Your alarm goes off and , after hitting “ snooze ” once or twice , you pry yourself out of bed .
You make a cup of coffee to help you get going , and then you shower , get dressed , eat breakfast , and check your phone for messages .
On your way to school , you stop to fill your car ’ s gas tank , almost making you late for the first day of chemistry class .
As you find a seat in the classroom , you read the question projected on the screen : “ Welcome to class !
Why should we study chemistry ? ” Do you have an answer ?
You may be studying chemistry because it fulfills an academic requirement , but if you consider your daily activities , you might find chemistry interesting for other reasons .
Most everything you do and encounter during your day involves chemistry .
Making coffee , cooking eggs , and toasting bread involve chemistry .
The products you use—like soap and shampoo , the fabrics you wear , the electronics that keep you connected to your world , the gasoline that propels your car—all of these and more involve chemical substances and processes .
Whether you are aware or not , chemistry is part of your everyday world .
In this course , you will learn many of the essential principles underlying the chemistry of modern-day life .
Our Stone Age ancestors chipped pieces of flint into useful tools and carved wood into statues and toys .
These endeavors involved changing the shape of a substance without changing the substance itself .
But as our knowledge increased , humans began to change the composition of the substances as well—clay was converted into pottery , hides were cured to make garments , copper ores were transformed into copper tools and weapons , and grain was made into bread .
Humans began to practice chemistry when they learned to control fire and use it to cook , make pottery , and smelt metals .
Subsequently , they began to separate and use specific components of matter .
A variety of drugs such as aloe , myrrh , and opium were isolated from plants .
Dyes , such as indigo and Tyrian purple , were extracted from plant and animal matter .
Metals were combined to form alloys—for example , copper and tin were mixed together to make bronze—and more elaborate smelting techniques produced iron .
Alkalis were extracted from ashes , and soaps were prepared by combining these alkalis with fats .
Alcohol was produced by fermentation and purified by distillation .
Attempts to understand the behavior of matter extend back for more than 2500 years .
As early as the sixth century BC , Greek philosophers discussed a system in which water was the basis of all things .
You may have heard of the Greek postulate that matter consists of four elements : earth , air , fire , and water .
From alchemy came the historical progressions that led to modern chemistry : the isolation of drugs from natural sources , metallurgy , and the dye industry .
Today , chemistry continues to deepen our understanding and improve our ability to harness and control the behavior of matter .
Chemistry is sometimes referred to as “ the central science ” due to its interconnectedness with a vast array of other STEM disciplines ( STEM stands for areas of study in the science , technology , engineering , and math fields ) .
Chemistry and the language of chemists play vital roles in biology , medicine , materials science , forensics , environmental science , and many other fields .
The basic principles of physics are essential for understanding many aspects of chemistry , and there is extensive overlap between many subdisciplines within the two fields , such as chemical physics and nuclear chemistry .
Mathematics , computer science , and information theory provide important tools that help us calculate , interpret , describe , and generally make sense of the chemical world .
Biology and chemistry converge in biochemistry , which is crucial to understanding the many complex factors and processes that keep living organisms ( such as us ) alive .
Chemical engineering , materials science , and nanotechnology combine chemical principles and empirical findings to produce useful substances , ranging from gasoline to fabrics to electronics .
Agriculture , food science , veterinary science , and brewing and wine making help provide sustenance in the form of food and drink to the world ’ s population .
Medicine , pharmacology , biotechnology , and botany identify and produce substances that help keep us healthy .
Environmental science , geology , oceanography , and atmospheric science incorporate many chemical ideas to help us better understand and protect our physical world .
Chemical ideas are used to help understand the universe in astronomy and cosmology .
What are some changes in matter that are essential to daily life ?
Digesting and assimilating food , synthesizing polymers that are used to make clothing , containers , cookware , and credit cards , and refining crude oil into gasoline and other products are just a few examples .
As you learn about these things , you will be learning chemistry , the study of the composition , properties , and interactions of matter .
The practice of chemistry is not limited to chemistry books or laboratories : It happens whenever someone is involved in changes in matter or in conditions that may lead to such changes .
Chemistry is a science based on observation and experimentation .
Doing chemistry involves attempting to answer questions and explain observations in terms of the laws and theories of chemistry , using procedures that are accepted by the scientific community .
There is no single route to answering a question or explaining an observation , but there is an aspect common to every approach : Each uses knowledge based on experiments that can be reproduced to verify the results .
Some routes involve a hypothesis , a tentative explanation of observations that acts as a guide for gathering and checking information .
A hypothesis is tested by experimentation , calculation , and/or comparison with the experiments of others and then refined as needed .
Some hypotheses are attempts to explain the behavior that is summarized in laws .
The laws of science summarize a vast number of experimental observations , and describe or predict some facet of the natural world .
If such a hypothesis turns out to be capable of explaining a large body of experimental data , it can reach the status of a theory .
Scientific theories are well-substantiated , comprehensive , testable explanations of particular aspects of nature .
Theories are accepted because they provide satisfactory explanations , but they can be modified if new data become available .
The path of discovery that leads from question and observation to law or hypothesis to theory , combined with experimental verification of the hypothesis and any necessary modification of the theory , is called the scientific method .
Chemists study and describe the behavior of matter and energy in three different domains : macroscopic , microscopic , and symbolic .
These domains provide different ways of considering and describing chemical behavior .
Macro is a Greek word that means “ large. ” The macroscopic domain is familiar to us : It is the realm of everyday things that are large enough to be sensed directly by human sight or touch .
In daily life , this includes the food you eat and the breeze you feel on your face .
The macroscopic domain includes everyday and laboratory chemistry , where we observe and measure physical and chemical properties such as density , solubility , and flammability .
Micro comes from Greek and means “ small. ” The microscopic domain of chemistry is often visited in the imagination .
Some aspects of the microscopic domain are visible through standard optical microscopes , for example , many biological cells .
More sophisticated instruments are capable of imaging even smaller entities such as molecules and atoms ( see ( b ) ) .
However , most of the subjects in the microscopic domain of chemistry are too small to be seen even with the most advanced microscopes and may only be pictured in the mind .
Other components of the microscopic domain include ions and electrons , protons and neutrons , and chemical bonds , each of which is far too small to see .
The symbolic domain contains the specialized language used to represent components of the macroscopic and microscopic domains .
Chemical symbols ( such as those used in the periodic table ) , chemical formulas , and chemical equations are part of the symbolic domain , as are graphs , drawings , and calculations .
These symbols play an important role in chemistry because they help interpret the behavior of the macroscopic domain in terms of the components of the microscopic domain .
A helpful way to understand the three domains is via the essential and ubiquitous substance of water .
That water is a liquid at moderate temperatures , will freeze to form a solid at lower temperatures , and boil to form a gas at higher temperatures are macroscopic observations .
But some properties of water fall into the microscopic domain—what can not be observed with the naked eye .
The description of water as comprising two hydrogen atoms and one oxygen atom , and the explanation of freezing and boiling in terms of attractions between these molecules , is within the microscopic arena .
The formula H O , which can describe water at either the macroscopic or microscopic levels , is an example of the symbolic domain .
The abbreviations ( g ) for gas , ( s ) for solid , and ( l ) for liquid are also symbolic .
Solids and liquids are more obviously matter : We can see that they take up space , and their weight tells us that they have mass .
Gases are also matter ; if gases did not take up space , a balloon would not inflate ( increase its volume ) when filled with gas .
Solids , liquids , and gases are the three states of matter commonly found on earth .
A solid is rigid and possesses a definite shape .
A liquid flows and takes the shape of its container , except that it forms a flat or slightly curved upper surface when acted upon by gravity .
( In zero gravity , liquids assume a spherical shape . )
Both liquid and solid samples have volumes that are very nearly independent of pressure .
A gas takes both the shape and volume of its container .
A fourth state of matter , plasma , occurs naturally in the interiors of stars .
A plasma is a gaseous state of matter that contains appreciable numbers of electrically charged particles .
The presence of these charged particles imparts unique properties to plasmas that justify their classification as a state of matter distinct from gases .
In addition to stars , plasmas are found in some other high-temperature environments ( both natural and man-made ) , such as lightning strikes , certain television screens , and specialized analytical instruments used to detect trace amounts of metals .
Some samples of matter appear to have properties of solids , liquids , and/or gases at the same time .
This can occur when the sample is composed of many small pieces .
For example , we can pour sand as if it were a liquid because it is composed of many small grains of solid sand .
Matter can also have properties of more than one state when it is a mixture , such as with clouds .
Clouds appear to behave somewhat like gases , but they are actually mixtures of air ( gas ) and tiny particles of water ( liquid or solid ) .
The mass of an object is a measure of the amount of matter in it .
One way to measure an object ’ s mass is to measure the force it takes to accelerate the object .
It takes much more force to accelerate a car than a bicycle because the car has much more mass .
A more common way to determine the mass of an object is to use a balance to compare its mass with a standard mass .
Although weight is related to mass , it is not the same thing .
Weight refers to the force that gravity exerts on an object .
This force is directly proportional to the mass of the object .
The weight of an object changes as the force of gravity changes , but its mass does not .
An astronaut ’ s mass does not change just because she goes to the moon .
But her weight on the moon is only one-sixth her earth-bound weight because the moon ’ s gravity is only one-sixth that of the earth ’ s .
Brewing beer and the operation of batteries provide examples of the conservation of matter .
During the brewing of beer , the ingredients ( water , yeast , grains , malt , hops , and sugar ) are converted into beer ( water , alcohol , carbonation , and flavoring substances ) with no actual loss of substance .
This is most clearly seen during the bottling process , when glucose turns into ethanol and carbon dioxide , and the total mass of the substances does not change .
Although this conservation law holds true for all conversions of matter , convincing examples are few and far between because , outside of the controlled conditions in a laboratory , we seldom collect all of the material that is produced during a particular conversion .
For example , when you eat , digest , and assimilate food , all of the matter in the original food is preserved .
But because some of the matter is incorporated into your body , and much is excreted as various types of waste , it is challenging to verify by measurement .
Matter can be classified into several categories .
Two broad categories are mixtures and pure substances .
A pure substance has a constant composition .
All specimens of a pure substance have exactly the same makeup and properties .
Any sample of sucrose ( table sugar ) consists of 42.1 % carbon , 6.5 % hydrogen , and 51.4 % oxygen by mass .
Any sample of sucrose also has the same physical properties , such as melting point , color , and sweetness , regardless of the source from which it is isolated .
Pure substances may be divided into two classes : elements and compounds .
Pure substances that can not be broken down into simpler substances by chemical changes are called elements .
Iron , silver , gold , aluminum , sulfur , oxygen , and copper are familiar examples of the more than 100 known elements , of which about 90 occur naturally on the earth , and two dozen or so have been created in laboratories .
Pure substances that can be broken down by chemical changes are called compounds .
This breakdown may produce either elements or other compounds , or both .
Mercury ( II ) oxide , an orange , crystalline solid , can be broken down by heat into the elements mercury and oxygen .
When heated in the absence of air , the compound sucrose is broken down into the element carbon and the compound water .
( The initial stage of this process , when the sugar is turning brown , is known as caramelization—this is what imparts the characteristic sweet and nutty flavor to caramel apples , caramelized onions , and caramel ) .
Silver ( I ) chloride is a white solid that can be broken down into its elements , silver and chlorine , by absorption of light .
This property is the basis for the use of this compound in photographic films and photochromic eyeglasses ( those with lenses that darken when exposed to light ) .
The properties of combined elements are different from those in the free , or uncombined , state .
For example , white crystalline sugar ( sucrose ) is a compound resulting from the chemical combination of the element carbon , which is a black solid in one of its uncombined forms , and the two elements hydrogen and oxygen , which are colorless gases when uncombined .
Free sodium , an element that is a soft , shiny , metallic solid , and free chlorine , an element that is a yellow-green gas , combine to form sodium chloride ( table salt ) , a compound that is a white , crystalline solid .
A mixture is composed of two or more types of matter that can be present in varying amounts and can be separated by physical changes , such as evaporation ( you will learn more about this later ) .
A mixture with a composition that varies from point to point is called a heterogeneous mixture .
Italian dressing is an example of a heterogeneous mixture .
Its composition can vary because it may be prepared from varying amounts of oil , vinegar , and herbs .
It is not the same from point to point throughout the mixture—one drop may be mostly vinegar , whereas a different drop may be mostly oil or herbs because the oil and vinegar separate and the herbs settle .
Other examples of heterogeneous mixtures are chocolate chip cookies ( we can see the separate bits of chocolate , nuts , and cookie dough ) and granite ( we can see the quartz , mica , feldspar , and more ) .
A homogeneous mixture , also called a solution , exhibits a uniform composition and appears visually the same throughout .
An example of a solution is a sports drink , consisting of water , sugar , coloring , flavoring , and electrolytes mixed together uniformly .
Each drop of a sports drink tastes the same because each drop contains the same amounts of water , sugar , and other components .
Note that the composition of a sports drink can vary—it could be made with somewhat more or less sugar , flavoring , or other components , and still be a sports drink .
Other examples of homogeneous mixtures include air , maple syrup , gasoline , and a solution of salt in water .
Although there are just over 100 elements , tens of millions of chemical compounds result from different combinations of these elements .
Each compound has a specific composition and possesses definite chemical and physical properties that distinguish it from all other compounds .
And , of course , there are innumerable ways to combine elements and compounds to form different mixtures .
A summary of how to distinguish between the various major classifications of matter is shown in .
Eleven elements make up about 99 % of the earth ’ s crust and atmosphere .
Oxygen constitutes nearly onehalf and silicon about one-quarter of the total quantity of these elements .
A majority of elements on earth are found in chemical combinations with other elements ; about one-quarter of the elements are also found in the free state .
An atom is the smallest particle of an element that has the properties of that element and can enter into a chemical combination .
Consider the element gold , for example .
This minimally sized piece of gold is an atom ( from the Greek atomos , meaning “ indivisible ” ) .
This atom would no longer be gold if it were divided any further .
The first suggestion that matter is composed of atoms is attributed to the Greek philosophers Leucippus and Democritus , who developed their ideas in the 5th century BCE .
However , it was not until the early nineteenth century that John Dalton ( 1766–1844 ) , a British schoolteacher with a keen interest in science , supported this hypothesis with quantitative measurements .
Since that time , repeated experiments have confirmed many aspects of this hypothesis , and it has become one of the central theories of chemistry .
Other aspects of Dalton ’ s atomic theory are still used but with minor revisions ( details of Dalton ’ s theory are provided in the chapter on atoms and molecules ) .
An atom is so small that its size is difficult to imagine .
One of the smallest things we can see with our unaided eye is a single thread of a spider web : These strands are about 1/10,000 of a centimeter ( 0.0001 cm ) in diameter .
Although the cross-section of one strand is almost impossible to see without a microscope , it is huge on an atomic scale .
A single carbon atom in the web has a diameter of about 0.000000015 centimeter , and it would take about 7000 carbon atoms to span the diameter of the strand .
To put this in perspective , if a carbon atom were the size of a dime , the cross-section of one strand would be larger than a football field , which would require about 150 million carbon atom “ dimes ” to cover it .
shows increasingly close microscopic and atomic-level views of ordinary cotton .
An atom is so light that its mass is also difficult to imagine .
A billion lead atoms ( 1,000,000,000 atoms ) weigh about 3 10 grams , a mass that is far too light to be weighed on even the world ’ s most sensitive balances .
It would require over 300,000,000,000,000 lead atoms ( 300 trillion , or 3 10 ) to be weighed , and they would weigh only 0.0000001 gram .
It is rare to find collections of individual atoms .
Only a few elements , such as the gases helium , neon , and argon , consist of a collection of individual atoms that move about independently of one another .
Other elements , such as the gases hydrogen , nitrogen , oxygen , and chlorine , are composed of units that consist of pairs of atoms .
One form of the element phosphorus consists of units composed of four phosphorus atoms .
The element sulfur exists in various forms , one of which consists of units composed of eight sulfur atoms .
These units are called molecules .
A molecule consists of two or more atoms joined by strong forces called chemical bonds .
The atoms in a molecule move around as a unit , much like the cans of soda in a six-pack or a bunch of keys joined together on a single key ring .
A molecule may consist of two or more identical atoms , as in the molecules found in the elements hydrogen , oxygen , and sulfur , or it may consist of two or more different atoms , as in the molecules found in water .
Each water molecule is a unit that contains two hydrogen atoms and one oxygen atom .
Each glucose molecule is a unit that contains 6 carbon atoms , 12 hydrogen atoms , and 6 oxygen atoms .
Like atoms , molecules are incredibly small and light .
If an ordinary glass of water were enlarged to the size of the earth , the water molecules inside it would be about the size of golf balls .
By the end of this section , you will be able to : Identify properties of and changes in matter as physical or chemical Identify properties of matter as extensive or intensive The characteristics that distinguish one substance from another are called properties .
A physical property is a characteristic of matter that is not associated with a change in its chemical composition .
Familiar examples of physical properties include density , color , hardness , melting and boiling points , and electrical conductivity .
Some physical properties , such as density and color , may be observed without changing the physical state of the matter .
Other physical properties , such as the melting temperature of iron or the freezing temperature of water , can only be observed as matter undergoes a physical change .
A physical change is a change in the state or properties of matter without any accompanying change in the chemical identities of the substances contained in the matter .
Physical changes are observed when wax melts , when sugar dissolves in coffee , and when steam condenses into liquid water .
Other examples of physical changes include magnetizing and demagnetizing metals ( as is done with common antitheft security tags ) and grinding solids into powders ( which can sometimes yield noticeable changes in color ) .
In each of these examples , there is a change in the physical state , form , or properties of the substance , but no change in its chemical composition .
The change of one type of matter into another type ( or the inability to change ) is a chemical property .
Examples of chemical properties include flammability , toxicity , acidity , and many other types of reactivity .
Iron , for example , combines with oxygen in the presence of water to form rust ; chromium does not oxidize .
Nitroglycerin is very dangerous because it explodes easily ; neon poses almost no hazard because it is very unreactive .
A chemical change always produces one or more types of matter that differ from the matter present before the change .
The formation of rust is a chemical change because rust is a different kind of matter than the iron , oxygen , and water present before the rust formed .
The explosion of nitroglycerin is a chemical change because the gases produced are very different kinds of matter from the original substance .
Other examples of chemical changes include reactions that are performed in a lab ( such as copper reacting with nitric acid ) , all forms of combustion ( burning ) , and food being cooked , digested , or rotting .
Properties of matter fall into one of two categories .
If the property depends on the amount of matter present , it is an extensive property .
The mass and volume of a substance are examples of extensive properties ; for instance , a gallon of milk has a larger mass than a cup of milk .
The value of an extensive property is directly proportional to the amount of matter in question .
If the property of a sample of matter does not depend on the amount of matter present , it is an intensive property .
Temperature is an example of an intensive property .
If the gallon and cup of milk are each at 20 °C ( room temperature ) , when they are combined , the temperature remains at 20 °C .
As another example , consider the distinct but related properties of heat and temperature .
A drop of hot cooking oil spattered on your arm causes brief , minor discomfort , whereas a pot of hot oil yields severe burns .
Both the drop and the pot of oil are at the same temperature ( an intensive property ) , but the pot clearly contains much more heat ( extensive property ) .
While many elements differ dramatically in their chemical and physical properties , some elements have similar properties .
For example , many elements conduct heat and electricity well , whereas others are poor conductors .
These properties can be used to sort the elements into three classes : metals ( elements that conduct well ) , nonmetals ( elements that conduct poorly ) , and metalloids ( elements that have intermediate conductivities ) .
The periodic table is a table of elements that places elements with similar properties close together .
You will learn more about the periodic table as you continue your study of chemistry .
Every measurement provides three kinds of information : the size or magnitude of the measurement ( a number ) ; a standard of comparison for the measurement ( a unit ) ; and an indication of the uncertainty of the measurement .
While the number and unit are explicitly represented when a quantity is written , the uncertainty is an aspect of the measurement result that is more implicitly represented and will be discussed later .
The number in the measurement can be represented in different ways , including decimal form and scientific notation .
( Scientific notation is also known as exponential notation ; a review of this topic can be found in . )
For example , the maximum takeoff weight of a Boeing 777-200ER airliner is 298,000 kilograms , which can also be written as 2.98 10 kg .
The mass of the average mosquito is about 0.0000025 kilograms , which can be written as 2.5 10 kg .
Units , such as liters , pounds , and centimeters , are standards of comparison for measurements .
A 2-liter bottle of a soft drink contains a volume of beverage that is twice that of the accepted volume of 1 liter .
The meat used to prepare a 0.25-pound hamburger weighs one-fourth as much as the accepted weight of 1 pound .
Without units , a number can be meaningless , confusing , or possibly life threatening .
Suppose a doctor prescribes phenobarbital to control a patient ’ s seizures and states a dosage of “ 100 ” without specifying units .
The measurement units for seven fundamental properties ( “ base units ” ) are listed in .
The standards for these units are fixed by international agreement , and they are called the International System of Units or SI Units ( from the French , Le Système International d ’ Unités ) .
SI units have been used by the United States National Institute of Standards and Technology ( NIST ) since 1964 .
Units for other properties may be derived from these seven base units .
Everyday measurement units are often defined as fractions or multiples of other units .
Milk is commonly packaged in containers of 1 gallon ( 4 quarts ) , 1 quart ( 0.25 gallon ) , and one pint ( 0.5 quart ) .
This same approach is used with SI units , but these fractions or multiples are always powers of 10 .
Fractional or multiple SI units are named using a prefix and the name of the base unit .
For example , a length of 1000 meters is also called a kilometer because the prefix kilo means “ one thousand , ” which in scientific notation is 10 ( 1 kilometer = 1000 m = 10 m ) .
The prefixes used and the powers to which 10 are raised are listed in .
The initial units of the metric system , which eventually evolved into the SI system , were established in France during the French Revolution .
The original standards for the meter and the kilogram were adopted there in 1799 and eventually by other countries .
This section introduces four of the SI base units commonly used in chemistry .
Other SI units will be introduced in subsequent chapters .
The standard unit of length in both the SI and original metric systems is the meter ( m ) .
A meter was originally specified as 1/10,000,000 of the distance from the North Pole to the equator .
It is now defined as the distance light in a vacuum travels in 1/299,792,458 of a second .
A meter is about 3 inches longer than a yard ; one meter is about 39.37 inches or 1.094 yards .
Longer distances are often reported in kilometers ( 1 km = 1000 m = 10 m ) , whereas shorter distances can be reported in centimeters ( 1 cm = 0.01 m = 10 m ) or millimeters ( 1 mm = 0.001 m = 10 m ) .
The standard unit of mass in the SI system is the kilogram ( kg ) .
A kilogram was originally defined as the mass of a liter of water ( a cube of water with an edge length of exactly 0.1 meter ) .
It is now defined by a certain cylinder of platinum-iridium alloy , which is kept in France .
Any object with the same mass as this cylinder is said to have a mass of 1 kilogram .
One kilogram is about 2.2 pounds .
The gram ( g ) is exactly equal to 1/1000 of the mass of the kilogram ( 10 kg ) .
Temperature is an intensive property .
The SI unit of temperature is the kelvin ( K ) .
The IUPAC convention is to use kelvin ( all lowercase ) for the word , K ( uppercase ) for the unit symbol , and neither the word “ degree ” nor the degree symbol ( ° ) .
The degree Celsius ( °C ) is also allowed in the SI system , with both the word “ degree ” and the degree symbol used for Celsius measurements .
Celsius degrees are the same magnitude as those of kelvin , but the two scales place their zeros in different places .
Water freezes at 273.15 K ( 0 °C ) and boils at 373.15 K ( 100 °C ) by definition , and normal human body temperature is approximately 310 K ( 37 °C ) .
The conversion between these two units and the Fahrenheit scale will be discussed later in this chapter .
The SI base unit of time is the second ( s ) .
Small and large time intervals can be expressed with the appropriate prefixes ; for example , 3 microseconds = 0.000003 s = 3 10 and 5 megaseconds = 5,000,000 s = 5 10 s. Alternatively , hours , days , and years can be used .
We can derive many units from the seven SI base units .
For example , we can use the base unit of length to define a unit of volume , and the base units of mass and length to define a unit of density .
Volume is the measure of the amount of space occupied by an object .
The standard SI unit of volume is defined by the base unit of length .
The standard volume is a cubic meter ( m ) , a cube with an edge length of exactly one meter .
To dispense a cubic meter of water , we could build a cubic box with edge lengths of exactly one meter .
This box would hold a cubic meter of water or any other substance .
A more commonly used unit of volume is derived from the decimeter ( 0.1 m , or 10 cm ) .
A cube with edge lengths of exactly one decimeter contains a volume of one cubic decimeter ( dm ) .
A liter ( L ) is the more common name for the cubic decimeter .
One liter is about 1.06 quarts .
A cubic centimeter ( cm ) is the volume of a cube with an edge length of exactly one centimeter .
The abbreviation cc ( for c ubic c entimeter ) is often used by health professionals .
A cubic centimeter is equivalent to a milliliter ( mL ) and is 1/1000 of a liter .
We use the mass and volume of a substance to determine its density .
Thus , the units of density are defined by the base units of mass and length .
The density of a substance is the ratio of the mass of a sample of the substance to its volume .
The SI unit for density is the kilogram per cubic meter ( kg/m ) .
For many situations , however , this as an inconvenient unit , and we often use grams per cubic centimeter ( g/cm ) for the densities of solids and liquids , and grams per liter ( g/L ) for gases .
Although there are exceptions , most liquids and solids have densities that range from about 0.7 g/cm ( the density of gasoline ) to 19 g/cm ( the density of gold ) .
The density of air is about 1.2 g/L .
shows the densities of some common substances .
While there are many ways to determine the density of an object , perhaps the most straightforward method involves separately finding the mass and volume of the object , and then dividing the mass of the sample by its volume .
In the following example , the mass is found directly by weighing , but the volume is found indirectly through length measurements .
Gold—in bricks , bars , and coins—has been a form of currency for centuries .
In order to swindle people into paying for a brick of gold without actually investing in a brick of gold , people have considered filling the centers of hollow gold bricks with lead to fool buyers into thinking that the entire brick is gold .
It does not work : Lead is a dense substance , but its density is not as great as that of gold , 19.3 g/cm .
What is the density of lead if a cube of lead has an edge length of 2.00 cm and a mass of 90.7 g ?
The density of a substance can be calculated by dividing its mass by its volume .
The volume of a cube is calculated by cubing the edge length .
( We will discuss the reason for rounding to the first decimal place in the next section . )
( a ) To three decimal places , what is the volume of a cube ( cm ) with an edge length of 0.843 cm ?
( b ) If the cube in part ( a ) is copper and has a mass of 5.34 g , what is the density of copper to two decimal places ?
Answer : ( a ) 0.599 cm ; ( b ) 8.91 g/cm This illustrates another way to determine density , using displacement of water .
Determine the density of the red and yellow blocks .
When you open the density simulation and select Same Mass , you can choose from several 5.00-kg colored blocks that you can drop into a tank containing 100.00 L water .
The yellow block floats ( it is less dense than water ) , and the water level rises to 105.00 L. While floating , the yellow block displaces 5.00 L water , an amount equal to the weight of the block .
The red block sinks ( it is more dense than water , which has density = 1.00 kg/L ) , and the water level rises to 101.25 L. The red block therefore displaces 1.25 L water , an amount equal to the volume of the block .
The density of the red block is : Note that since the yellow block is not completely submerged , you can not determine its density from this information .
Determine the density of the green block .
The result of such a counting measurement is an example of an exact number .
By counting the eggs in a carton , one can determine exactly how many eggs the carton contains .
The numbers of defined quantities are also exact .
By definition , 1 foot is exactly 12 inches , 1 inch is exactly 2.54 centimeters , and 1 gram is exactly 0.001 kilogram .
Quantities derived from measurements other than counting , however , are uncertain to varying extents due to practical limitations of the measurement process used .
The numbers of measured quantities , unlike defined or directly counted quantities , are not exact .
To measure the volume of liquid in a graduated cylinder , you should make a reading at the bottom of the meniscus , the lowest point on the curved surface of the liquid .
Refer to the illustration in .
The bottom of the meniscus in this case clearly lies between the 21 and 22 markings , meaning the liquid volume is certainly greater than 21 mL but less than 22 mL .
The meniscus appears to be a bit closer to the 22-mL mark than to the 21-mL mark , and so a reasonable estimate of the liquid ’ s volume would be 21.6 mL .
In the number 21.6 , then , the digits 2 and 1 are certain , but the 6 is an estimate .
Some people might estimate the meniscus position to be equally distant from each of the markings and estimate the tenth-place digit as 5 , while others may think it to be even closer to the 22-mL mark and estimate this digit to be 7 .
Note that it would be pointless to attempt to estimate a digit for the hundredths place , given that the tenths-place digit is uncertain .
In general , numerical scales such as the one on this graduated cylinder will permit measurements to one-tenth of the smallest scale division .
The scale in this case has 1-mL divisions , and so volumes may be measured to the nearest 0.1 mL .
This concept holds true for all measurements , even if you do not actively make an estimate .
If you place a quarter on a standard electronic balance , you may obtain a reading of 6.72 g. The digits 6 and 7 are certain , and the 2 indicates that the mass of the quarter is likely between 6.71 and 6.73 grams .
The quarter weighs about 6.72 grams , with a nominal uncertainty in the measurement of ± 0.01 gram .
If the coin is weighed on a more sensitive balance , the mass might be 6.723 g. This means its mass lies between 6.722 and 6.724 grams , an uncertainty of 0.001 gram .
Every measurement has some uncertainty , which depends on the device used ( and the user ’ s ability ) .
All of the digits in a measurement , including the uncertain last digit , are called significant figures or significant digits .
A measurement result is properly reported when its significant digits accurately represent the certainty of the measurement process .
But what if you were analyzing a reported value and trying to determine what is significant and what is not ?
Well , for starters , all nonzero digits are significant , and it is only zeros that require some thought .
We will use the terms “ leading , ” “ trailing , ” and “ captive ” for the zeros and will consider how to deal with them .
Starting with the first nonzero digit on the left , count this digit and all remaining digits to the right .
This is the number of significant figures in the measurement unless the last digit is a trailing zero lying to the left of the decimal point .
Captive zeros result from measurement and are therefore always significant .
Leading zeros , however , are never significant—they merely tell us where the decimal point is located .
The leading zeros in this example are not significant .
We could use exponential notation ( as described in Appendix B ) and express the number as 8.32407 10 ; then the number 8.32407 contains all of the significant figures , and 10 locates the decimal point .
The number of significant figures is uncertain in a number that ends with a zero to the left of the decimal point location .
The zeros in the measurement 1,300 grams could be significant or they could simply indicate where the decimal point is located .
In cases where only the decimal-formatted number is available , it is prudent to assume that all trailing zeros are not significant .
When determining significant figures , be sure to pay attention to reported values and think about the measurement and significant figures in terms of what is reasonable or likely when evaluating whether the value makes sense .
For example , the official January 2014 census reported the resident population of the US as 317,297,725 .
Do you think the US population was correctly determined to the reported nine significant figures , that is , to the exact number of people ?
People are constantly being born , dying , or moving into or out of the country , and assumptions are made to account for the large number of people who are not actually counted .
Because of these uncertainties , it might be more reasonable to expect that we know the population to within perhaps a million or so , in which case the population should be reported as 3.17 10 people .
A second important principle of uncertainty is that results calculated from a measurement are at least as uncertain as the measurement itself .
Take the uncertainty in measurements into account to avoid misrepresenting the uncertainty in calculated results .
When multiplying or dividing numbers , round the result to the same number of digits as the number with the least number of significant figures ( the least certain value in terms of multiplication and division ) .
( a ) Multiply 0.6238 cm by 6.6 cm .
( b ) Divide 421.23 g by 486 mL .
( a ) ( b ) ( a ) Multiply 2.334 cm and 0.320 cm .
Answer : ( a ) 0.747 cm ( b ) 0.9884 m/s One common bathtub is 13.44 dm long , 5.920 dm wide , and 2.54 dm deep .
Assume that the tub is rectangular and calculate its approximate volume in liters .
What is the density of a liquid with a mass of 31.1415 g and a volume of 30.13 cm ?
Answer : 1.034 g/mL A piece of rebar is weighed and then submerged in a graduated cylinder partially filled with water , with results as shown .
( a ) Use these values to determine the density of this piece of rebar .
( b ) Rebar is mostly iron .
Does your result in ( a ) support this statement ?
An irregularly shaped piece of a shiny yellowish material is weighed and then submerged in a graduated cylinder , with results as shown .
( a ) Use these values to determine the density of this material .
( b ) Do you have any reasonable guesses as to the identity of this material ?
Explain your reasoning .
Answer : ( a ) 19 g/cm ; ( b ) It is likely gold ; the right appearance for gold and very close to the density given for gold in .
Scientists typically make repeated measurements of a quantity to ensure the quality of their findings and to evaluate both the precision and the accuracy of their results .
Measurements are said to be precise if they yield very similar results when repeated in the same manner .
A measurement is considered accurate if it yields a result that is very close to the true or accepted value .
Precise values agree with each other ; accurate values agree with a true value .
These characterizations can be extended to other contexts , such as the results of an archery competition .
Suppose a quality control chemist at a pharmaceutical company is tasked with checking the accuracy and precision of three different machines that are meant to dispense 10 ounces ( 296 mL ) of cough syrup into storage bottles .
She proceeds to use each machine to fill five bottles and then carefully determines the actual volume dispensed , obtaining the results tabulated in .
Results for dispenser # 2 represent improved accuracy ( each volume is less than 3 mL away from 296 mL ) but worse precision ( volumes vary by more than 4 mL ) .
Finally , she can report that dispenser # 3 is working well , dispensing cough syrup both accurately ( all volumes within 0.1 mL of the target volume ) and precisely ( volumes differing from each other by no more than 0.2 mL ) .
For example , consider measuring the average speed of an athlete running sprints .
Dimensional analysis is based on this premise : the units of quantities must be subjected to the same mathematical operations as their associated numbers .
This method can be applied to computations ranging from simple unit conversions to more complex , multi-step calculations involving several different quantities .
A ratio of two equivalent quantities expressed with different measurement units can be used as a unit conversion factor .
For example , the lengths of 2.54 cm and 1 in .
are equivalent ( by definition ) , and so a unit conversion factor may be derived from the ratio , Several other commonly used conversion factors are given in .
When a quantity ( such as distance in inches ) is multiplied by an appropriate unit conversion factor , the quantity is converted to an equivalent value with different units ( such as distance in centimeters ) .
For example , a basketball player ’ s vertical jump of 34 inches can be converted to centimeters by : Since this simple arithmetic involves quantities , the premise of dimensional analysis requires that we multiply both numbers and units .
The numbers of these two quantities are multiplied to yield the number of the product quantity , 86 , whereas the units are multiplied to yield .
Just as for numbers , a ratio of identical units is also numerically and the unit product thus simplifies to cm .
( When identical units divide to yield a factor of equal to one , 1 , they are said to “ cancel. ” ) Dimensional analysis may be used to confirm the proper application of unit conversion factors as demonstrated in the following example .
The mass of a competition frisbee is 125 g. Convert its mass to ounces using the unit conversion factor derived from the relationship 1 oz = 28.349 g .
Given the conversion factor , the mass in ounces may be derived using an equation similar to the one used for converting length from inches to centimeters .
The unit conversion factor may be represented as : The correct unit conversion factor is the ratio that cancels the units of grams and leaves ounces .
Convert a volume of 9.345 qt to liters .
Answer : 8.844 L Beyond simple unit conversions , the factor-label method can be used to solve more complex problems involving computations .
Regardless of the details , the basic approach is the same—all the factors involved in the calculation must be appropriately oriented to ensure that their labels ( units ) will appropriately cancel and/or combine to yield the desired unit in the result .
As your study of chemistry continues , you will encounter many opportunities to apply this approach .
What is the density of common antifreeze in units of g/mL ?
A 4.00-qt sample of the antifreeze weighs 9.26 lb .
Since , we need to divide the mass in grams by the volume in milliliters .
In general : the number of units of B = the number of units of A unit conversion factor .
The necessary conversion factors are given in : 1 lb = 453.59 g ; 1 L = 1.0567 qt ; 1 L = 1,000 mL .
Mass may be converted from pounds to grams as follows : Volume may be converted from quarts to millimeters via two steps : Convert quarts to liters .
Convert liters to milliliters .
Answer : 2.956 × 10 L While being driven from Philadelphia to Atlanta , a distance of about 1250 km , a 2014 Lamborghini Aventador Roadster uses 213 L gasoline .
( a ) What ( average ) fuel economy , in miles per gallon , did the Roadster get during this trip ?
( b ) If gasoline costs $ 3.80 per gallon , what was the fuel cost for this trip ?
( a ) What ( average ) fuel economy , in miles per gallon , did the Prius get during this trip ?
( b ) If gasoline costs $ 3.90 per gallon , what was the fuel cost for this trip ?
Answer : ( a ) 51 mpg ; ( b ) $ 62 We use the word temperature to refer to the hotness or coldness of a substance .
One way we measure a change in temperature is to use the fact that most substances expand when their temperature increases and contract when their temperature decreases .
The mercury or alcohol in a common glass thermometer changes its volume as the temperature changes , and the position of the trapped liquid along a printed scale may be used as a measure of temperature .
Temperature scales are defined relative to selected reference temperatures : Two of the most commonly used are the freezing and boiling temperatures of water at a specified atmospheric pressure .
On the Celsius scale , 0 °C is defined as the freezing temperature of water and 100 °C as the boiling temperature of water .
The space between the two temperatures is divided into 100 equal intervals , which we call degrees .
On the Fahrenheit scale , the freezing point of water is defined as 32 °F and the boiling temperature as 212 °F .
The space between these two points on a Fahrenheit thermometer is divided into 180 equal parts ( degrees ) .
Defining the Celsius and Fahrenheit temperature scales as described in the previous paragraph results in a slightly more complex relationship between temperature values on these two scales than for different units of measure for other properties .
Most measurement units for a given property are directly proportional to one another ( y = mx ) .
Using familiar length units as one example : where y = length in feet , x = length in inches , and the proportionality constant , m , is the conversion factor .
The Celsius and Fahrenheit temperature scales , however , do not share a common zero point , and so the relationship between these two scales is a linear one rather than a proportional one ( y = mx + b ) .
Consequently , converting a temperature from one of these scales into the other requires more than simple multiplication by a conversion factor , m , it also must take into account differences in the scales ’ zero points ( b ) .
The linear equation relating Celsius and Fahrenheit temperatures is easily derived from the two temperatures used to define each scale .
Unlike the Celsius and Fahrenheit scales , the kelvin scale is an absolute temperature scale in which 0 ( zero ) K corresponds to the lowest temperature that can theoretically be achieved .
Since the kelvin temperature scale is absolute , a degree symbol is not included in the unit abbreviation , K. The early 19th-century discovery of the relationship between a gas ’ s volume and temperature suggested that the volume of a gas would be zero at −273.15 °C .
In 1848 , British physicist William Thompson , who later adopted the title of Lord Kelvin , proposed an absolute temperature scale based on this concept ( further treatment of this topic is provided in this text ’ s chapter on gases ) .
Following the same approach , the equations for converting between the kelvin and Celsius temperature scales are derived to be : The 273.15 in these equations has been determined experimentally , so it is not exact .
shows the relationship among the three temperature scales .
Although the kelvin ( absolute ) temperature scale is the official SI temperature scale , Celsius is commonly used in many scientific contexts and is the scale of choice for nonscience contexts in almost all areas of the world .
Very few countries ( the U.S. and its territories , the Bahamas , Belize , Cayman Islands , and Palau ) still use Fahrenheit for weather , medicine , and cooking .
Normal body temperature has been commonly accepted as 37.0 °C ( although it varies depending on time of day and method of measurement , as well as among individuals ) .
What is this temperature on the kelvin scale and on the Fahrenheit scale ?
Convert 80.92 °C to K and °F .
Answer : 354.07 K , 177.7 °F Baking a ready-made pizza calls for an oven temperature of 450 °F .
If you are in Europe , and your oven thermometer uses the Celsius scale , what is the setting ?
What is the kelvin temperature ?
Convert 50 °F to °C and K. Answer : 10 °C , 280 K Your overall health and susceptibility to disease depends upon the complex interaction between your genetic makeup and environmental exposure , with the outcome difficult to predict .
Early detection of biomarkers , substances that indicate an organism ’ s disease or physiological state , could allow diagnosis and treatment before a condition becomes serious or irreversible .
Recent studies have shown that your exhaled breath can contain molecules that may be biomarkers for recent exposure to environmental contaminants or for pathological conditions ranging from asthma to lung cancer .
Scientists are working to develop biomarker “ fingerprints ” that could be used to diagnose a specific disease based on the amounts and identities of certain molecules in a patient ’ s exhaled breath .
An essential concept underlying this goal is that of a molecule ’ s identity , which is determined by the numbers and types of atoms it contains , and how they are bonded together .
This chapter will describe some of the fundamental chemical principles related to the composition of matter , including those central to the concept of molecular identity .
Later , Aristotle and others came to the conclusion that matter consisted of various combinations of the four “ elements ” —fire , earth , air , and water—and could be infinitely divided .
Interestingly , these philosophers thought about atoms and “ elements ” as philosophical concepts , but apparently never considered performing experiments to test their ideas .
The Aristotelian view of the composition of matter held sway for over two thousand years , until English schoolteacher John Dalton helped to revolutionize chemistry with his hypothesis that the behavior of matter could be explained using an atomic theory .
First published in 1807 , many of Dalton ’ s hypotheses about the microscopic features of matter are still valid in modern atomic theory .
Here are the postulates of Dalton ’ s atomic theory .
Matter is composed of exceedingly small particles called atoms .
An atom is the smallest unit of an element that can participate in a chemical change .
An element consists of only one type of atom , which has a mass that is characteristic of the element and is the same for all atoms of that element .
A macroscopic sample of an element contains an incredibly large number of atoms , all of which have identical chemical properties .
Atoms of one element differ in properties from atoms of all other elements .
A compound consists of atoms of two or more elements combined in a small , whole-number ratio .
In a given compound , the numbers of atoms of each of its elements are always present in the same ratio .
Atoms are neither created nor destroyed during a chemical change , but are instead rearranged to yield substances that are different from those present before the change .
Dalton ’ s atomic theory provides a microscopic explanation of the many macroscopic properties of matter that you ’ ve learned about .
For example , if an element such as copper consists of only one kind of atom , then it can not be broken down into simpler substances , that is , into substances composed of fewer types of atoms .
And if atoms are neither created nor destroyed during a chemical change , then the total mass of matter present when matter changes from one type to another will remain constant ( the law of conservation of matter ) .
In the following drawing , the green spheres represent atoms of a certain element .
The purple spheres represent atoms of another element .
If the spheres touch , they are part of a single unit of a compound .
Does the following chemical change represented by these symbols violate any of the ideas of Dalton ’ s atomic theory ?
If so , which one ?
The starting materials consist of two green spheres and two purple spheres .
The products consist of only one green sphere and one purple sphere .
This violates Dalton ’ s postulate that atoms are neither created nor destroyed during a chemical change , but are merely redistributed .
( In this case , atoms appear to have been destroyed . )
In the following drawing , the green spheres represent atoms of a certain element .
The purple spheres represent atoms of another element .
If the spheres touch , they are part of a single unit of a compound .
Does the following chemical change represented by these symbols violate any of the ideas of Dalton ’ s atomic theory ?
If so , which one ?
Answer : The starting materials consist of four green spheres and two purple spheres .
The products consist of four green spheres and two purple spheres .
This does not violate any of Dalton ’ s postulates : Atoms are neither created nor destroyed , but are redistributed in small , whole-number ratios .
Dalton knew of the experiments of French chemist Joseph Proust , who demonstrated that all samples of a pure compound contain the same elements in the same proportion by mass .
This statement is known as the law of definite proportions or the law of constant composition .
The suggestion that the numbers of atoms of the elements in a given compound always exist in the same ratio is consistent with these observations .
For example , when different samples of isooctane ( a component of gasoline and one of the standards used in the octane rating system ) are analyzed , they are found to have a carbon-to-hydrogen mass ratio of 5.33:1 , as shown in .
It is worth noting that although all samples of a particular compound have the same mass ratio , the converse is not true in general .
That is , samples that have the same mass ratio are not necessarily the same substance .
For example , there are many compounds other than isooctane that also have a carbon-to-hydrogen mass ratio of 5.33:1.00 .
Dalton also used data from Proust , as well as results from his own experiments , to formulate another interesting law .
The law of multiple proportions states that when two elements react to form more than one compound , a fixed mass of one element will react with masses of the other element in a ratio of small , whole numbers .
For example , copper and chlorine can form a green , crystalline solid with a mass ratio of 0.558 g chlorine to 1 g copper , as well as a brown crystalline solid with a mass ratio of 1.116 g chlorine to 1 g copper .
These ratios by themselves may not seem particularly interesting or informative ; however , if we take a ratio of these ratios , we obtain a useful and possibly surprising result : a small , whole-number ratio .
This 2-to-1 ratio means that the brown compound has twice the amount of chlorine per amount of copper as the green compound .
This can be explained by atomic theory if the copper-to-chlorine ratio in the brown compound is 1 copper atom to 2 chlorine atoms , and the ratio in the green compound is 1 copper atom to 1 chlorine atom .
The ratio of chlorine atoms ( and thus the ratio of their masses ) is therefore 2 to 1 .
A sample of compound A ( a clear , colorless gas ) is analyzed and found to contain 4.27 g carbon and 5.69 g oxygen .
A sample of compound B ( also a clear , colorless gas ) is analyzed and found to contain 5.19 g carbon and 13.84 g oxygen .
Are these data an example of the law of definite proportions , the law of multiple proportions , or neither ?
What do these data tell you about substances A and B ?
In compound A , the mass ratio of carbon to oxygen is : In compound B , the mass ratio of carbon to oxygen is : The ratio of these ratios is : This supports the law of multiple proportions .
This means that A and B are different compounds , with A having one-half as much oxygen per amount of carbon ( or twice as much carbon per amount of oxygen ) as B .
A possible pair of compounds that would fit this relationship would be A = CO and B = CO .
A sample of compound X ( a clear , colorless , combustible liquid with a noticeable odor ) is analyzed and found to contain 14.13 g carbon and 2.96 g hydrogen .
A sample of compound Y ( a clear , colorless , combustible liquid with a noticeable odor that is slightly different from X ’ s odor ) is analyzed and found to contain 19.91 g carbon and 3.34 g hydrogen .
Are these data an example of the law of definite proportions , the law of multiple proportions , or neither ?
What do these data tell you about substances X and Y ?
Answer : In compound X , the mass ratio of carbon to hydrogen is ratio of carbon to oxygen is In compound Y , the mass The ratio of these ratios is This small , whole-number ratio supports the law of multiple proportions .
This means that X and Y are different compounds .
Are they the smallest particles , or is there something smaller ?
In the late 1800s , a number of scientists interested in questions like these investigated the electrical discharges that could be produced in low-pressure gases , with the most significant discovery made by English physicist J. J. Thomson using a cathode ray tube .
This apparatus consisted of a sealed glass tube from which almost all the air had been removed ; the tube contained two metal electrodes .
When high voltage was applied across the electrodes , a visible beam called a cathode ray appeared between them .
This beam was deflected toward the positive charge and away from the negative charge , and was produced in the same way with identical properties when different metals were used for the electrodes .
In similar experiments , the ray was simultaneously deflected by an applied magnetic field , and measurements of the extent of deflection and the magnetic field strength allowed Thomson to calculate the charge-to-mass ratio of the cathode ray particles .
The results of these measurements indicated that these particles were much lighter than atoms .
Although controversial at the time , Thomson ’ s idea was gradually accepted , and his cathode ray particle is what we now call an electron , a negatively charged , subatomic particle with a mass more than one thousand-times less that of an atom .
The term “ electron ” was coined in 1891 by Irish physicist George Stoney , from “ electr ic i on . ” In 1909 , more information about the electron was uncovered by American physicist Robert A. Millikan via his “ oil drop ” experiments .
Millikan created microscopic oil droplets , which could be electrically charged by friction as they formed or by using X-rays .
These droplets initially fell due to gravity , but their downward progress could be slowed or even reversed by an electric field lower in the apparatus .
By adjusting the electric field strength and making careful measurements and appropriate calculations , Millikan was able to determine the charge on individual drops .
Scientists had now established that the atom was not indivisible as Dalton had believed , and due to the work of Thomson , Millikan , and others , the charge and mass of the negative , subatomic particles—the electrons—were known .
However , the positively charged part of an atom was not yet well understood .
In 1904 , Thomson proposed the “ plum pudding ” model of atoms , which described a positively charged mass with an equal amount of negative charge in the form of electrons embedded in it , since all atoms are electrically neutral .
A competing model had been proposed in 1903 by Hantaro Nagaoka , who postulated a Saturn-like atom , consisting of a positively charged sphere surrounded by a halo of electrons .
The next major development in understanding the atom came from Ernest Rutherford , a physicist from New Zealand who largely spent his scientific career in Canada and England .
What did they discover ?
Most particles passed right through the foil without being deflected at all .
However , some were diverted slightly , and a very small number were deflected almost straight back toward the source .
Rutherford described finding these results : “ It was quite the most incredible event that has ever happened to me in my life .
Alpha particles are positively charged , so deflections arose when they encountered another positive charge ( like charges repel each other ) .
Since like charges repel one another , the few positively charged α particles that changed paths abruptly must have hit , or closely approached , another body that also had a highly concentrated , positive charge .
Since the deflections occurred a small fraction of the time , this charge only occupied a small amount of the space in the gold foil .
Analyzing a series of such experiments in detail , Rutherford drew two conclusions : The volume occupied by an atom must consist of a large amount of empty space .
A small , relatively heavy , positively charged body , the nucleus , must be at the center of each atom .
This analysis led Rutherford to propose a model in which an atom consists of a very small , positively charged nucleus , in which most of the mass of the atom is concentrated , surrounded by the negatively charged electrons , so that the atom is electrically neutral .
After many more experiments , Rutherford also discovered that the nuclei of other elements contain the hydrogen nucleus as a “ building block , ” and he named this more fundamental particle the proton , the positively charged , subatomic particle found in the nucleus .
With one addition , which you will learn next , this nuclear model of the atom , proposed over a century ago , is still used today .
Another important finding was the discovery of isotopes .
During the early 1900s , scientists identified several substances that appeared to be new elements , isolating them from radioactive ores .
For example , a “ new element ” produced by the radioactive decay of thorium was initially given the name mesothorium .
However , a more detailed analysis showed that mesothorium was chemically identical to radium ( another decay product ) , despite having a different atomic mass .
This result , along with similar findings for other elements , led the English chemist Frederick Soddy to realize that an element could have types of atoms with different masses that were chemically indistinguishable .
These different types are called isotopes —atoms of the same element that differ in mass .
Soddy was awarded the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1921 for this discovery .
One puzzle remained : The nucleus was known to contain almost all of the mass of an atom , with the number of protons only providing half , or less , of that mass .
Different proposals were made to explain what constituted the remaining mass , including the existence of neutral particles in the nucleus .
As you might expect , detecting uncharged particles is very challenging , and it was not until 1932 that James Chadwick found evidence of neutrons , uncharged , subatomic particles with a mass approximately the same as that of protons .
The existence of the neutron also explained isotopes : They differ in mass because they have different numbers of neutrons , but they are chemically identical because they have the same number of protons .
This will be explained in more detail later in this chapter .
It was learned that an atom contains a very small nucleus composed of positively charged protons and uncharged neutrons , surrounded by a much larger volume of space containing negatively charged electrons .
The nucleus contains the majority of an atom ’ s mass because protons and neutrons are much heavier than electrons , whereas electrons occupy almost all of an atom ’ s volume .
The diameter of an atom is on the order of 10 m , whereas the diameter of the nucleus is roughly 10 m—about 100,000 times smaller .
For a perspective about their relative sizes , consider this : If the nucleus were the size of a blueberry , the atom would be about the size of a football stadium .
Atoms—and the protons , neutrons , and electrons that compose them—are extremely small .
For example , a carbon atom weighs less than 2 10 g , and an electron has a charge of less than 2 10 C ( coulomb ) .
When describing the properties of tiny objects such as atoms , we use appropriately small units of measure , such as the atomic mass unit ( amu ) and the fundamental unit of charge ( e ) .
The amu was originally defined based on hydrogen , the lightest element , then later in terms of oxygen .
Since 1961 , it has been defined with regard to the most abundant isotope of carbon , atoms of which are assigned masses of exactly 12 amu .
( This isotope is known as “ carbon-12 ” as will be discussed later in this module . )
Thus , one amu is exactly of the mass of one carbon-12 atom : 1 amu = 1.6605 10 g. ( The Dalton ( Da ) and the unified atomic mass unit ( u ) are alternative units that are equivalent to the amu . )
The fundamental unit of charge ( also called the elementary charge ) equals the magnitude of the charge of an electron ( e ) with e = 1.602 10 C. A proton has a mass of 1.0073 amu and a charge of 1+ .
A neutron is a slightly heavier particle with a mass 1.0087 amu and a charge of zero ; as its name suggests , it is neutral .
The electron has a charge of 1− and is a much lighter particle with a mass of about 0.00055 amu ( it would take about 1800 electrons to equal the mass of one proton ) .
The properties of these fundamental particles are summarized in .
( An observant student might notice that the sum of an atom ’ s subatomic particles does not equal the atom ’ s actual mass : The total mass of six protons , six neutrons , and six electrons is 12.0993 amu , slightly larger than 12.00 amu .
This “ missing ” mass is known as the mass defect , and you will learn about it in the chapter on nuclear chemistry . )
The number of protons in the nucleus of an atom is its atomic number ( Z ) .
This is the defining trait of an element : Its value determines the identity of the atom .
For example , any atom that contains six protons is the element carbon and has the atomic number 6 , regardless of how many neutrons or electrons it may have .
A neutral atom must contain the same number of positive and negative charges , so the number of protons equals the number of electrons .
Therefore , the atomic number also indicates the number of electrons in an atom .
The total number of protons and neutrons in an atom is called its mass number ( A ) .
The number of neutrons is therefore the difference between the mass number and the atomic number : A – Z = number of neutrons .
Atoms are electrically neutral if they contain the same number of positively charged protons and negatively charged electrons .
When the numbers of these subatomic particles are not equal , the atom is electrically charged and is called an ion .
The charge of an atom is defined as follows : Atomic charge = number of protons − number of electrons As will be discussed in more detail later in this chapter , atoms ( and molecules ) typically acquire charge by gaining or losing electrons .
An atom that gains one or more electrons will exhibit a negative charge and is called an anion .
Positively charged atoms called cations are formed when an atom loses one or more electrons .
For example , a neutral sodium atom ( Z = 11 ) has 11 electrons .
If this atom loses one electron , it will become a cation with a 1+ charge ( 11 − 10 = 1+ ) .
A neutral oxygen atom ( Z = 8 ) has eight electrons , and if it gains two electrons it will become an anion with a 2− charge ( 8 − 10 = 2− ) .
Iodine is an essential trace element in our diet ; it is needed to produce thyroid hormone .
Insufficient iodine in the diet can lead to the development of a goiter , an enlargement of the thyroid gland .
The addition of small amounts of iodine to table salt ( iodized salt ) has essentially eliminated this health concern in the United States , but as much as 40 % of the world ’ s population is still at risk of iodine deficiency .
The iodine atoms are added as anions , and each has a 1− charge and a mass number of 127 .
Determine the numbers of protons , neutrons , and electrons in one of these iodine anions .
The atomic number of iodine ( 53 ) tells us that a neutral iodine atom contains 53 protons in its nucleus and 53 electrons outside its nucleus .
Because the sum of the numbers of protons and neutrons equals the mass number , 127 , the number of neutrons is 74 ( 127 − 53 = 74 ) .
Since the iodine is added as a 1− anion , the number of electrons is 54 [ 53 – ( 1– ) = 54 ] .
An ion of platinum has a mass number of 195 and contains 74 electrons .
How many protons and neutrons does it contain , and what is its charge ?
Answer : 78 protons ; 117 neutrons ; charge is 4+ A chemical symbol is an abbreviation that we use to indicate an element or an atom of an element .
For example , the symbol for mercury is Hg .
We use the same symbol to indicate one atom of mercury ( microscopic domain ) or to label a container of many atoms of the element mercury ( macroscopic domain ) .
The symbols for several common elements and their atoms are listed in .
Some symbols are derived from the common name of the element ; others are abbreviations of the name in another language .
Most symbols have one or two letters , but three-letter symbols have been used to describe some elements that have atomic numbers greater than 112 .
To avoid confusion with other notations , only the first letter of a symbol is capitalized .
For example , Co is the symbol for the element cobalt , but CO is the notation for the compound carbon monoxide , which contains atoms of the elements carbon ( C ) and oxygen ( O ) .
All known elements and their symbols are in the periodic table in ( also found in ) .
Traditionally , the discoverer ( or discoverers ) of a new element names the element .
However , until the name is recognized by the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry ( IUPAC ) , the recommended name of the new element is based on the Latin word ( s ) for its atomic number .
For example , element 106 was called unnilhexium ( Unh ) , element 107 was called unnilseptium ( Uns ) , and element 108 was called unniloctium ( Uno ) for several years .
These elements are now named after scientists ( or occasionally locations ) ; for example , element 106 is now known as seaborgium ( Sg ) in honor of Glenn Seaborg , a Nobel Prize winner who was active in the discovery of several heavy elements .
The symbol for a specific isotope of any element is written by placing the mass number as a superscript to the left of the element symbol .
The atomic number is sometimes written as a subscript preceding the symbol , but since this number defines the element ’ s identity , as does its symbol , it is often omitted .
For example , magnesium exists as a mixture of three isotopes , each with an atomic number of 12 and with mass numbers of 24 , 25 , and 26 , respectively .
These isotopes can be identified as Mg , Mg , and Mg .
These isotope symbols are read as “ element , mass number ” and can be symbolized consistent with this reading .
They differ only because a Mg atom has 12 neutrons in its nucleus , a Mg atom has 13 neutrons , and a Mg has 14 neutrons .
Information about the naturally occurring isotopes of elements with atomic numbers 1 through 10 is given in .
Note that in addition to standard names and symbols , the isotopes of hydrogen are often referred to using common names and accompanying symbols .
However , the average masses of atoms of most elements are not whole numbers because most elements exist naturally as mixtures of two or more isotopes .
The mass of an element shown in a periodic table or listed in a table of atomic masses is a weighted , average mass of all the isotopes present in a naturally occurring sample of that element .
This is equal to the sum of each individual isotope ’ s mass multiplied by its fractional abundance .
For example , the element boron is composed of two isotopes : About 19.9 % of all boron atoms are B with a mass of 10.0129 amu , and the remaining 80.1 % are B with a mass of 11.0093 amu .
A meteorite found in central Indiana contains traces of the noble gas neon picked up from the solar wind during the meteorite ’ s trip through the solar system .
Analysis of a sample of the gas showed that it consisted of 91.84 % Ne ( mass 19.9924 amu ) , 0.47 % Ne ( mass 20.9940 amu ) , and 7.69 % Ne ( mass 21.9914 amu ) .
What is the average mass of the neon in the solar wind ?
The average mass of a neon atom in the solar wind is 20.15 amu .
( The average mass of a terrestrial neon atom is 20.1796 amu .
This result demonstrates that we may find slight differences in the natural abundance of isotopes , depending on their origin . )
A sample of magnesium is found to contain 78.70 % of Mg atoms ( mass 23.98 amu ) , 10.13 % of Mg atoms ( mass 24.99 amu ) , and 11.17 % of Mg atoms ( mass 25.98 amu ) .
Calculate the average mass of a Mg atom .
Answer : 24.31 amu We can also do variations of this type of calculation , as shown in the next example .
Naturally occurring chlorine consists of Cl ( mass 34.96885 amu ) and Cl ( mass 36.96590 amu ) , with an average mass of 35.453 amu .
What is the percent composition of Cl in terms of these two isotopes ?
The average mass of chlorine is the fraction that is Cl times the mass of Cl plus the fraction that is Cl times the mass of Cl .
If we let x represent the fraction that is Cl , then the fraction that is Cl is represented by 1.00 − x .
( The fraction that is Cl + the fraction that is Cl must add up to 1 , so the fraction of Cl must equal 1.00 − the fraction of Cl . )
Substituting this into the average mass equation , we have : So solving yields : x = 0.7576 , which means that 1.00 − 0.7576 = 0.2424 .
Therefore , chlorine consists of 75.76 % Cl and 24.24 % Cl .
Naturally occurring copper consists of Cu ( mass 62.9296 amu ) and Cu ( mass 64.9278 amu ) , with an average mass of 63.546 amu .
What is the percent composition of Cu in terms of these two isotopes ?
Answer : 69.15 % Cu-63 and 30.85 % Cu-65 The occurrence and natural abundances of isotopes can be experimentally determined using an instrument called a mass spectrometer .
Mass spectrometry ( MS ) is widely used in chemistry , forensics , medicine , environmental science , and many other fields to analyze and help identify the substances in a sample of material .
In a typical mass spectrometer , the sample is vaporized and exposed to a high-energy electron beam that causes the sample ’ s atoms ( or molecules ) to become electrically charged , typically by losing one or more electrons .
The ions are detected , and a plot of the relative number of ions generated versus their mass-to-charge ratios ( a mass spectrum ) is made .
The height of each vertical feature or peak in a mass spectrum is proportional to the fraction of cations with the specified mass-to-charge ratio .
Since its initial use during the development of modern atomic theory , MS has evolved to become a powerful tool for chemical analysis in a wide range of applications .
( A subscript is used only when more than one atom of a given type is present . )
Molecular formulas are also used as abbreviations for the names of compounds .
The structural formula for a compound gives the same information as its molecular formula ( the types and numbers of atoms in the molecule ) but also shows how the atoms are connected in the molecule .
The structural formula for methane contains symbols for one C atom and four H atoms , indicating the number of atoms in the molecule .
The lines represent bonds that hold the atoms together .
( A chemical bond is an attraction between atoms or ions that holds them together in a molecule or a crystal . )
We will discuss chemical bonds and see how to predict the arrangement of atoms in a molecule later .
For now , simply know that the lines are an indication of how the atoms are connected in a molecule .
A ball-and-stick model shows the geometric arrangement of the atoms with atomic sizes not to scale , and a space-filling model shows the relative sizes of the atoms .
Although many elements consist of discrete , individual atoms , some exist as molecules made up of two or more atoms of the element chemically bonded together .
For example , most samples of the elements hydrogen , oxygen , and nitrogen are composed of molecules that contain two atoms each ( called diatomic molecules ) and thus have the molecular formulas H , O , and N , respectively .
Other elements commonly found as diatomic molecules are fluorine ( F ) , chlorine ( Cl ) , bromine ( Br ) , and iodine ( I ) .
The most common form of the element sulfur is composed of molecules that consist of eight atoms of sulfur ; its molecular formula is S .
It is important to note that a subscript following a symbol and a number in front of a symbol do not represent the same thing ; for example , H and 2H represent distinctly different species .
H is a molecular formula ; it represents a diatomic molecule of hydrogen , consisting of two atoms of the element that are chemically bonded together .
The expression 2H , on the other hand , indicates two separate hydrogen atoms that are not combined as a unit .
The expression 2H represents two molecules of diatomic hydrogen .
Compounds are formed when two or more elements chemically combine , resulting in the formation of bonds .
For example , hydrogen and oxygen can react to form water , and sodium and chlorine can react to form table salt .
We sometimes describe the composition of these compounds with an empirical formula , which indicates the types of atoms present and the simplest whole-number ratio of the number of atoms ( or ions ) in the compound .
For example , titanium dioxide ( used as pigment in white paint and in the thick , white , blocking type of sunscreen ) has an empirical formula of TiO .
This identifies the elements titanium ( Ti ) and oxygen ( O ) as the constituents of titanium dioxide , and indicates the presence of twice as many atoms of the element oxygen as atoms of the element titanium .
As discussed previously , we can describe a compound with a molecular formula , in which the subscripts indicate the actual numbers of atoms of each element in a molecule of the compound .
In many cases , the molecular formula of a substance is derived from experimental determination of both its empirical formula and its molecular mass ( the sum of atomic masses for all atoms composing the molecule ) .
For example , it can be determined experimentally that benzene contains two elements , carbon ( C ) and hydrogen ( H ) , and that for every carbon atom in benzene , there is one hydrogen atom .
Thus , the empirical formula is CH .
An experimental determination of the molecular mass reveals that a molecule of benzene contains six carbon atoms and six hydrogen atoms , so the molecular formula for benzene is C H .
If we know a compound ’ s formula , we can easily determine the empirical formula .
( This is somewhat of an academic exercise ; the reverse chronology is generally followed in actual practice . )
For example , the molecular formula for acetic acid , the component that gives vinegar its sharp taste , is C H O .
This formula indicates that a molecule of acetic acid contains two carbon atoms , four hydrogen atoms , and two oxygen atoms .
The ratio of atoms is 2:4:2 .
Dividing by the lowest common denominator ( 2 ) gives the simplest , whole-number ratio of atoms , 1:2:1 , so the empirical formula is CH O .
Note that a molecular formula is always a whole-number multiple of an empirical formula .
Molecules of glucose ( blood sugar ) contain 6 carbon atoms , 12 hydrogen atoms , and 6 oxygen atoms .
What are the molecular and empirical formulas of glucose ?
The molecular formula is C H O because one molecule actually contains 6 C , 12 H , and 6 O atoms .
The simplest whole-number ratio of C to H to O atoms in glucose is 1:2:1 , so the empirical formula is CH O .
A molecule of metaldehyde ( a pesticide used for snails and slugs ) contains 8 carbon atoms , 16 hydrogen atoms , and 4 oxygen atoms .
What are the molecular and empirical formulas of metaldehyde ?
For example , could there be another compound with the same formula as acetic acid , C H O ?
And if so , what would be the structure of its molecules ?
If you predict that another compound with the formula C H O could exist , then you demonstrated good chemical insight and are correct .
Two C atoms , four H atoms , and two O atoms can also be arranged to form a methyl formate , which is used in manufacturing , as an insecticide , and for quick-drying finishes .
Methyl formate molecules have one of the oxygen atoms between the two carbon atoms , differing from the arrangement in acetic acid molecules .
Acetic acid and methyl formate are examples of isomers —compounds with the same chemical formula but different molecular structures .
Note that this small difference in the arrangement of the atoms has a major effect on their respective chemical properties .
You would certainly not want to use a solution of methyl formate as a substitute for a solution of acetic acid ( vinegar ) when you make salad dressing .
Many types of isomers exist .
Acetic acid and methyl formate are structural isomers , compounds in which the molecules differ in how the atoms are connected to each other .
There are also various types of spatial isomers , in which the relative orientations of the atoms in space can be different .
For example , the compound carvone ( found in caraway seeds , spearmint , and mandarin orange peels ) consists of two isomers that are mirror images of each other .
S - ( + ) -carvone smells like caraway , and R - ( − ) -carvone smells like spearmint .
One such grouping includes lithium ( Li ) , sodium ( Na ) , and potassium ( K ) : These elements all are shiny , conduct heat and electricity well , and have similar chemical properties .
A second grouping includes calcium ( Ca ) , strontium ( Sr ) , and barium ( Ba ) , which also are shiny , good conductors of heat and electricity , and have chemical properties in common .
However , the specific properties of these two groupings are notably different from each other .
Fluorine ( F ) , chlorine ( Cl ) , bromine ( Br ) , and iodine ( I ) also exhibit similar properties to each other , but these properties are drastically different from those of any of the elements above .
Dimitri Mendeleev in Russia ( 1869 ) and Lothar Meyer in Germany ( 1870 ) independently recognized that there was a periodic relationship among the properties of the elements known at that time .
Both published tables with the elements arranged according to increasing atomic mass .
But Mendeleev went one step further than Meyer : He used his table to predict the existence of elements that would have the properties similar to aluminum and silicon , but were yet unknown .
The discoveries of gallium ( 1875 ) and germanium ( 1886 ) provided great support for Mendeleev ’ s work .
Although Mendeleev and Meyer had a long dispute over priority , Mendeleev ’ s contributions to the development of the periodic table are now more widely recognized .
By the twentieth century , it became apparent that the periodic relationship involved atomic numbers rather than atomic masses .
The modern statement of this relationship , the periodic law , is as follows : the properties of the elements are periodic functions of their atomic numbers .
A modern periodic table arranges the elements in increasing order of their atomic numbers and groups atoms with similar properties in the same vertical column .
Each box represents an element and contains its atomic number , symbol , average atomic mass , and ( sometimes ) name .
The elements are arranged in seven horizontal rows , called periods or series , and 18 vertical columns , called groups .
Groups are labeled at the top of each column .
In the United States , the labels traditionally were numerals with capital letters .
However , IUPAC recommends that the numbers 1 through 18 be used , and these labels are more common .
For the table to fit on a single page , parts of two of the rows , a total of 14 columns , are usually written below the main body of the table .
Many elements differ dramatically in their chemical and physical properties , but some elements are similar in their behaviors .
For example , many elements appear shiny , are malleable ( able to be deformed without breaking ) and ductile ( can be drawn into wires ) , and conduct heat and electricity well .
Other elements are not shiny , malleable , or ductile , and are poor conductors of heat and electricity .
The elements can be subdivided further by more specific properties , such as the composition of the compounds they form .
For example , the elements in group 1 ( the first column ) form compounds that consist of one atom of the element and one atom of hydrogen .
These elements ( except hydrogen ) are known as alkali metals , and they all have similar chemical properties .
The elements in group 2 ( the second column ) form compounds consisting of one atom of the element and two atoms of hydrogen : These are called alkaline earth metals , with similar properties among members of that group .
Other groups with specific names are the pnictogens ( group 15 ) , chalcogens ( group 16 ) , halogens ( group 17 ) , and the noble gases ( group 18 , also known as inert gases ) .
The groups can also be referred to by the first element of the group : For example , the chalcogens can be called the oxygen group or oxygen family .
Hydrogen is a unique , nonmetallic element with properties similar to both group 1 and group 17 elements .
For that reason , hydrogen may be shown at the top of both groups , or by itself .
Atoms of each of the following elements are essential for life .
Element 43 ( technetium ) , element 61 ( promethium ) , and most of the elements with atomic number 84 ( polonium ) and higher have their atomic mass given in square brackets .
This is done for elements that consist entirely of unstable , radioactive isotopes ( you will learn more about radioactivity in the nuclear chemistry chapter ) .
An average atomic weight can not be determined for these elements because their radioisotopes may vary significantly in relative abundance , depending on the source , or may not even exist in nature .
The number in square brackets is the atomic mass number ( an approximate atomic mass ) of the most stable isotope of that element .
Electrons , however , can be added to atoms by transfer from other atoms , lost by transfer to other atoms , or shared with other atoms .
The transfer and sharing of electrons among atoms govern the chemistry of the elements .
During the formation of some compounds , atoms gain or lose electrons , and form electrically charged particles called ions .
You can use the periodic table to predict whether an atom will form an anion or a cation , and you can often predict the charge of the resulting ion .
Atoms of many main-group metals lose enough electrons to leave them with the same number of electrons as an atom of the preceding noble gas .
To illustrate , an atom of an alkali metal ( group 1 ) loses one electron and forms a cation with a 1+ charge ; an alkaline earth metal ( group 2 ) loses two electrons and forms a cation with a 2+ charge , and so on .
For example , a neutral calcium atom , with 20 protons and 20 electrons , readily loses two electrons .
This results in a cation with 20 protons , 18 electrons , and a 2+ charge .
It has the same number of electrons as atoms of the preceding noble gas , argon , and is symbolized Ca .
The name of a metal ion is the same as the name of the metal atom from which it forms , so Ca is called a calcium ion .
When atoms of nonmetal elements form ions , they generally gain enough electrons to give them the same number of electrons as an atom of the next noble gas in the periodic table .
Atoms of group 17 gain one electron and form anions with a 1− charge ; atoms of group 16 gain two electrons and form ions with a 2− charge , and so on .
For example , the neutral bromine atom , with 35 protons and 35 electrons , can gain one electron to provide it with 36 electrons .
This results in an anion with 35 protons , 36 electrons , and a 1− charge .
It has the same number of electrons as atoms of the next noble gas , krypton , and is symbolized Br .
( A discussion of the theory supporting the favored status of noble gas electron numbers reflected in these predictive rules for ion formation is provided in a later chapter of this text . )
Note the usefulness of the periodic table in predicting likely ion formation and charge .
Moving from the far left to the right on the periodic table , main-group elements tend to form cations with a charge equal to the group number .
That is , group 1 elements form 1+ ions ; group 2 elements form 2+ ions , and so on .
Moving from the far right to the left on the periodic table , elements often form anions with a negative charge equal to the number of groups moved left from the noble gases .
For example , group 17 elements ( one group left of the noble gases ) form 1− ions ; group 16 elements ( two groups left ) form 2− ions , and so on .
This trend can be used as a guide in many cases , but its predictive value decreases when moving toward the center of the periodic table .
In fact , transition metals and some other metals often exhibit variable charges that are not predictable by their location in the table .
For example , copper can form ions with a 1+ or 2+ charge , and iron can form ions with a 2+ or 3+ charge .
An ion found in some compounds used as antiperspirants contains 13 protons and 10 electrons .
What is its symbol ?
Because the number of protons remains unchanged when an atom forms an ion , the atomic number of the element must be 13 .
Knowing this lets us use the periodic table to identify the element as Al ( aluminum ) .
The Al atom has lost three electrons and thus has three more positive charges ( 13 ) than it has electrons ( 10 ) .
This is the aluminum cation , Al .
Give the symbol and name for the ion with 34 protons and 36 electrons .
Answer : Se , the selenide ion Magnesium and nitrogen react to form an ionic compound .
Predict which forms an anion , which forms a cation , and the charges of each ion .
Write the symbol for each ion and name them .
Magnesium ’ s position in the periodic table ( group 2 ) tells us that it is a metal .
Metals form positive ions ( cations ) .
A magnesium atom must lose two electrons to have the same number electrons as an atom of the previous noble gas , neon .
Thus , a magnesium atom will form a cation with two fewer electrons than protons and a charge of 2+ .
The symbol for the ion is Mg , and it is called a magnesium ion .
Nitrogen ’ s position in the periodic table ( group 15 ) reveals that it is a nonmetal .
Nonmetals form negative ions ( anions ) .
A nitrogen atom must gain three electrons to have the same number of electrons as an atom of the following noble gas , neon .
Thus , a nitrogen atom will form an anion with three more electrons than protons and a charge of 3− .
The symbol for the ion is N , and it is called a nitride ion .
Aluminum and carbon react to form an ionic compound .
Predict which forms an anion , which forms a cation , and the charges of each ion .
Write the symbol for each ion and name them .
Answer : Al will form a cation with a charge of 3+ : Al , an aluminum ion .
Carbon will form an anion with a charge of 4− : C , a carbide ion .
The ions that we have discussed so far are called monatomic ions , that is , they are ions formed from only one atom .
We also find many polyatomic ions .
These ions , which act as discrete units , are electrically charged molecules ( a group of bonded atoms with an overall charge ) .
Some of the more important polyatomic ions are listed in .
Oxyanions are polyatomic ions that contain one or more oxygen atoms .
At this point in your study of chemistry , you should memorize the names , formulas , and charges of the most common polyatomic ions .
Because you will use them repeatedly , they will soon become familiar .
chlorite is Note that there is a system for naming some polyatomic ions ; -ate and -ite are suffixes designating polyatomic ions containing more or fewer oxygen atoms .
Per ( short for “ hyper ” ) and hypo ( meaning “ under ” ) are prefixes meaning more oxygen atoms than -ate and fewer oxygen atoms than -ite , respectively .
For example , perchlorate is and hypochlorite is ClO .
Unfortunately , the number of oxygen atoms chlorate is corresponding to a given suffix or prefix is not consistent ; for example , nitrate is This will be covered in more detail in the next module on nomenclature .
The nature of the attractive forces that hold atoms or ions together within a compound is the basis for classifying chemical bonding .
When electrons are transferred and ions form , ionic bonds result .
Ionic bonds are electrostatic forces of attraction , that is , the attractive forces experienced between objects of opposite electrical charge ( in this case , cations and anions ) .
When electrons are “ shared ” and molecules form , covalent bonds result .
Covalent bonds are the attractive forces between the positively charged nuclei of the bonded atoms and one or more pairs of electrons that are located between the atoms .
Compounds are classified as ionic or molecular ( covalent ) on the basis of the bonds present in them .
while sulfate is When an element composed of atoms that readily lose electrons ( a metal ) reacts with an element composed of atoms that readily gain electrons ( a nonmetal ) , a transfer of electrons usually occurs , producing ions .
The compound formed by this transfer is stabilized by the electrostatic attractions ( ionic bonds ) between the ions of opposite charge present in the compound .
Similarly , each calcium atom ( group 2 ) can give up two electrons and transfer one to each of two chlorine atoms to form CaCl , which is composed of Ca and Cl ions in the ratio of one Ca ion to two Cl ions .
A compound that contains ions and is held together by ionic bonds is called an ionic compound .
The periodic table can help us recognize many of the compounds that are ionic : When a metal is combined with one or more nonmetals , the compound is usually ionic .
This guideline works well for predicting ionic compound formation for most of the compounds typically encountered in an introductory chemistry course .
However , it is not always true ( for example , aluminum chloride , AlCl , is not ionic ) .
You can often recognize ionic compounds because of their properties .
Ionic compounds are solids that typically melt at high temperatures and boil at even higher temperatures .
For example , sodium chloride melts at 801 °C and boils at 1413 °C .
( As a comparison , the molecular compound water melts at 0 °C and boils at 100 °C . )
In solid form , an ionic compound is not electrically conductive because its ions are unable to flow ( “ electricity ” is the flow of charged particles ) .
When molten , however , it can conduct electricity because its ions are able to move freely through the liquid .
In every ionic compound , the total number of positive charges of the cations equals the total number of negative charges of the anions .
Thus , ionic compounds are electrically neutral overall , even though they contain positive and negative ions .
We can use this observation to help us write the formula of an ionic compound .
The formula of an ionic compound must have a ratio of ions such that the numbers of positive and negative charges are equal .
The gemstone sapphire is mostly a compound of aluminum and oxygen that contains aluminum cations , Al , and oxygen anions , O .
What is the formula of this compound ?
Because the ionic compound must be electrically neutral , it must have the same number of positive and negative charges .
Two aluminum ions , each with a charge of 3+ , would give us six positive charges , and three oxide ions , each with a charge of 2− , would give us six negative charges .
The formula would be Al O .
Predict the formula of the ionic compound formed between the sodium cation , Na , and the sulfide anion , S .
Answer : Na S Many ionic compounds contain polyatomic ions as the cation , the anion , or both .
As with simple ionic compounds , these compounds must also be electrically neutral , so their formulas can be predicted by treating the polyatomic ions as discrete units .
We use parentheses in a formula to indicate a group of atoms that behave as a unit .
For example , the formula for calcium phosphate , one of the minerals in our bones , is Ca ( PO ) .
This formula indicates that there are three calcium ions ( Ca ) for every two phosphate groups are discrete units , each consisting of one phosphorus atom and four oxygen atoms , and having an overall charge of 3− .
The compound is electrically neutral , and its formula shows a total count of three Ca , two P , and eight O atoms .
The What is the formula of this compound ?
Baking powder contains calcium dihydrogen phosphate , an ionic compound composed of the ions Ca and The positive and negative charges must balance , and this ionic compound must be electrically neutral .
Thus , we must have two negative charges to balance the 2+ charge of the calcium ion .
This requires a ratio of one ions .
We designate this by enclosing the formula for the dihydrogen phosphate Ca ion to two ion in parentheses and adding a subscript 2 .
The formula is Ca ( H PO ) .
Predict the formula of the ionic compound formed between the lithium ion and the peroxide ion , ( Hint : Use the periodic table to predict the sign and the charge on the lithium ion . )
Because an ionic compound is not made up of single , discrete molecules , it may not be properly symbolized using a molecular formula .
Instead , ionic compounds must be symbolized by a formula indicating the relative numbers Answer : Li O of its constituent ions .
For compounds containing only monatomic ions ( such as NaCl ) and for many compounds containing polyatomic ions ( such as CaSO ) , these formulas are just the empirical formulas introduced earlier in this chapter .
However , the formulas for some ionic compounds containing polyatomic ions are not empirical formulas .
For example , the ionic compound sodium oxalate is comprised of Na and ions combined in a 2:1 ratio , and its formula is written as Na C O .
The subscripts in this formula are not the smallest-possible whole numbers , as each can be divided by 2 to yield the empirical formula , NaCO .
This is not the accepted formula for sodium oxalate , however , as it does not accurately represent the compound ’ s polyatomic anion , Many compounds do not contain ions but instead consist solely of discrete , neutral molecules .
These molecular compounds ( covalent compounds ) result when atoms share , rather than transfer ( gain or lose ) , electrons .
Covalent bonding is an important and extensive concept in chemistry , and it will be treated in considerable detail in a later chapter of this text .
We can often identify molecular compounds on the basis of their physical properties .
Under normal conditions , molecular compounds often exist as gases , low-boiling liquids , and low-melting solids , although many important exceptions exist .
Whereas ionic compounds are usually formed when a metal and a nonmetal combine , covalent compounds are usually formed by a combination of nonmetals .
Thus , the periodic table can help us recognize many of the compounds that are covalent .
Shades of gray exist between ionic and molecular compounds , and you ’ ll learn more about those later .
( b ) Hydrogen ( group 1 ) is a nonmetal , and oxygen ( group 16 ) is a nonmetal ; H O is predicted to be molecular .
( c ) Carbon ( group 14 ) is a nonmetal , hydrogen ( group 1 ) is a nonmetal , and chlorine ( group 17 ) is a nonmetal ; CHCl is predicted to be molecular .
( d ) Lithium ( group 1 ) is a metal , and carbonate is a polyatomic ion ; Li CO is predicted to be ionic .
This module describes an approach that is used to name simple ionic and molecular compounds , such as NaCl , CaCO , and N O .
We will limit our attention here to inorganic compounds , compounds that are composed principally of elements other than carbon , and will follow the nomenclature guidelines proposed by IUPAC .
The rules for organic compounds , in which carbon is the principle element , will be treated in a later chapter on organic chemistry .
To name an inorganic compound , we need to consider the answers to several questions .
First , is the compound ionic or molecular ?
If the compound is ionic , does the metal form ions of only one type ( fixed charge ) or more than one type ( variable charge ) ?
Are the ions monatomic or polyatomic ?
If the compound is molecular , does it contain hydrogen ?
If so , does it also contain oxygen ?
From the answers we derive , we place the compound in an appropriate category and then name it accordingly .
The name of a binary compound containing monatomic ions consists of the name of the cation ( the name of the metal ) followed by the name of the anion ( the name of the nonmetallic element with its ending replaced by the suffix – ide ) .
Some examples are given in .
Compounds containing polyatomic ions are named similarly to those containing only monatomic ions , i.e .
by naming first the cation and then the anion .
Examples are shown in .
Most of the transition metals and some main group metals can form two or more cations with different charges .
Compounds of these metals with nonmetals are named with the same method as compounds in the first category , except the charge of the metal ion is specified by a Roman numeral in parentheses after the name of the metal .
The charge of the metal ion is determined from the formula of the compound and the charge of the anion .
For example , consider binary ionic compounds of iron and chlorine .
Iron typically exhibits a charge of either 2+ or 3+ ( see ) , and the two corresponding compound formulas are FeCl and FeCl .
The simplest name , “ iron chloride , ” will , in this case , be ambiguous , as it does not distinguish between these two compounds .
In cases like this , the charge of the metal ion is included as a Roman numeral in parentheses immediately following the metal name .
These two compounds are then unambiguously named iron ( II ) chloride and iron ( III ) chloride , respectively .
Other examples are provided in .
Though this naming convention has been largely abandoned by the scientific community , it remains in use by some segments of industry .
For example , you may see the words stannous fluoride on a tube of toothpaste .
This represents the formula SnF , which is more properly named tin ( II ) fluoride .
The other fluoride of tin is SnF , which was previously called stannic fluoride but is now named tin ( IV ) fluoride .
Ionic compounds that contain water molecules as integral components of their crystals are called hydrates .
The name for an ionic hydrate is derived by adding a term to the name for the anhydrous ( meaning “ not hydrated ” ) compound that indicates the number of water molecules associated with each formula unit of the compound .
Washing soda is the common name for a hydrate of sodium carbonate containing 10 water molecules ; the systematic name is sodium carbonate decahydrate .
Formulas for ionic hydrates are written by appending a vertically centered dot , a coefficient representing the number of water molecules , and the formula for water .
Because the total number of positive charges in each compound must equal the total number of negative charges , the positive ions must be Fe , Cu , Ga , Cr , and Ti .
The charges of cations and anions dictate their ratios in ionic compounds , so specifying the names of the ions provides sufficient information to determine chemical formulas .
However , because covalent bonding allows for significant variation in the combination ratios of the atoms in a molecule , the names for molecular compounds must explicitly identify these ratios .
When two nonmetallic elements form a molecular compound , several combination ratios are often possible .
For example , carbon and oxygen can form the compounds CO and CO .
Since these are different substances with different properties , they can not both have the same name ( they can not both be called carbon oxide ) .
To deal with this situation , we use a naming method that is somewhat similar to that used for ionic compounds , but with added prefixes to specify the numbers of atoms of each element .
The numbers of atoms of each element are designated by the Greek prefixes shown in .
When only one atom of the first element is present , the prefix mono is usually deleted from that part .
Thus , CO is named carbon monoxide , and CO is called carbon dioxide .
When two vowels are adjacent , the a in the Greek prefix is usually dropped .
Some other examples are shown in .
There are a few common names that you will encounter as you continue your study of chemistry .
For example , although NO is often called nitric oxide , its proper name is nitrogen monoxide .
Similarly , N O is known as nitrous oxide even though our rules would specify the name dinitrogen monoxide .
( And H O is usually called water , not dihydrogen monoxide . )
You should commit to memory the common names of compounds as you encounter them .
The chemistry of these compounds is explored in more detail in later chapters of this text , but for now , it will suffice to note that many acids release hydrogen ions , H , when dissolved in water .
To denote this distinct chemical property , a mixture of water with an acid is given a name derived from the compound ’ s name .
Several other examples of this nomenclature are shown in .
Many compounds containing three or more elements ( such as organic compounds or coordination compounds ) are subject to specialized nomenclature rules that you will learn later .
Typical oxyacids consist of hydrogen combined with a polyatomic , oxygen-containing ion .
To name this correctly , “ hydrogen ” is omitted ; the – ate of carbonate is replace with – ic ; and acid is added—so its name is carbonic acid .
Other examples are given in .
There are some exceptions to the general naming method ( e.g. , H SO is called sulfuric acid , not sulfic acid , and H SO is sulfurous , not sulfous , acid ) .
Swimming pools have long been a popular means of recreation , exercise , and physical therapy .
Since it is impractical to refill large pools with fresh water on a frequent basis , pool water is regularly treated with chemicals to prevent the growth of harmful bacteria and algae .
Proper pool maintenance requires regular additions of various chemical compounds in carefully measured amounts .
For example , the relative amount of calcium ion , Ca , in the water should be maintained within certain limits to prevent eye irritation and avoid damage to the pool bed and plumbing .
Quantitative aspects of the composition of substances ( such as the calcium-containing compound ) and mixtures ( such as the pool water ) are the subject of this chapter .
For example , Dalton ’ s atomic theory was an attempt to explain the results of measurements that allowed him to calculate the relative masses of elements combined in various compounds .
Understanding the relationship between the masses of atoms and the chemical formulas of compounds allows us to quantitatively describe the composition of substances .
An earlier chapter of this text described the development of the atomic mass unit , the concept of average atomic masses , and the use of chemical formulas to represent the elemental makeup of substances .
These ideas can be extended to calculate the formula mass of a substance by summing the average atomic masses of all the atoms represented in the substance ’ s formula .
For covalent substances , the formula represents the numbers and types of atoms composing a single molecule of the substance ; therefore , the formula mass may be correctly referred to as a molecular mass .
Consider chloroform ( CHCl ) , a covalent compound once used as a surgical anesthetic and now primarily used in the production of tetrafluoroethylene , the building block for the `` anti-stick '' polymer , Teflon .
The molecular formula of chloroform indicates that a single molecule contains one carbon atom , one hydrogen atom , and three chlorine atoms .
The average molecular mass of a chloroform molecule is therefore equal to the sum of the average atomic masses of these atoms .
outlines the calculations used to derive the molecular mass of chloroform , which is 119.37 amu .
Likewise , the molecular mass of an aspirin molecule , C H O , is the sum of the atomic masses of nine carbon atoms , eight hydrogen atoms , and four oxygen atoms , which amounts to 180.15 amu .
Ibuprofen , C H O , is a covalent compound and the active ingredient in several popular nonprescription pain medications , such as Advil and Motrin .
What is the molecular mass ( amu ) for this compound ?
Molecules of this compound are composed of 13 carbon atoms , 18 hydrogen atoms , and 2 oxygen atoms .
Following the approach described above , the average molecular mass for this compound is therefore : Acetaminophen , C H NO , nonprescription pain medications , such as Tylenol .
What is the molecular mass ( amu ) for this compound ?
is a covalent compound and the active ingredient in several popular Answer : 151.16 amu Ionic compounds are composed of discrete cations and anions combined in ratios to yield electrically neutral bulk matter .
The formula mass for an ionic compound is calculated in the same way as the formula mass for covalent compounds : by summing the average atomic masses of all the atoms in the compound ’ s formula .
Sodium chloride is an ionic compound composed of sodium cations , Na , and chloride anions , Cl , combined in a 1:1 ratio .
The formula mass for this compound is computed as 58.44 amu ( see ) .
Note that the average masses of neutral sodium and chlorine atoms were used in this computation , rather than the masses for sodium cations and chlorine anions .
This approach is perfectly acceptable when computing the formula mass of an ionic compound .
Moreover , the mass of an electron is negligibly small with respect to the mass of a typical atom .
Even when calculating the mass of an isolated ion , the missing or additional electrons can generally be ignored , since their contribution to the overall mass is negligible , reflected only in the nonsignificant digits that will be lost when the computed mass is properly rounded .
The few exceptions to this guideline are very light ions derived from elements with precisely known atomic masses .
Aluminum sulfate , Al ( SO ) , is an ionic compound that is used in the manufacture of paper and in various water purification processes .
What is the formula mass ( amu ) of this compound ?
The formula for this compound indicates it contains Al and SO ions combined in a 2:3 ratio .
For purposes of computing a formula mass , it is helpful to rewrite the formula in the simpler format , Al S O .
Following the approach outlined above , the formula mass for this compound is calculated as follows : Calcium phosphate , Ca ( PO ) , is an ionic compound and a common anti-caking agent added to food products .
What is the formula mass ( amu ) of calcium phosphate ?
Answer : 310.18 amu The identity of a substance is defined not only by the types of atoms or ions it contains , but by the quantity of each type of atom or ion .
For example , water , H O , and hydrogen peroxide , H O , are alike in that their respective molecules are composed of hydrogen and oxygen atoms .
However , because a hydrogen peroxide molecule contains two oxygen atoms , as opposed to the water molecule , which has only one , the two substances exhibit very different properties .
This experimental approach required the introduction of a new unit for amount of substances , the mole , which remains indispensable in modern chemical science .
The mole is an amount unit similar to familiar units like pair , dozen , gross , etc .
It provides a specific measure of the number of atoms or molecules in a bulk sample of matter .
The mole provides a link between an easily measured macroscopic property , bulk mass , and an extremely important fundamental property , number of atoms , molecules , and so forth .
The number of entities composing a mole has been experimentally determined to be 6.02214179 10 , a fundamental constant named Avogadro ’ s number ( N ) or the Avogadro constant in honor of Italian scientist Amedeo Avogadro .
This constant is properly reported with an explicit unit of “ per mole , ” a conveniently rounded version being 6.022 10 /mol .
Consistent with its definition as an amount unit , 1 mole of any element contains the same number of atoms as 1 mole of any other element .
The masses of 1 mole of different elements , however , are different , since the masses of the individual atoms are drastically different .
The molar mass of an element ( or compound ) is the mass in grams of 1 mole of that substance , a property expressed in units of grams per mole ( g/mol ) ( see ) .
Because the definitions of both the mole and the atomic mass unit are based on the same reference substance , C , the molar mass of any substance is numerically equivalent to its atomic or formula weight in amu .
Per the amu definition , a single C atom weighs 12 amu ( its atomic mass is 12 amu ) .
According to the definition of the mole , 12 g of C contains 1 mole of C atoms ( its molar mass is 12 g/mol ) .
This relationship holds for all elements , since their atomic masses are measured relative to that of the amu-reference substance , C. Extending this principle , the molar mass of a compound in grams is likewise numerically equivalent to its formula mass in amu .
While atomic mass and molar mass are numerically equivalent , keep in mind that they are vastly different in terms of scale , as represented by the vast difference in the magnitudes of their respective units ( amu versus g ) .
To appreciate the enormity of the mole , consider a small drop of water weighing about 0.03 g ( see ) .
Although this represents just a tiny fraction of 1 mole of water ( ~18 g ) , it contains more water molecules than can be clearly imagined .
If the molecules were distributed equally among the roughly seven billion people on earth , each person would receive more than 100 billion molecules .
The relationships between formula mass , the mole , and Avogadro ’ s number can be applied to compute various quantities that describe the composition of substances and compounds , as demonstrated in the next several example problems .
According to nutritional guidelines from the US Department of Agriculture , the estimated average requirement for dietary potassium is 4.7 g. What is the estimated average requirement of potassium in moles ?
The mass of K is provided , and the corresponding amount of K in moles is requested .
Referring to the periodic table , the atomic mass of K is 39.10 amu , and so its molar mass is 39.10 g/mol .
The given mass of K ( 4.7 g ) is a bit more than one-tenth the molar mass ( 39.10 g ) , so a reasonable “ ballpark ” estimate of the number of moles would be slightly greater than 0.1 mol .
Beryllium is a light metal used to fabricate transparent X-ray windows for medical imaging instruments .
How many moles of Be are in a thin-foil window weighing 3.24 g ?
Answer : 0.360 mol A liter of air contains 9.2 10 mol argon .
What is the mass of Ar in a liter of air ?
The molar amount of Ar is provided and must be used to derive the corresponding mass in grams .
What is the mass of 2.561 mol of gold ?
Answer : 504.4 g Copper is commonly used to fabricate electrical wire .
How many copper atoms are in 5.00 g of copper wire ?
Carrying out the two-step computation yields : The factor-label method yields the desired cancellation of units , and the computed result is on the order of 10 as expected .
A prospector panning for gold in a river collects 15.00 g of pure gold .
How many Au atoms are in this quantity of gold ?
Answer : 4.586 10 Au atoms Our bodies synthesize protein from amino acids .
One of these amino acids is glycine , which has the molecular formula C H O N. How many moles of glycine molecules are contained in 28.35 g of glycine ?
Derive the number of moles of a compound from its mass following the same procedure used for an element in : The molar mass of glycine is required for this calculation , and it is computed in the same fashion as its molecular mass .
Dividing the compound ’ s mass by its molar mass yields : This result is consistent with the rough estimate .
How many moles of sucrose , C H O , are in a 25-g sample of sucrose ?
Answer : 0.073 mol Vitamin C is a covalent compound with the molecular formula C H O .
The recommended daily dietary allowance of vitamin C for children aged 4–8 years is 1.42 10 mol .
What is the mass of this allowance in grams ?
As for elements , the mass of a compound can be derived from its molar amount as shown : The molar mass for this compound is computed to be 176.124 g/mol .
The given number of moles is a very small fraction of a mole ( ~10 or one-ten thousandth ) ; therefore , the corresponding mass is expected to be about one-ten thousandth of the molar mass ( ~0.02 g ) .
Performing the calculation yields : This is consistent with the anticipated result .
What is the mass of 0.443 mol of hydrazine , N H ?
How many carbon atoms are in the same sample ?
How many hydrogen atoms ?
Given the chemical formula of the substance , one may determine the amount of the substance ( moles ) from its mass , and vice versa .
But what if the chemical formula of a substance is unknown ?
In this section , these same principles will be applied to derive the chemical formulas of unknown substances from experimental mass measurements .
The elemental makeup of a compound defines its chemical identity , and chemical formulas are the most succinct way of representing this elemental makeup .
When a compound ’ s formula is unknown , measuring the mass of each of its constituent elements is often the first step in the process of determining the formula experimentally .
The results of these measurements permit the calculation of the compound ’ s percent composition , defined as the percentage by mass of each element in the compound .
For example , consider a gaseous compound composed solely of carbon and hydrogen .
A 24.81-g sample of a gaseous compound containing only carbon , oxygen , and chlorine is determined to contain 3.01 g C , 4.00 g O , and 17.81 g Cl .
What is this compound ’ s percent composition ?
Answer : 12.1 % C , 16.1 % O , 71.8 % Cl Percent composition is also useful for evaluating the relative abundance of a given element in different compounds of known formulas .
As one example , consider the common nitrogen-containing fertilizers ammonia ( NH ) , ammonium nitrate ( NH NO ) , and urea ( CH N O ) .
The element nitrogen is the active ingredient for agricultural purposes , so the mass percentage of nitrogen in the compound is a practical and economic concern for consumers choosing among these fertilizers .
For these sorts of applications , the percent composition of a compound is easily derived from its formula mass and the atomic masses of its constituent elements .
A molecule of NH contains one N atom weighing 14.01 amu and three H atoms weighing a total of ( 3 1.008 amu ) = 3.024 amu .
The formula mass of ammonia is therefore ( 14.01 amu + 3.024 amu ) = 17.03 amu , and its percent composition is : This same approach may be taken considering a pair of molecules , a dozen molecules , or a mole of molecules , etc .
The latter amount is most convenient and would simply involve the use of molar masses instead of atomic and formula masses , as demonstrated .
As long as the molecular or empirical formula of the compound in question is known , the percent composition may be derived from the atomic or molar masses of the compound 's elements .
Aspirin is a compound with the molecular formula C H O .
What is its percent composition ?
To calculate the percent composition , the masses of C , H , and O in a known mass of C H O are needed .
It is convenient to consider 1 mol of C H O and use its molar mass ( 180.159 g/mole , determined from the chemical formula ) to calculate the percentages of each of its elements : Note that these percentages sum to equal 100.00 % when appropriately rounded .
To three significant digits , what is the mass percentage of iron in the compound Fe O ?
Answer : 69.9 % Fe As previously mentioned , the most common approach to determining a compound ’ s chemical formula is to first measure the masses of its constituent elements .
However , keep in mind that chemical formulas represent the relative numbers , not masses , of atoms in the substance .
Therefore , any experimentally derived data involving mass must be used to derive the corresponding numbers of atoms in the compound .
This is accomplished using molar masses to convert the mass of each element to a number of moles .
These molar amounts are used to compute whole-number ratios that can be used to derive the empirical formula of the substance .
Consider a sample of compound determined to contain 1.71 g C and 0.287 g H. The corresponding numbers of atoms ( in moles ) are : Thus , this compound may be represented by the formula C H .
Per convention , formulas contain wholenumber subscripts , which can be achieved by dividing each subscript by the smaller subscript : ( Recall that subscripts of “ 1 ” are not written but rather assumed if no other number is present . )
The empirical formula for this compound is thus CH .
This may or not be the compound ’ s molecular formula as well ; however , additional information is needed to make that determination ( as discussed later in this section ) .
Consider as another example a sample of compound determined to contain 5.31 g Cl and 8.40 g O .
Following the same approach yields a tentative empirical formula of : In this case , dividing by the smallest subscript still leaves us with a decimal subscript in the empirical formula .
To convert this into a whole number , multiply each of the subscripts by two , retaining the same atom ratio and yielding Cl O as the final empirical formula .
A sample of the black mineral hematite , an oxide of iron found in many iron ores , contains 34.97 g of iron and 15.03 g of oxygen .
What is the empirical formula of hematite ?
This problem provides the mass in grams of each element .
Begin by finding the moles of each : Next , derive the iron-to-oxygen molar ratio by dividing by the lesser number of moles : The ratio is 1.000 mol of iron to 1.500 mol of oxygen ( Fe O ) .
Finally , multiply the ratio by two to get the smallest possible whole number subscripts while still maintaining the correct iron-to-oxygen ratio : The empirical formula is Fe O .
What is the empirical formula of a compound if a sample contains 0.130 g of nitrogen and 0.370 g of oxygen ?
Answer : N O Finally , with regard to deriving empirical formulas , consider instances in which a compound ’ s percent composition is available rather than the absolute masses of the compound ’ s constituent elements .
In such cases , the percent composition can be used to calculate the masses of elements present in any convenient mass of compound ; these masses can then be used to derive the empirical formula in the usual fashion .
The bacterial fermentation of grain to produce ethanol forms a gas with a percent composition of 27.29 % C and 72.71 % O .
What is the empirical formula for this gas ?
What is the empirical formula of a compound containing 40.0 % C , 6.71 % H , and 53.28 % O ?
Answer : CH O Recall that empirical formulas are symbols representing the relative numbers of a compound ’ s elements .
Determining the absolute numbers of atoms that compose a single molecule of a covalent compound requires knowledge of both its empirical formula and its molecular mass or molar mass .
These quantities may be determined experimentally by various measurement techniques .
Molecular mass , for example , is often derived from the mass spectrum of the compound ( see discussion of this technique in the previous chapter on atoms and molecules ) .
Molar mass can be measured by a number of experimental methods , many of which will be introduced in later chapters of this text .
Molecular formulas are derived by comparing the compound ’ s molecular or molar mass to its empirical formula mass .
As the name suggests , an empirical formula mass is the sum of the average atomic masses of all the atoms represented in an empirical formula .
The empirical formula mass for this compound is approximately 30 amu ( the sum of 12 amu for one C atom , 2 amu for two H atoms , and 16 amu for one O atom ) .
In this case , one mole of empirical formula units and molecules is considered , as opposed to single units and molecules .
Determining the molecular formula from the provided data will require comparison of the compound ’ s empirical formula mass to its molar mass .
As the first step , use the percent composition to derive the compound ’ s empirical formula .
However , mixtures—samples of matter containing two or more substances physically combined—are more commonly encountered in nature than are pure substances .
Similar to a pure substance , the relative composition of a mixture plays an important role in determining its properties .
The relative amount of oxygen in a planet ’ s atmosphere determines its ability to sustain aerobic life .
The relative amounts of iron , carbon , nickel , and other elements in steel ( a mixture known as an “ alloy ” ) determine its physical strength and resistance to corrosion .
The relative amount of the active ingredient in a medicine determines its effectiveness in achieving the desired pharmacological effect .
The relative amount of sugar in a beverage determines its sweetness ( see ) .
This section will describe one of the most common ways in which the relative compositions of mixtures may be quantified .
Solutions have previously been defined as homogeneous mixtures , meaning that the composition of the mixture ( and therefore its properties ) is uniform throughout its entire volume .
Solutions occur frequently in nature and have also been implemented in many forms of manmade technology .
A more thorough treatment of solution properties is provided in the chapter on solutions and colloids , but provided here is an introduction to some of the basic properties of solutions .
The relative amount of a given solution component is known as its concentration .
Often , though not always , a solution contains one component with a concentration that is significantly greater than that of all other components .
This component is called the solvent and may be viewed as the medium in which the other components are dispersed , or dissolved .
Solutions in which water is the solvent are , of course , very common on our planet .
A solution in which water is the solvent is called an aqueous solution .
A solute is a component of a solution that is typically present at a much lower concentration than the solvent .
Solute concentrations are often described with qualitative terms such as dilute ( of relatively low concentration ) and concentrated ( of relatively high concentration ) .
Concentrations may be quantitatively assessed using a wide variety of measurement units , each convenient for particular applications .
Molarity ( M ) is a useful concentration unit for many applications in chemistry .
Molarity is defined as the number of moles of solute in exactly 1 liter ( 1 L ) of the solution : A 355-mL soft drink sample contains 0.133 mol of sucrose ( table sugar ) .
What is the molar concentration of sucrose in the beverage ?
Since the molar amount of solute and the volume of solution are both given , the molarity can be calculated using the definition of molarity .
Per this definition , the solution volume must be converted from mL to L : A teaspoon of table sugar contains about 0.01 mol sucrose .
What is the molarity of sucrose if a teaspoon of sugar has been dissolved in a cup of tea with a volume of 200 mL ?
Answer : 0.05 M How much sugar ( mol ) is contained in a modest sip ( ~10 mL ) of the soft drink from ?
Answer : 80 mL Distilled white vinegar is a solution of acetic acid , CH CO H , in water .
A 0.500-L vinegar solution contains 25.2 g of acetic acid .
What is the concentration of the acetic acid solution in units of molarity ?
As in previous examples , the definition of molarity is the primary equation used to calculate the quantity sought .
Answer : 0.674 M How many grams of NaCl are contained in 0.250 L of a 5.30M solution ?
Answer : 5.55 g CaCl When performing calculations stepwise , as in , it is important to refrain from rounding any intermediate calculation results , which can lead to rounding errors in the final result .
This eliminates intermediate steps so that only the final result is rounded .
In , the concentration of acetic acid in white vinegar was determined to be 0.839 M .
What volume of vinegar contains 75.6 g of acetic acid ?
Answer : 0.370 L Dilution is the process whereby the concentration of a solution is lessened by the addition of solvent .
For example , a glass of iced tea becomes increasingly diluted as the ice melts .
The water from the melting ice increases the volume of the solvent ( water ) and the overall volume of the solution ( iced tea ) , thereby reducing the relative concentrations of the solutes that give the beverage its taste .
Dilution is also a common means of preparing solutions of a desired concentration .
By adding solvent to a measured portion of a more concentrated stock solution , a solution of lesser concentration may be prepared .
For example , commercial pesticides are typically sold as solutions in which the active ingredients are far more concentrated than is appropriate for their application .
Before they can be used on crops , the pesticides must be diluted .
This is also a very common practice for the preparation of a number of common laboratory reagents .
A simple mathematical relationship can be used to relate the volumes and concentrations of a solution before and after the dilution process .
Since the dilution process does not change the amount of solute in the solution , n = n .
Thus , these two equations may be set equal to one another : This relation is commonly referred to as the dilution equation .
Although this equation uses molarity as the unit of concentration and liters as the unit of volume , other units of concentration and volume may be used as long as the units properly cancel per the factor-label method .
Reflecting this versatility , the dilution equation is often written in the more general form : where C and V are concentration and volume , respectively .
If 0.850 L of a 5.00M solution of copper nitrate , Cu ( NO ) , is diluted to a volume of 1.80 L by the addition of water , what is the molarity of the diluted solution ?
The stock concentration , C , and volume , V , are provided as well as the volume of the diluted solution , V .
This ballpark estimate will be compared to the calculated result to check for any gross errors in computation ( for example , such as an improper substitution of the given quantities ) .
Substituting the given values for the terms on the right side of this equation yields : This result compares well to our ballpark estimate ( it ’ s a bit less than one-half the stock concentration , 5 M ) .
What is the concentration of the solution that results from diluting 25.0 mL of a 2.04M solution of CH OH to 500.0 mL ?
Answer : 0.102 M CH OH What volume of 0.12 M HBr can be prepared from 11 mL ( 0.011 L ) of 0.45 M HBr ?
Provided are the volume and concentration of a stock solution , V and C , and the concentration of the resultant diluted solution , C .
Substituting the given values and solving for the unknown volume yields : The volume of the 0.12M solution is 0.041 L ( 41 mL ) .
The result is reasonable and compares well with the rough estimate .
A laboratory experiment calls for 0.125 M HNO .
What volume of 0.125 M HNO can be prepared from 0.250 L of 1.88 M HNO ?
Answer : 3.76 L What volume of 1.59 M KOH is required to prepare 5.00 L of 0.100 M KOH ?
Given are the concentration of a stock solution , C , and the volume and concentration of the resultant diluted solution , V and C .
Substituting the given values and solving for the unknown volume yields : Thus , 0.314 L of the 1.59M solution is needed to prepare the desired solution .
This result is consistent with the rough estimate .
What volume of a 0.575M solution of glucose , C H O , can be prepared from 50.00 mL of a 3.00M glucose solution ?
However , molarity is only one measure of concentration .
This section will describe some other units of concentration that are commonly used in various applications , either for convenience or by convention .
Earlier in this chapter , percent composition was introduced as a measure of the relative amount of a given element in a compound .
Percentages are also commonly used to express the composition of mixtures , including solutions .
The most common symbol for mass percentage is simply the percent sign , % , although more detailed symbols are often used including % mass , % weight , and ( w/w ) % .
Use of these more detailed symbols can prevent confusion of mass percentages with other types of percentages , such as volume percentages ( to be discussed later in this section ) .
Mass percentages are popular concentration units for consumer products .
The label of a typical liquid bleach bottle cites the concentration of its active ingredient , sodium hypochlorite ( NaOCl ) , as being 7.4 % .
A 100.0-g sample of bleach would therefore contain 7.4 g of NaOCl .
A 5.0-g sample of spinal fluid contains 3.75 mg ( 0.00375 g ) of glucose .
What is the percent by mass of glucose in spinal fluid ?
The spinal fluid sample contains roughly 4 mg of glucose in 5000 mg of fluid , so the mass fraction of glucose should be a bit less than one part in 1000 , or about 0.1 % .
Substituting the given masses into the equation defining mass percentage yields : The computed mass percentage agrees with our rough estimate ( it ’ s a bit less than 0.1 % ) .
In this case , the solute mass unit in the numerator was converted from mg to g to match the units in the denominator .
Alternatively , the spinal fluid mass unit in the denominator could have been converted from g to mg instead .
As long as identical mass units are used for both solute and solution , the computed mass percentage will be correct .
A bottle of a tile cleanser contains 135 g of HCl and 775 g of water .
What is the percent by mass of HCl in this cleanser ?
Answer : 14.8 % “ Concentrated ” hydrochloric acid is an aqueous solution of 37.2 % HCl that is commonly used as a laboratory reagent .
The density of this solution is 1.19 g/mL .
What mass of HCl is contained in 0.500 L of this solution ?
The HCl concentration is near 40 % , so a 100-g portion of this solution would contain about 40 g of HCl .
Using the solution density given , convert the solution ’ s volume to mass , and then use the given mass percentage to calculate the solute mass .
Answer : 282 mL Liquid volumes over a wide range of magnitudes are conveniently measured using common and relatively inexpensive laboratory equipment .
The concentration of a solution formed by dissolving a liquid solute in a liquid solvent is therefore often expressed as a volume percentage , % vol or ( v/v ) % : Rubbing alcohol ( isopropanol ) is usually sold as a 70 % vol aqueous solution .
If the density of isopropyl alcohol is 0.785 g/mL , how many grams of isopropyl alcohol are present in a 355 mL bottle of rubbing alcohol ?
Per the definition of volume percentage , the isopropanol volume is 70 % of the total solution volume .
Multiplying the isopropanol volume by its density yields the requested mass : Wine is approximately 12 % ethanol ( CH CH OH ) by volume .
Ethanol has a molar mass of 46.06 g/mol and a density 0.789 g/mL .
How many moles of ethanol are present in a 750-mL bottle of wine ?
Answer : 1.5 mol ethanol “ Mixed ” percentage units , derived from the mass of solute and the volume of solution , are popular for certain biochemical and medical applications .
A mass-volume percent is a ratio of a solute ’ s mass to the solution ’ s volume expressed as a percentage .
The specific units used for solute mass and solution volume may vary , depending on the solution .
For example , physiological saline solution , used to prepare intravenous fluids , has a concentration of 0.9 % mass/volume ( m/v ) , indicating that the composition is 0.9 g of solute per 100 mL of solution .
The concentration of glucose in blood ( commonly referred to as “ blood sugar ” ) is also typically expressed in terms of a mass-volume ratio .
Though not expressed explicitly as a percentage , its concentration is usually given in milligrams of glucose per deciliter ( 100 mL ) of blood .
Very low solute concentrations are often expressed using appropriately small units such as parts per million ( ppm ) or parts per billion ( ppb ) .
Like percentage ( “ part per hundred ” ) units , ppm and ppb may be defined in terms of masses , volumes , or mixed mass-volume units .
There are also ppm and ppb units defined with respect to numbers of atoms and molecules .
The mass-based definitions of ppm and ppb are given here : Both ppm and ppb are convenient units for reporting the concentrations of pollutants and other trace contaminants in water .
Concentrations of these contaminants are typically very low in treated and natural waters , and their levels can not exceed relatively low concentration thresholds without causing adverse effects on health and wildlife .
For example , the EPA has identified the maximum safe level of fluoride ion in tap water to be 4 ppm .
Inline water filters are designed to reduce the concentration of fluoride and several other trace-level contaminants in tap water .
According to the EPA , when the concentration of lead in tap water reaches 15 ppb , certain remedial actions must be taken .
What is this concentration in ppm ?
At this concentration , what mass of lead ( μg ) would be contained in a typical glass of water ( 300 mL ) ?
The definitions of the ppm and ppb units may be used to convert the given concentration from ppb to ppm .
Comparing these two unit definitions shows that ppm is 1000 times greater than ppb ( 1 ppm = 10 ppb ) .
Thus : The definition of the ppb unit may be used to calculate the requested mass if the mass of the solution is provided .
Since the volume of solution ( 300 mL ) is given , its density must be used to derive the corresponding mass .
Assume the density of tap water to be roughly the same as that of pure water ( ~1.00 g/mL ) , since the concentrations of any dissolved substances should not be very large .
Rearranging the equation defining the ppb unit and substituting the given quantities yields : Finally , convert this mass to the requested unit of micrograms : A 50.0-g sample of industrial wastewater was determined to contain 0.48 mg of mercury .
Express the mercury concentration of the wastewater in ppm and ppb units .
Answer : 9.6 ppm , 9600 ppb Solid-fuel rockets are a central feature in the world ’ s space exploration programs , including the new Space Launch System being developed by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration ( NASA ) to replace the retired Space Shuttle fleet .
The engines of these rockets rely on carefully prepared solid mixtures of chemicals combined in precisely measured amounts .
Igniting the mixture initiates a vigorous chemical reaction that rapidly generates large amounts of gaseous products .
These gases are ejected from the rocket engine through its nozzle , providing the thrust needed to propel heavy payloads into space .
Both the nature of this chemical reaction and the relationships between the amounts of the substances being consumed and produced by the reaction are critically important considerations that determine the success of the technology .
This chapter will describe how to symbolize chemical reactions using chemical equations , how to classify some common chemical reactions by identifying patterns of reactivity , and how to determine the quantitative relations between the amounts of substances involved in chemical reactions—that is , the reaction stoichiometry .
By the end of this section , you will be able to : Derive chemical equations from narrative descriptions of chemical reactions .
Write and balance chemical equations in molecular , total ionic , and net ionic formats .
An earlier chapter of this text introduced the use of element symbols to represent individual atoms .
When atoms gain or lose electrons to yield ions , or combine with other atoms to form molecules , their symbols are modified or combined to generate chemical formulas that appropriately represent these species .
Extending this symbolism to represent both the identities and the relative quantities of substances undergoing a chemical ( or physical ) change involves writing and balancing a chemical equation .
Consider as an example the reaction between one methane molecule ( CH ) and two diatomic oxygen molecules ( O ) to produce one carbon dioxide molecule ( CO ) and two water molecules ( H O ) .
The chemical equation representing this process is provided in the upper half of , with space-filling molecular models shown in the lower half of the figure .
This example illustrates the fundamental aspects of any chemical equation : The substances undergoing reaction are called reactants , and their formulas are placed on the left side of the equation .
The substances generated by the reaction are called products , and their formulas are placed on the right side of the equation .
Plus signs ( + ) separate individual reactant and product formulas , and an arrow separates the reactant and product ( left and right ) sides of the equation .
The relative numbers of reactant and product species are represented by coefficients ( numbers placed immediately to the left of each formula ) .
A coefficient of 1 is typically omitted .
It is common practice to use the smallest possible whole-number coefficients in a chemical equation , as is done in this example .
Realize , however , that these coefficients represent the relative numbers of reactants and products , and , therefore , they may be correctly interpreted as ratios .
Methane and oxygen react to yield carbon dioxide and water in a 1:2:1:2 ratio .
This ratio is satisfied if the numbers of these molecules are , respectively , 1-2-1-2 , or 2-4-2-4 , or 3-6-3-6 , and so on .
One dozen methane molecules and two dozen oxygen molecules react to yield one dozen carbon dioxide molecules and two dozen water molecules .
One mole of methane molecules and 2 moles of oxygen molecules react to yield 1 mole of carbon dioxide molecules and 2 moles of water molecules .
The chemical equation described in section 4.1 is balanced , meaning that equal numbers of atoms for each element involved in the reaction are represented on the reactant and product sides .
This is a requirement the equation must satisfy to be consistent with the law of conservation of matter .
It may be confirmed by simply summing the numbers of atoms on either side of the arrow and comparing these sums to ensure they are equal .
Note that the number of atoms for a given element is calculated by multiplying the coefficient of any formula containing that element by the element ’ s subscript in the formula .
If an element appears in more than one formula on a given side of the equation , the number of atoms represented in each must be computed and then added together .
Consider as an example the decomposition of water to yield molecular hydrogen and oxygen .
To achieve balance , the coefficients of the equation may be changed as needed .
Keep in mind , of course , that the formula subscripts define , in part , the identity of the substance , and so these can not be changed without altering the qualitative meaning of the equation .
For example , changing the reactant formula from H O to H O would yield balance in the number of atoms , but doing so also changes the reactant ’ s identity ( it ’ s now hydrogen peroxide and not water ) .
The O atom balance may be achieved by changing the coefficient for H O to 2 .
The H atom balance was upset by this change , but it is easily reestablished by changing the coefficient for the H product to 2 .
These coefficients yield equal numbers of both H and O atoms on the reactant and product sides , and the balanced equation is , therefore : Write a balanced equation for the reaction of molecular nitrogen ( N ) and oxygen ( O ) to form dinitrogen pentoxide .
First , write the unbalanced equation .
Next , count the number of each type of atom present in the unbalanced equation .
Though nitrogen is balanced , changes in coefficients are needed to balance the number of oxygen atoms .
To balance the number of oxygen atoms , a reasonable first attempt would be to change the coefficients for the O and N O to integers that will yield 10 O atoms ( the least common multiple for the O atom subscripts in these two formulas ) .
The N atom balance has been upset by this change ; it is restored by changing the coefficient for the reactant N to 2 .
The numbers of N and O atoms on either side of the equation are now equal , and so the equation is balanced .
Write a balanced equation for the decomposition of ammonium nitrate to form molecular nitrogen , molecular oxygen , and water .
( Hint : Balance oxygen last , since it is present in more than one molecule on the right side of the equation . )
Answer : It is sometimes convenient to use fractions instead of integers as intermediate coefficients in the process of balancing a chemical equation .
When balance is achieved , all the equation ’ s coefficients may then be multiplied by a whole number to convert the fractional coefficients to integers without upsetting the atom balance .
Although the equation for the reaction between molecular nitrogen and molecular hydrogen to produce ammonia is , indeed , balanced , the coefficients are not the smallest possible integers representing the relative numbers of reactant and product molecules .
Dividing each coefficient by the greatest common factor , 3 , gives the preferred equation : The physical states of reactants and products in chemical equations very often are indicated with a parenthetical abbreviation following the formulas .
Common abbreviations include s for solids , l for liquids , g for gases , and aq for substances dissolved in water ( aqueous solutions , as introduced in the preceding chapter ) .
These notations are illustrated in the example equation here : This equation represents the reaction that takes place when sodium metal is placed in water .
The solid sodium reacts with liquid water to produce molecular hydrogen gas and the ionic compound sodium hydroxide ( a solid in pure form , but readily dissolved in water ) .
Special conditions necessary for a reaction are sometimes designated by writing a word or symbol above or below the equation ’ s arrow .
For example , a reaction carried out by heating may be indicated by the uppercase Greek letter delta ( Δ ) over the arrow .
Other examples of these special conditions will be encountered in more depth in later chapters .
Given the abundance of water on earth , it stands to reason that a great many chemical reactions take place in aqueous media .
When ions are involved in these reactions , the chemical equations may be written with various levels of detail appropriate to their intended use .
To illustrate this , consider a reaction between ionic compounds taking place in an aqueous solution .
When ionic compounds dissolve in water , they may dissociate into their constituent ions , which are subsequently dispersed homogenously throughout the resulting solution ( a thorough discussion of this important process is provided in the chapter on solutions ) .
Ionic compounds dissolved in water are , therefore , more realistically represented as dissociated ions , in this case : Unlike these three ionic compounds , AgCl does not dissolve in water to a significant extent , as signified by its physical state notation , s .
Explicitly representing all dissolved ions results in a complete ionic equation .
These molecular and complete ionic equations provide additional information , namely , the ionic compounds used as sources of Cl and Ag .
When carbon dioxide is dissolved in an aqueous solution of sodium hydroxide , the mixture reacts to yield aqueous sodium carbonate and liquid water .
Write balanced molecular , complete ionic , and net ionic equations for this process .
When two humans exchange information , we say they are communicating .
When they exchange blows with their fists or feet , we say they are fighting .
Faced with a wide range of varied interactions between chemical substances , scientists have likewise found it convenient ( or even necessary ) to classify chemical interactions by identifying common patterns of reactivity .
This module will provide an introduction to three of the most prevalent types of chemical reactions : precipitation , acid-base , and oxidation-reduction .
A precipitation reaction is one in which dissolved substances react to form one ( or more ) solid products .
Many reactions of this type involve the exchange of ions between ionic compounds in aqueous solution and are sometimes referred to as double displacement , double replacement , or metathesis reactions .
These reactions are common in nature and are responsible for the formation of coral reefs in ocean waters and kidney stones in animals .
They are used widely in industry for production of a number of commodity and specialty chemicals .
Precipitation reactions also play a central role in many chemical analysis techniques , including spot tests used to identify metal ions and gravimetric methods for determining the composition of matter ( see the last module of this chapter ) .
The extent to which a substance may be dissolved in water , or any solvent , is quantitatively expressed as its solubility , defined as the maximum concentration of a substance that can be achieved under specified conditions .
Substances with relatively large solubilities are said to be soluble .
A substance will precipitate when solution conditions are such that its concentration exceeds its solubility .
Substances with relatively low solubilities are said to be insoluble , and these are the substances that readily precipitate from solution .
More information on these important concepts is provided in a later chapter on solutions .
For purposes of predicting the identities of solids formed by precipitation reactions , one may simply refer to patterns of solubility that have been observed for many ionic compounds .
The net ionic equation representing this reaction is : Lead iodide is a bright yellow solid that was formerly used as an artist ’ s pigment known as iodine yellow .
The properties of pure PbI crystals make them useful for fabrication of X-ray and gamma ray detectors .
The solubility guidelines in may be used to predict whether a precipitation reaction will occur when solutions of soluble ionic compounds are mixed together .
One merely needs to identify all the ions present in the solution and then consider if possible cation/anion pairing could result in an insoluble compound .
For example , Na , and F mixing solutions of silver nitrate and sodium fluoride will yield a solution containing Ag , ions .
Aside from the two ionic compounds originally present in the solutions , AgNO and NaF , two additional ionic compounds may be derived from this collection of ions : NaNO and AgF .
The solubility guidelines indicate all nitrate salts are soluble but that AgF is one of the exceptions to the general solubility of fluoride salts .
A precipitation reaction , therefore , is predicted to occur , as described by the following equations : Predict the result of mixing reasonably concentrated solutions of the following ionic compounds .
If precipitation is expected , write a balanced net ionic equation for the reaction .
( a ) potassium sulfate and barium nitrate ( b ) lithium chloride and silver acetate ( c ) lead nitrate and ammonium carbonate ( a ) The two possible products for this combination are KNO and BaSO .
The solubility guidelines indicate BaSO is insoluble , and so a precipitation reaction is expected .
The net ionic equation for this reaction , derived in the manner detailed in the previous module , is ( b ) The two possible products for this combination are LiC H O and AgCl .
The solubility guidelines indicate AgCl is insoluble , and so a precipitation reaction is expected .
The net ionic equation for this reaction , derived in the manner detailed in the previous module , is ( c ) The two possible products for this combination are PbCO and NH NO .
The solubility guidelines indicate PbCO is insoluble , and so a precipitation reaction is expected .
The net ionic equation for this reaction , derived in the manner detailed in the previous module , is Which solution could be used to precipitate the barium ion , Ba , in a water sample : sodium chloride , sodium hydroxide , or sodium sulfate ?
What is the formula for the expected precipitate ?
Answer : sodium sulfate , BaSO An acid-base reaction is one in which a hydrogen ion , H , is transferred from one chemical species to another .
Such reactions are of central importance to numerous natural and technological processes , ranging from the chemical transformations that take place within cells and the lakes and oceans , to the industrial-scale production of fertilizers , pharmaceuticals , and other substances essential to society .
The subject of acid-base chemistry , therefore , is worthy of thorough discussion , and a full chapter is devoted to this topic later in the text .
For purposes of this brief introduction , we will consider only the more common types of acid-base reactions that take place in aqueous solutions .
In this context , an acid is a substance that will dissolve in water to yield hydronium ions , H O .
As an example , consider the equation shown here : The process represented by this equation confirms that hydrogen chloride is an acid .
When dissolved in water , H O ions are produced by a chemical reaction in which H ions are transferred from HCl molecules to H O molecules .
The nature of HCl is such that its reaction with water as just described is essentially 100 % efficient : Virtually every HCl molecule that dissolves in water will undergo this reaction .
Acids that completely react in this fashion are called strong acids , and HCl is one among just a handful of common acid compounds that are classified as strong .
A far greater number of compounds behave as weak acids and only partially react with water , leaving a large majority of dissolved molecules in their original form and generating a relatively small amount of hydronium ions .
Weak acids are commonly encountered in nature , being the substances partly responsible for the tangy taste of citrus fruits , the stinging sensation of insect bites , and the unpleasant smells associated with body odor .
A familiar example of a weak acid is acetic acid , the main ingredient in food vinegars : When dissolved in water under typical conditions , only about 1 % of acetic acid molecules are present in the ionized .
( The use of a double-arrow in the equation above denotes the partial reaction aspect form , of this process , a concept addressed fully in the chapters on chemical equilibrium . )
A base is a substance that will dissolve in water to yield hydroxide ions , OH .
The most common bases are ionic compounds composed of alkali or alkaline earth metal cations ( groups 1 and 2 ) combined with the hydroxide ion—for example , NaOH and Ca ( OH ) .
Unlike the acid compounds discussed previously , these compounds do not react chemically with water ; instead they dissolve and dissociate , releasing hydroxide ions directly into the solution .
For example , KOH and Ba ( OH ) dissolve in water and dissociate completely to produce cations ( K and Ba , respectively ) and hydroxide ions , OH .
These bases , along with other hydroxides that completely dissociate in water , are considered strong bases .
Consider as an example the dissolution of lye ( sodium hydroxide ) in water : This equation confirms that sodium hydroxide is a base .
When dissolved in water , NaOH dissociates to yield Na and OH ions .
This is also true for any other ionic compound containing hydroxide ions .
Since the dissociation process is essentially complete when ionic compounds dissolve in water under typical conditions , NaOH and other ionic hydroxides are all classified as strong bases .
Unlike ionic hydroxides , some compounds produce hydroxide ions when dissolved by chemically reacting with water molecules .
In all cases , these compounds react only partially and so are classified as weak bases .
These types of compounds are also abundant in nature and important commodities in various technologies .
For example , global production of the weak base ammonia is typically well over 100 metric tons annually , being widely used as an agricultural fertilizer , a raw material for chemical synthesis of other compounds , and an active ingredient in household cleaners .
When dissolved in water , ammonia reacts partially to yield hydroxide ions , as shown here : This is , by definition , an acid-base reaction , in this case involving the transfer of H ions from water molecules to ammonia molecules .
Under typical conditions , only about 1 % of the dissolved ammonia is present as ions .
Since the substance is reported to be an acid , its reaction with water will involve the transfer of H from HOCl to H O to generate hydronium ions , H O and hypochlorite ions , OCl .
A double-arrow is appropriate in this equation because it indicates the HOCl is a weak acid that has not reacted completely .
( b ) The two reactants are provided , Ba ( OH ) and HNO .
( Hint : Consider the ions produced when a strong acid is dissolved in water . )
Answer : Earth ’ s atmosphere contains about 20 % molecular oxygen , O , a chemically reactive gas that plays an essential role in the metabolism of aerobic organisms and in many environmental processes that shape the world .
The term oxidation was originally used to describe chemical reactions involving O , but its meaning has evolved to refer to a broad and important reaction class known as oxidation-reduction ( redox ) reactions .
A few examples of such reactions will be used to develop a clear picture of this classification .
For redox reactions of this sort , the loss and gain of electrons define the complementary processes that occur : In this reaction , then , sodium is oxidized and chlorine undergoes reduction .
Viewed from a more active perspective , sodium functions as a reducing agent ( reductant ) , since it provides electrons to ( or reduces ) chlorine .
Likewise , chlorine functions as an oxidizing agent ( oxidant ) , as it effectively removes electrons from ( oxidizes ) sodium .
Some redox processes , however , do not involve the transfer of electrons .
Consider , for example , a reaction similar to the one yielding NaCl : The product of this reaction is a covalent compound , so transfer of electrons in the explicit sense is not involved .
To clarify the similarity of this reaction to the previous one and permit an unambiguous definition of redox reactions , a property called oxidation number has been defined .
The oxidation number ( or oxidation state ) of an element in a compound is the charge its atoms would possess if the compound was ionic .
The following guidelines are used to assign oxidation numbers to each element in a molecule or ion .
The oxidation number of an atom in an elemental substance is zero .
The oxidation number of a monatomic ion is equal to the ion ’ s charge .
Note : The proper convention for reporting charge is to write the number first , followed by the sign ( e.g. , 2+ ) , while oxidation number is written with the reversed sequence , sign followed by number ( e.g. , +2 ) .
This convention aims to emphasize the distinction between these two related properties .
Using this oxidation number and the compound ’ s formula , guideline 4 may then be used to calculate the oxidation number for sulfur : ( b ) Guideline 3 suggests the oxidation number for oxygen is −2 .
Using this oxidation number and the ion ’ s formula , guideline 4 may then be used to calculate the oxidation number for sulfur : ( c ) For ionic compounds , it ’ s convenient to assign oxidation numbers for the cation and anion separately .
According to guideline 2 , the oxidation number for sodium is +1 .
Oxidationreduction ( redox ) reactions are those in which one or more elements involved undergo a change in oxidation number .
Definitions for the complementary processes of this reaction class are correspondingly revised as shown here : Returning to the reactions used to introduce this topic , they may now both be identified as redox processes .
In the reaction between sodium and chlorine to yield sodium chloride , sodium is oxidized ( its oxidation number increases from 0 in Na to +1 in NaCl ) and chlorine is reduced ( its oxidation number decreases from 0 in Cl to −1 in NaCl ) .
In the reaction between molecular hydrogen and chlorine , hydrogen is oxidized ( its oxidation number increases from 0 in H to +1 in HCl ) and chlorine is reduced ( its oxidation number decreases from 0 in Cl to −1 in HCl ) .
Solid rocket-fuel reactions such as the one depicted in are combustion processes .
A typical propellant reaction in which solid aluminum is oxidized by ammonium perchlorate is represented by this equation : Single-displacement ( replacement ) reactions are redox reactions in which an ion in solution is displaced ( or replaced ) via the oxidation of a metallic element .
Silver ions in solution are reduced to elemental silver at the surface of the copper wire , and the resulting Cu ions dissolve in the solution to yield a characteristic blue color .
Identify which equations represent redox reactions , providing a name for the reaction if appropriate .
For those reactions identified as redox , name the oxidant and reductant .
( a ) ( b ) ( c ) ( d ) ( e ) Redox reactions are identified per definition if one or more elements undergo a change in oxidation number .
( a ) This is not a redox reaction , since oxidation numbers remain unchanged for all elements .
( b ) This is a redox reaction .
Gallium is oxidized , its oxidation number increasing from 0 in Ga ( l ) to +3 in GaBr ( s ) .
The reducing agent is Ga ( l ) .
Bromine is reduced , its oxidation number decreasing from 0 in Br ( l ) to −1 in GaBr ( s ) .
The oxidizing agent is Br ( l ) .
( c ) This is a redox reaction .
It is a particularly interesting process , as it involves the same element , oxygen , undergoing both oxidation and reduction ( a so-called disproportionation reaction ) .
Oxygen is oxidized , its oxidation number increasing from −1 in H O ( aq ) to 0 in O ( g ) .
Oxygen is also reduced , its oxidation number decreasing from −1 in H O ( aq ) to −2 in H O ( l ) .
For disproportionation reactions , the same substance functions as an oxidant and a reductant .
( d ) This is not a redox reaction , since oxidation numbers remain unchanged for all elements .
( e ) This is a redox reaction ( combustion ) .
Carbon is oxidized , its oxidation number increasing from −2 in C H ( g ) to +4 in CO ( g ) .
The reducing agent ( fuel ) is C H ( g ) .
Oxygen is reduced , its oxidation number decreasing from 0 in O ( g ) to −2 in H O ( l ) .
The oxidizing agent is O ( g ) .
This equation describes the production of tin ( II ) chloride : Is this a redox reaction ?
If so , provide a more specific name for the reaction if appropriate , and identify the oxidant and reductant .
Answer : Yes , a single-replacement reaction .
Sn ( s ) is the reductant , HCl ( g ) is the oxidant .
Redox reactions that take place in aqueous media often involve water , hydronium ions , and hydroxide ions as reactants or products .
Although these species are not oxidized or reduced , they do participate in chemical change in other ways ( e.g. , by providing the elements required to form oxyanions ) .
Equations representing these reactions are sometimes very difficult to balance by inspection , so systematic approaches have been developed to assist in the process .
One very useful approach is to use the method of half-reactions , which involves the following steps : 1 .
Write the two half-reactions representing the redox process .
Balance all elements except oxygen and hydrogen .
Balance oxygen atoms by adding H O molecules .
Balance hydrogen atoms by adding H ions .
Balance charge by adding electrons .
If necessary , multiply each half-reaction ’ s coefficients by the smallest possible integers to yield equal numbers of electrons in each .
Add the balanced half-reactions together and simplify by removing species that appear on both sides of the equation .
For reactions occurring in basic media ( excess hydroxide ions ) , carry out these additional steps : Add OH ions to both sides of the equation in numbers equal to the number of H ions .
On the side of the equation containing both H and OH ions , combine these ions to yield water molecules .
Simplify the equation by removing any redundant water molecules .
Finally , check to see that both the number of atoms and the total charges are balanced .
Write a balanced equation for the reaction between dichromate ion and iron ( II ) to yield iron ( III ) and chromium ( III ) in acidic solution .
Write the two half-reactions .
Each half-reaction will contain one reactant and one product with one element in common .
Balance all elements except oxygen and hydrogen .
The iron half-reaction is already balanced , but the chromium half-reaction shows two Cr atoms on the left and one Cr atom on the right .
Changing the coefficient on the right side of the equation to 2 achieves balance with regard to Cr atoms .
Balance oxygen atoms by adding H O molecules .
The iron half-reaction does not contain O atoms .
The chromium half-reaction shows seven O atoms on the left and none on the right , so seven water molecules are added to the right side .
Balance hydrogen atoms by adding H ions .
The iron half-reaction does not contain H atoms .
The chromium half-reaction shows 14 H atoms on the right and none on the left , so 14 hydrogen ions are added to the left side .
Balance charge by adding electrons .
The iron half-reaction shows a total charge of 2+ on the left side ( 1 Fe ion ) and 3+ on the right side ( 1 Fe ion ) .
Adding one electron to the right side brings that side ’ s total charge to ( 3+ ) + ( 1− ) = 2+ , and charge balance is achieved .
The chromium half-reaction shows a total charge of ( 1 2− ) + ( 14 1+ ) = 12+ on the left side ion and 14 H ions ) .
The total charge on the right side is ( 2 3+ ) = 6 + ( 2 Cr ions ) .
Adding six electrons to the left side will bring that side ’ s total charge to ( 12+ + 6− ) = 6+ , and charge balance is achieved .
Multiply the two half-reactions so the number of electrons in one reaction equals the number of electrons in the other reaction .
To be consistent with mass conservation , and the idea that redox reactions involve the transfer ( not creation or destruction ) of electrons , the iron half-reaction ’ s coefficient must be multiplied by 6 .
Add the balanced half-reactions and cancel species that appear on both sides of the equation .
Only the six electrons are redundant species .
Removing them from each side of the equation yields the simplified , balanced equation here : A final check of atom and charge balance confirms the equation is balanced .
In basic solution , molecular chlorine , Cl , reacts with hydroxide ions , OH , to yield chloride ions , Cl .
and chlorate ions , ClO oxidized and reduced .
Write a balanced equation for this reaction .
Chemical formulas provide the identities of the reactants and products involved in the chemical change , allowing classification of the reaction .
Coefficients provide the relative numbers of these chemical species , allowing a quantitative assessment of the relationships between the amounts of substances consumed and produced by the reaction .
These quantitative relationships are known as the reaction ’ s stoichiometry , a term derived from the Greek words stoicheion ( meaning “ element ” ) and metron ( meaning “ measure ” ) .
In this module , the use of balanced chemical equations for various stoichiometric applications is explored .
The general approach to using stoichiometric relationships is similar in concept to the way people go about many common activities .
Food preparation , for example , offers an appropriate comparison .
A recipe for making eight pancakes calls for 1 cup pancake mix , cup milk , and one egg .
The “ equation ” representing the preparation of pancakes per this recipe is If two dozen pancakes are needed for a big family breakfast , the ingredient amounts must be increased proportionally according to the amounts given in the recipe .
The coefficients in the balanced equation are used to derive stoichiometric factors that permit computation of the desired quantity .
Similar factors may be derived for any pair of substances in any chemical equation .
How many moles of I are required to react with 0.429 mol of Al according to the following equation ( see ) ?
The approach here is the same as for , though the absolute number of molecules is requested , not the number of moles of molecules .
This will simply require use of the moles-to-numbers conversion factor , Avogadro ’ s number .
Directly measuring numbers of atoms and molecules is , however , not an easy task , and the practical application of stoichiometry requires that we use the more readily measured property of mass .
What mass of sodium hydroxide , NaOH , would be required to produce 16 g of the antacid milk of magnesia [ magnesium hydroxide , Mg ( OH ) ] by the following reaction ?
The approach used previously in and is likewise used here ; that is , we must derive an appropriate stoichiometric factor from the balanced chemical equation and use it to relate the amounts of the two substances of interest .
In this case , however , masses ( not molar amounts ) are provided and requested , so additional steps of the sort learned in the previous chapter are required .
The calculations required are outlined in this flowchart : What mass of gallium oxide , Ga O , can be prepared from 29.0 g of gallium metal ?
The equation for the reaction is Answer : 39.0 g What mass of oxygen gas , O , from the air is consumed in the combustion of 702 g of octane , C H , one of the principal components of gasoline ?
The approach required here is the same as for the , differing only in that the provided and requested masses are both for reactant species .
What mass of CO is required to react with 25.13 g of Fe O according to the equation Answer : 13.22 g These examples illustrate just a few instances of reaction stoichiometry calculations .
Numerous variations on the beginning and ending computational steps are possible depending upon what particular quantities are provided and sought ( volumes , solution concentrations , and so forth ) .
Regardless of the details , all these calculations share a common essential component : the use of stoichiometric factors derived from balanced chemical equations .
provides a general outline of the various computational steps associated with many reaction stoichiometry calculations .
By the end of this section , you will be able to : Explain the concepts of theoretical yield and limiting reactants/reagents .
Derive the theoretical yield for a reaction under specified conditions .
Calculate the percent yield for a reaction .
The relative amounts of reactants and products represented in a balanced chemical equation are often referred to as stoichiometric amounts .
All the exercises of the preceding module involved stoichiometric amounts of reactants .
For example , when calculating the amount of product generated from a given amount of reactant , it was assumed that any other reactants required were available in stoichiometric amounts ( or greater ) .
In this module , more realistic situations are considered , in which reactants are not present in stoichiometric amounts .
Consider another food analogy , making grilled cheese sandwiches : Stoichiometric amounts of sandwich ingredients for this recipe are bread and cheese slices in a 2:1 ratio .
Provided with 28 slices of bread and 11 slices of cheese , one may prepare 11 sandwiches per the provided recipe , using all the provided cheese and having six slices of bread left over .
In this scenario , the number of sandwiches prepared has been limited by the number of cheese slices , and the bread slices have been provided in excess .
Consider this concept now with regard to a chemical process , the reaction of hydrogen with chlorine to yield hydrogen chloride : The balanced equation shows the hydrogen and chlorine react in a 1:1 stoichiometric ratio .
If these reactants are provided in any other amounts , one of the reactants will nearly always be entirely consumed , thus limiting the amount of product that may be generated .
This substance is the limiting reactant , and the other substance is the excess reactant .
Identifying the limiting and excess reactants for a given situation requires computing the molar amounts of each reactant provided and comparing them to the stoichiometric amounts represented in the balanced chemical equation .
For example , imagine combining 3 moles of H and 2 moles of Cl .
This represents a 3:2 ( or 1.5:1 ) ratio of hydrogen to chlorine present for reaction , which is greater than the stoichiometric ratio of 1:1 .
Hydrogen , therefore , is present in excess , and chlorine is the limiting reactant .
Reaction of all the provided chlorine ( 2 mol ) will consume 2 mol of the 3 mol of hydrogen provided , leaving 1 mol of hydrogen unreacted .
An alternative approach to identifying the limiting reactant involves comparing the amount of product expected for the complete reaction of each reactant .
Each reactant amount is used to separately calculate the amount of product that would be formed per the reaction ’ s stoichiometry .
The reactant yielding the lesser amount of product is the limiting reactant .
For the example in the previous paragraph , complete reaction of the hydrogen would yield Complete reaction of the provided chlorine would produce The chlorine will be completely consumed once 4 moles of HCl have been produced .
Since enough hydrogen was provided to yield 6 moles of HCl , there will be unreacted hydrogen remaining once this reaction is complete .
Chlorine , therefore , is the limiting reactant and hydrogen is the excess reactant .
Silicon nitride is a very hard , high-temperature-resistant ceramic used as a component of turbine blades in jet engines .
It is prepared according to the following equation : Which is the limiting reactant when 2.00 g of Si and 1.50 g of N react ?
Compute the provided molar amounts of reactants , and then compare these amounts to the balanced equation to identify the limiting reactant .
The provided Si : N molar ratio is : The stoichiometric Si : N ratio is : Comparing these ratios shows that Si is provided in a less-than-stoichiometric amount , and so is the limiting reactant .
Alternatively , compute the amount of product expected for complete reaction of each of the provided reactants .
The 0.0712 moles of silicon would yield while the 0.0535 moles of nitrogen would produce Since silicon yields the lesser amount of product , it is the limiting reactant .
Which is the limiting reactant when 5.00 g of H and 10.0 g of O react and form water ?
Answer : O The amount of product that may be produced by a reaction under specified conditions , as calculated per the stoichiometry of an appropriate balanced chemical equation , is called the theoretical yield of the reaction .
In practice , the amount of product obtained is called the actual yield , and it is often less than the theoretical yield for a number of reasons .
Some reactions are inherently inefficient , being accompanied by side reactions that generate other products .
Others are , by nature , incomplete ( consider the partial reactions of weak acids and bases discussed earlier in this chapter ) .
Some products are difficult to collect without some loss , and so less than perfect recovery will reduce the actual yield .
As long as both yields are expressed using the same units , these units will cancel when percent yield is calculated .
Upon reaction of 1.274 g of copper sulfate with excess zinc metal , 0.392 g copper metal was obtained according to the equation : What is the percent yield ?
Answer : 48.3 % By the end of this section , you will be able to : Describe the fundamental aspects of titrations and gravimetric analysis .
Perform stoichiometric calculations using typical titration and gravimetric data .
In the 18th century , the strength ( actually the concentration ) of vinegar samples was determined by noting the amount of potassium carbonate , K CO , which had to be added , a little at a time , before bubbling ceased .
The greater the weight of potassium carbonate added to reach the point where the bubbling ended , the more concentrated the vinegar .
We now know that the effervescence that occurred during this process was due to reaction with acetic acid , CH CO H , the compound primarily responsible for the odor and taste of vinegar .
Acetic acid reacts with potassium carbonate according to the following equation : The bubbling was due to the production of CO .
The test of vinegar with potassium carbonate is one type of quantitative analysis —the determination of the amount or concentration of a substance in a sample .
In the analysis of vinegar , the concentration of the solute ( acetic acid ) was determined from the amount of reactant that combined with the solute present in a known volume of the solution .
In other types of chemical analyses , the amount of a substance present in a sample is determined by measuring the amount of product that results .
The described approach to measuring vinegar strength was an early version of the analytical technique known as titration analysis .
A typical titration analysis involves the use of a buret to make incremental additions of a solution containing a known concentration of some substance ( the titrant ) to a sample solution containing the substance whose concentration is to be measured ( the analyte ) .
The titrant and analyte undergo a chemical reaction of known stoichiometry , and so measuring the volume of titrant solution required for complete reaction with the analyte ( the equivalence point of the titration ) allows calculation of the analyte concentration .
The equivalence point of a titration may be detected visually if a distinct change in the appearance of the sample solution accompanies the completion of the reaction .
The halt of bubble formation in the classic vinegar analysis is one such example , though , more commonly , special dyes called indicators are added to the sample solutions to impart a change in color at or very near the equivalence point of the titration .
Equivalence points may also be detected by measuring some solution property that changes in a predictable way during the course of the titration .
Regardless of the approach taken to detect a titration ’ s equivalence point , the volume of titrant actually measured is called the end point .
Properly designed titration methods typically ensure that the difference between the equivalence and end points is negligible .
Though any type of chemical reaction may serve as the basis for a titration analysis , the three described in this chapter ( precipitation , acid-base , and redox ) are most common .
Additional details regarding titration analysis are provided in the chapter on acid-base equilibria .
The end point in a titration of a 50.00-mL sample of aqueous HCl was reached by addition of 35.23 mL of 0.250 M NaOH titrant .
The titration reaction is : What is the molarity of the HCl ?
As for all reaction stoichiometry calculations , the key issue is the relation between the molar amounts of the chemical species of interest as depicted in the balanced chemical equation .
The approach outlined in previous modules of this chapter is followed , with additional considerations required , since the amounts of reactants provided and requested are expressed as solution concentrations .
A volume of 23.24 mL was required to reach the end point .
What is the oxalic acid molarity ?
Answer : 0.2648 M A gravimetric analysis is one in which a sample is subjected to some treatment that causes a change in the physical state of the analyte that permits its separation from the other components of the sample .
Mass measurements of the sample , the isolated analyte , or some other component of the analysis system , used along with the known stoichiometry of the compounds involved , permit calculation of the analyte concentration .
Gravimetric methods were the first techniques used for quantitative chemical analysis , and they remain important tools in the modern chemistry laboratory .
The required change of state in a gravimetric analysis may be achieved by various physical and chemical processes .
For example , the moisture ( water ) content of a sample is routinely determined by measuring the mass of a sample before and after it is subjected to a controlled heating process that evaporates the water .
Also common are gravimetric techniques in which the analyte is subjected to a precipitation reaction of the sort described earlier in this chapter .
The precipitate is typically isolated from the reaction mixture by filtration , carefully dried , and then weighed .
The mass of the precipitate may then be used , along with relevant stoichiometric relationships , to calculate analyte concentration .
A 0.4550-g solid mixture containing MgSO is dissolved in water and treated with an excess of Ba ( NO ) , resulting in the precipitation of 0.6168 g of BaSO .
What is the concentration ( mass percent ) of MgSO in the mixture ?
The plan for this calculation is similar to others used in stoichiometric calculations , the central step being the connection between the moles of BaSO and MgSO through their stoichiometric factor .
Once the mass of MgSO is computed , it may be used along with the mass of the sample mixture to calculate the requested percentage concentration .
Answer : 23.76 % The elemental composition of hydrocarbons and related compounds may be determined via a gravimetric method known as combustion analysis .
In a combustion analysis , a weighed sample of the compound is heated to a high temperature under a stream of oxygen gas , resulting in its complete combustion to yield gaseous products of known identities .
The complete combustion of hydrocarbons , for example , will yield carbon dioxide and water as the only products .
The gaseous combustion products are swept through separate , preweighed collection devices containing compounds that selectively absorb each product .
The mass increase of each device corresponds to the mass of the absorbed product and may be used in an appropriate stoichiometric calculation to derive the mass of the relevant element .
Polyethylene is a hydrocarbon polymer used to produce food-storage bags and many other flexible plastic items .
A combustion analysis of a 0.00126-g sample of polyethylene yields 0.00394 g of CO and 0.00161 g of H O .
What is the empirical formula of polyethylene ?
The primary assumption in this exercise is that all the carbon in the sample combusted is converted to carbon dioxide , and all the hydrogen in the sample is converted to water : Note that a balanced equation is not necessary for the task at hand .
To derive the empirical formula of the compound , only the subscripts x and y are needed .
First , calculate the molar amounts of carbon and hydrogen in the sample , using the provided masses of the carbon dioxide and water , respectively .
With these molar amounts , the empirical formula for the compound may be written as described in the previous chapter of this text .
An outline of this approach is given in the following flow chart : The empirical formula for the compound is then derived by identifying the smallest whole-number multiples for these molar amounts .
The H-to-C molar ratio is and the empirical formula for polyethylene is CH .
A 0.00215-g sample of polystyrene , a polymer composed of carbon and hydrogen , produced 0.00726 g of CO and 0.00148 g of H O in a combustion analysis .
What is the empirical formula for polystyrene ?
Answer : CH Chemical reactions , such as those that occur when you light a match , involve changes in energy as well as matter .
Societies at all levels of development could not function without the energy released by chemical reactions .
In 2012 , about 85 % of US energy consumption came from the combustion of petroleum products , coal , wood , and garbage .
While these combustion reactions help us meet our essential energy needs , they are also recognized by the majority of the scientific community as a major contributor to global climate change .
Useful forms of energy are also available from a variety of chemical reactions other than combustion .
For example , the energy produced by the batteries in a cell phone , car , or flashlight results from chemical reactions .
This chapter introduces many of the basic ideas necessary to explore the relationships between chemical changes and energy , with a focus on thermal energy .
The macronutrients in food ( proteins , fats , and carbohydrates ) undergo metabolic reactions that provide the energy to keep our bodies functioning .
We burn a variety of fuels ( gasoline , natural gas , coal ) to produce energy for transportation , heating , and the generation of electricity .
Industrial chemical reactions use enormous amounts of energy to produce raw materials ( such as iron and aluminum ) .
Energy is then used to manufacture those raw materials into useful products , such as cars , skyscrapers , and bridges .
Over 90 % of the energy we use comes originally from the sun .
Every day , the sun provides the earth with almost 10,000 times the amount of energy necessary to meet all of the world ’ s energy needs for that day .
Our challenge is to find ways to convert and store incoming solar energy so that it can be used in reactions or chemical processes that are both convenient and nonpolluting .
Plants and many bacteria capture solar energy through photosynthesis .
We release the energy stored in plants when we burn wood or plant products such as ethanol .
We also use this energy to fuel our bodies by eating food that comes directly from plants or from animals that got their energy by eating plants .
Burning coal and petroleum also releases stored solar energy : These fuels are fossilized plant and animal matter .
This chapter will introduce the basic ideas of an important area of science concerned with the amount of heat absorbed or released during chemical and physical changes—an area called thermochemistry .
The concepts introduced in this chapter are widely used in almost all scientific and technical fields .
Food scientists use them to determine the energy content of foods .
Biologists study the energetics of living organisms , such as the metabolic combustion of sugar into carbon dioxide and water .
The oil , gas , and transportation industries , renewable energy providers , and many others endeavor to find better methods to produce energy for our commercial and personal needs .
Engineers strive to improve energy efficiency , find better ways to heat and cool our homes , refrigerate our food and drinks , and meet the energy and cooling needs of computers and electronics , among other applications .
Understanding thermochemical principles is essential for chemists , physicists , biologists , geologists , every type of engineer , and just about anyone who studies or does any kind of science .
Energy can be defined as the capacity to supply heat or do work .
One type of work ( w ) is the process of causing matter to move against an opposing force .
For example , we do work when we inflate a bicycle tire—we move matter ( the air in the pump ) against the opposing force of the air already in the tire .
Like matter , energy comes in different types .
One scheme classifies energy into two types : potential energy , the energy an object has because of its relative position , composition , or condition , and kinetic energy , the energy that an object possesses because of its motion .
Water at the top of a waterfall or dam has potential energy because of its position ; when it flows downward through generators , it has kinetic energy that can be used to do work and produce electricity in a hydroelectric plant .
A battery has potential energy because the chemicals within it can produce electricity that can do work .
Energy can be converted from one form into another , but all of the energy present before a change occurs always exists in some form after the change is completed .
This observation is expressed in the law of conservation of energy : during a chemical or physical change , energy can be neither created nor destroyed , although it can be changed in form .
( This is also one version of the first law of thermodynamics , as you will learn later . )
When one substance is converted into another , there is always an associated conversion of one form of energy into another .
Heat is usually released or absorbed , but sometimes the conversion involves light , electrical energy , or some other form of energy .
For example , chemical energy ( a type of potential energy ) is stored in the molecules that compose gasoline .
When gasoline is combusted within the cylinders of a car ’ s engine , the rapidly expanding gaseous products of this chemical reaction generate mechanical energy ( a type of kinetic energy ) when they move the cylinders ’ pistons .
According to the law of conservation of matter ( seen in an earlier chapter ) , there is no detectable change in the total amount of matter during a chemical change .
When chemical reactions occur , the energy changes are relatively modest and the mass changes are too small to measure , so the laws of conservation of matter and energy hold well .
However , in nuclear reactions , the energy changes are much larger ( by factors of a million or so ) , the mass changes are measurable , and matter-energy conversions are significant .
This will be examined in more detail in a later chapter on nuclear chemistry .
Thermal energy is kinetic energy associated with the random motion of atoms and molecules .
Assuming that no chemical reaction or phase change ( such as melting or vaporizing ) occurs , increasing the amount of thermal energy in a sample of matter will cause its temperature to increase .
And , assuming that no chemical reaction or phase change ( such as condensation or freezing ) occurs , decreasing the amount of thermal energy in a sample of matter will cause its temperature to decrease .
Most substances expand as their temperature increases and contract as their temperature decreases .
This property can be used to measure temperature changes , as shown in .
The operation of many thermometers depends on the expansion and contraction of substances in response to temperature changes .
Heat ( q ) is the transfer of thermal energy between two bodies at different temperatures .
Heat flow ( a redundant term , but one commonly used ) increases the thermal energy of one body and decreases the thermal energy of the other .
Suppose we initially have a high temperature ( and high thermal energy ) substance ( H ) and a low temperature ( and low thermal energy ) substance ( L ) .
Heat flow will continue until the two substances are at the same temperature .
Matter undergoing chemical reactions and physical changes can release or absorb heat .
A change that releases heat is called an exothermic process .
For example , the combustion reaction that occurs when using an oxyacetylene torch is an exothermic process—this process also releases energy in the form of light as evidenced by the torch ’ s flame .
A reaction or change that absorbs heat is an endothermic process .
A cold pack used to treat muscle strains provides an example of an endothermic process .
When the substances in the cold pack ( water and a salt like ammonium nitrate ) are brought together , the resulting process absorbs heat , leading to the sensation of cold .
Historically , energy was measured in units of calories ( cal ) .
A calorie is the amount of energy required to raise one gram of water by 1 degree C ( 1 kelvin ) .
However , this quantity depends on the atmospheric pressure and the starting temperature of the water .
The ease of measurement of energy changes in calories has meant that the calorie is still frequently used .
The Calorie ( with a capital C ) , or large calorie , commonly used in quantifying food energy content , is a kilocalorie .
The SI unit of heat , work , and energy is the joule .
A joule ( J ) is defined as the amount of energy used when a force of 1 newton moves an object 1 meter .
It is named in honor of the English physicist James Prescott Joule .
One joule is equivalent to 1 kg m /s , which is also called 1 newton–meter .
A kilojoule ( kJ ) is 1000 joules .
To standardize its definition , 1 calorie has been set to equal 4.184 joules .
We now introduce two concepts useful in describing heat flow and temperature change .
It is therefore an extensive property—its value is proportional to the amount of the substance .
For example , consider the heat capacities of two cast iron frying pans .
The heat capacity of the large pan is five times greater than that of the small pan because , although both are made of the same material , the mass of the large pan is five times greater than the mass of the small pan .
More mass means more atoms are present in the larger pan , so it takes more energy to make all of those atoms vibrate faster .
It is an intensive property—the type , but not the amount , of the substance is all that matters .
Note that specific heat is measured in units of energy per temperature per mass and is an intensive property , being derived from a ratio of two extensive properties ( heat and mass ) .
The molar heat capacity , also an intensive property , is the heat capacity per mole of a particular substance and has units of J/mol °C .
water has a relatively high specific heat ( about 4.2 J/g °C for the liquid and 2.09 J/g °C for the solid ) ) ; most metals have much lower specific heats ( usually less than 1 J/g °C ) .
The specific heat of a substance varies somewhat with temperature .
However , this variation is usually small enough that we will treat specific heat as constant over the range of temperatures that will be considered in this chapter .
Specific heats of some common substances are listed in .
If a substance gains thermal energy , its temperature increases , its final temperature is higher than its initial temperature , T − T has a positive value , and the value of q is positive .
If a substance loses thermal energy , its temperature decreases , the final temperature is lower than the initial temperature , T − T has a negative value , and the value of q is negative .
A flask containing 8.0 10 g of water is heated , and the temperature of the water increases from 21 °C to 85 °C .
How much heat did the water absorb ?
The specific heat of water is 4.184 J/g °C , so to heat 1 g of water by 1 °C requires 4.184 J .
We note that since 4.184 J is required to heat 1 g of water by 1 °C , we will need 800 times as much to heat 8.0 × 10 g of water by 1 °C .
Finally , we observe that since 4.184 J are required to heat 1 g of water by 1 °C , we will need 64 times as much to heat it by 64 °C ( that is , from 21 °C to 85 °C ) .
This can be summarized using the equation : Because the temperature increased , the water absorbed heat and q is positive .
How much heat , in joules , must be added to a 5.07 10 J iron skillet to increase its temperature from 25 °C to 250 °C ?
The specific heat of iron is 0.449 J/g °C .
Answer : 5.07 10 J Note that the relationship between heat , specific heat , mass , and temperature change can be used to determine any of these quantities ( not just heat ) if the other three are known or can be deduced .
A piece of unknown metal weighs 348 g. When the metal piece absorbs 6.64 kJ of heat , its temperature increases from 22.4 °C to 43.6 °C .
Determine the specific heat of this metal ( which might provide a clue to its identity ) .
A piece of unknown metal weighs 217 g. When the metal piece absorbs 1.43 kJ of heat , its temperature increases from 24.5 °C to 39.1 °C .
Determine the specific heat of this metal , and predict its identity .
Calorimetry is used to measure amounts of heat transferred to or from a substance .
To do so , the heat is exchanged with a calibrated object ( calorimeter ) .
The temperature change measured by the calorimeter is used to derive the amount of heat transferred by the process under study .
A calorimeter is a device used to measure the amount of heat involved in a chemical or physical process .
For example , when an exothermic reaction occurs in solution in a calorimeter , the heat produced by the reaction is absorbed by the solution , which increases its temperature .
When an endothermic reaction occurs , the heat required is absorbed from the thermal energy of the solution , which decreases its temperature .
The temperature change , along with the specific heat and mass of the solution , can then be used to calculate the amount of heat involved in either case .
Scientists use well-insulated calorimeters that all but prevent the transfer of heat between the calorimeter and its environment , which effectively limits the “ surroundings ” to the nonsystem components with the calorimeter ( and the calorimeter itself ) .
This enables the accurate determination of the heat involved in chemical processes , the energy content of foods , and so on .
General chemistry students often use simple calorimeters constructed from polystyrene cups .
These easy-to-use “ coffee cup ” calorimeters allow more heat exchange with the outside environment , and therefore produce less accurate energy values .
Commercial solution calorimeters are also available .
Relatively inexpensive calorimeters often consist of two thinwalled cups that are nested in a way that minimizes thermal contact during use , along with an insulated cover , handheld stirrer , and simple thermometer .
More expensive calorimeters used for industry and research typically have a well-insulated , fully enclosed reaction vessel , motorized stirring mechanism , and a more accurate temperature sensor .
Before discussing the calorimetry of chemical reactions , consider a simpler example that illustrates the core idea behind calorimetry .
Suppose we initially have a high-temperature substance , such as a hot piece of metal ( M ) , and a low-temperature substance , such as cool water ( W ) .
If we place the metal in the water , heat will flow from M to W. The temperature of M will decrease , and the temperature of W will increase , until the two substances have the same temperature—that is , when they reach thermal equilibrium .
If this occurs in a calorimeter , ideally all of this heat transfer occurs between the two substances , with no heat gained or lost by either its external environment .
In the specific situation described , q is a negative value and q is positive , since heat is transferred from M to W. A 360.0-g piece of rebar ( a steel rod used for reinforcing concrete ) is dropped into 425 mL of water at 24.0 °C .
The final temperature of the water was measured as 42.7 °C .
Calculate the initial temperature of the piece of rebar .
Assume the specific heat of steel is approximately the same as that for iron , and that all heat transfer occurs between the rebar and the water ( there is no heat exchange with the surroundings ) .
The temperature of the water increases from 24.0 °C to 42.7 °C , so the water absorbs heat .
That heat came from the piece of rebar , which initially was at a higher temperature .
A 248-g piece of copper is dropped into 390 mL of water at 22.6 °C .
The final temperature of the water was measured as 39.9 °C .
Calculate the initial temperature of the piece of copper .
Assume that all heat transfer occurs between the copper and the water .
Answer : The initial temperature of the copper was 335.6 °C .
A 248-g piece of copper initially at 314 °C is dropped into 390 mL of water initially at 22.6 °C .
Assuming that all heat transfer occurs between the copper and the water , calculate the final temperature .
Answer : The final temperature ( reached by both copper and water ) is 38.7 °C .
This method can also be used to determine other quantities , such as the specific heat of an unknown metal .
A 59.7 g piece of metal that had been submerged in boiling water was quickly transferred into 60.0 mL of water initially at 22.0 °C .
The final temperature is 28.5 °C .
Use these data to determine the specific heat of the metal .
Use this result to identify the metal .
A 92.9-g piece of a silver/gray metal is heated to 178.0 °C , and then quickly transferred into 75.0 mL of water initially at 24.0 °C .
After 5 minutes , both the metal and the water have reached the same temperature : 29.7 °C .
Determine the specific heat and the identity of the metal .
( Note : You should find that the specific heat is close to that of two different metals .
Explain how you can confidently determine the identity of the metal ) .
Answer : c = 0.13 J/g °C This specific heat is close to that of either gold or lead .
It would be difficult to determine which metal this was based solely on the numerical values .
However , the observation that the metal is silver/gray in addition to the value for the specific heat indicates that the metal is lead .
When we use calorimetry to determine the heat involved in a chemical reaction , the same principles we have been discussing apply .
The amount of heat absorbed by the calorimeter is often small enough that we can neglect it ( though not for highly accurate measurements , as discussed later ) , and the calorimeter minimizes energy exchange with the outside environment .
When 50.0 mL of 1.00 M HCl ( aq ) and 50.0 mL of 1.00 M NaOH ( aq ) , both at 22.0 °C , are added to a coffee cup calorimeter , the temperature of the mixture reaches a maximum of 28.9 °C .
What is the approximate amount of heat produced by this reaction ?
To visualize what is going on , imagine that you could combine the two solutions so quickly that no reaction took place while they mixed ; then after mixing , the reaction took place .
At the instant of mixing , you have 100.0 mL of a mixture of HCl and NaOH at 22.0 °C .
The HCl and NaOH then react until the solution temperature reaches 28.9 °C .
The heat given off by the reaction is equal to that taken in by the solution .
Therefore : ( It is important to remember that this relationship only holds if the calorimeter does not absorb any heat from the reaction , and there is no heat exchange between the calorimeter and the outside environment . )
Next , we know that the heat absorbed by the solution depends on its specific heat , mass , and temperature change : To proceed with this calculation , we need to make a few more reasonable assumptions or approximations .
Since the solution is aqueous , we can proceed as if it were water in terms of its specific heat and mass values .
The density of water is approximately 1.0 g/mL , so 100.0 mL has a mass of about 1.0 10 g ( two significant figures ) .
The specific heat of water is approximately 4.184 J/g °C , so we use that for the specific heat of the solution .
Substituting these values gives : Finally , since we are trying to find the heat of the reaction , we have : The negative sign indicates that the reaction is exothermic .
It produces 2.9 kJ of heat .
When 100 mL of 0.200 M NaCl ( aq ) and 100 mL of 0.200 M AgNO ( aq ) , both at 21.9 °C , are mixed in a coffee cup calorimeter , the temperature increases to 23.5 °C as solid AgCl forms .
How much heat is produced by this precipitation reaction ?
What assumptions did you make to determine your value ?
This is the basis for an “ instant ice pack ” .
When 3.21 g of solid NH NO dissolves in 50.0 g of water at 24.9 °C in a calorimeter , the temperature decreases to 20.3 °C .
Calculate the value of q for this reaction and explain the meaning of its arithmetic sign .
State any assumptions that you made .
We assume that the calorimeter prevents heat transfer between the solution and its external environment ( including the calorimeter itself ) , in which case : with “ rxn ” and “ soln ” used as shorthand for “ reaction ” and “ solution , ” respectively .
Assuming also that the specific heat of the solution is the same as that for water , we have : The positive sign for q indicates that the dissolution is an endothermic process .
When a 3.00-g sample of KCl was added to 3.00 10 g of water in a coffee cup calorimeter , the temperature decreased by 1.05 °C .
How much heat is involved in the dissolution of the KCl ?
What assumptions did you make ?
The calorimeters described are designed to operate at constant ( atmospheric ) pressure and are convenient to measure heat flow accompanying processes that occur in solution .
A different type of calorimeter that operates at constant volume , colloquially known as a bomb calorimeter , is used to measure the energy produced by reactions that yield large amounts of heat and gaseous products , such as combustion reactions .
( The term “ bomb ” comes from the observation that these reactions can be vigorous enough to resemble explosions that would damage other calorimeters . )
This type of calorimeter consists of a robust steel container ( the “ bomb ” ) that contains the reactants and is itself submerged in water .
The sample is placed in the bomb , which is then filled with oxygen at high pressure .
A small electrical spark is used to ignite the sample .
The energy produced by the reaction is absorbed by the steel bomb and the surrounding water .
The temperature increase is measured and , along with the known heat capacity of the calorimeter , is used to calculate the energy produced by the reaction .
Bomb calorimeters require calibration to determine the heat capacity of the calorimeter and ensure accurate results .
The calibration is accomplished using a reaction with a known q , such as a measured quantity of benzoic acid ignited by a spark from a nickel fuse wire that is weighed before and after the reaction .
The temperature change produced by the known reaction is used to determine the heat capacity of the calorimeter .
The calibration is generally performed each time before the calorimeter is used to gather research data .
When 3.12 g of glucose , C H O , is burned in a bomb calorimeter , the temperature of the calorimeter increases from 23.8 °C to 35.6 °C .
The calorimeter contains 775 g of water , and the bomb itself has a heat capacity of 893 J/°C .
How much heat was produced by the combustion of the glucose sample ?
The combustion produces heat that is primarily absorbed by the water and the bomb .
( The amounts of heat absorbed by the reaction products and the unreacted excess oxygen are relatively small and dealing with them is beyond the scope of this text .
We will neglect them in our calculations . )
The heat produced by the reaction is absorbed by the water and the bomb : This reaction released 48.7 kJ of heat when 3.12 g of glucose was burned .
When 0.963 g of benzene , C H , is burned in a bomb calorimeter , the temperature of the calorimeter increases by 8.39 °C .
The bomb has a heat capacity of 784 J/°C and is submerged in 925 mL of water .
How much heat was produced by the combustion of the glucose sample ?
Answer : 39.0 kJ Since the first one was constructed in 1899 , 35 calorimeters have been built to measure the heat produced by a living person .
These whole-body calorimeters of various designs are large enough to hold an individual human being .
More recently , whole-room calorimeters allow for relatively normal activities to be performed , and these calorimeters generate data that more closely reflect the real world .
These calorimeters are used to measure the metabolism of individuals under different environmental conditions , different dietary regimes , and with different health conditions , such as diabetes .
In humans , metabolism is typically measured in Calories per day .
As we concentrate on thermochemistry in this chapter , we need to consider some widely used concepts of thermodynamics .
Substances act as reservoirs of energy , meaning that energy can be added to them or removed from them .
Energy is stored in a substance when the kinetic energy of its atoms or molecules is raised .
The greater kinetic energy may be in the form of increased translations ( travel or straight-line motions ) , vibrations , or rotations of the atoms or molecules .
When thermal energy is lost , the intensities of these motions decrease and the kinetic energy falls .
The total of all possible kinds of energy present in a substance is called the internal energy ( U ) , sometimes symbolized as E .
As a system undergoes a change , its internal energy can change , and energy can be transferred from the system to the surroundings , or from the surroundings to the system .
Energy is transferred into a system when it absorbs heat ( q ) from the surroundings or when the surroundings do work ( w ) on the system .
Both processes increase the internal energy of the wire , which is reflected in an increase in the wire ’ s temperature .
Conversely , energy is transferred out of a system when heat is lost from the system , or when the system does work on the surroundings .
The relationship between internal energy , heat , and work can be represented by the equation : as shown in .
The work , w , is positive if it is done on the system and negative if it is done by the system .
A type of work called expansion work ( or pressure-volume work ) occurs when a system pushes back the surroundings against a restraining pressure , or when the surroundings compress the system .
An example of this occurs during the operation of an internal combustion engine .
The reaction of gasoline and oxygen is exothermic .
Some of this energy is given off as heat , and some does work pushing the piston in the cylinder .
The substances involved in the reaction are the system , and the engine and the rest of the universe are the surroundings .
The system loses energy by both heating and doing work on the surroundings , and its internal energy decreases .
( The engine is able to keep the car moving because this process is repeated many times per second while the engine is running . )
We will consider how to determine the amount of work involved in a chemical or physical change in the chapter on thermodynamics .
As discussed , the relationship between internal energy , heat , and work can be represented as Δ U = q + w .
Internal energy is an example of a state function ( or state variable ) , whereas heat and work are not state functions .
The value of a state function depends only on the state that a system is in , and not on how that state is reached .
If a quantity is not a state function , then its value does depend on how the state is reached .
An example of a state function is altitude or elevation .
If you stand on the summit of Mt .
Kilimanjaro , you are at an altitude of 5895 m , and it does not matter whether you hiked there or parachuted there .
The distance you traveled to the top of Kilimanjaro , however , is not a state function .
You could climb to the summit by a direct route or by a more roundabout , circuitous path .
The distances traveled would differ ( distance is not a state function ) but the elevation reached would be the same ( altitude is a state function ) .
Chemists ordinarily use a property known as enthalpy ( H ) to describe the thermodynamics of chemical and physical processes .
Enthalpy is defined as the sum of a system ’ s internal energy ( U ) and the mathematical product of its pressure ( P ) and volume ( V ) : Enthalpy is also a state function .
Enthalpy values for specific substances can not be measured directly ; only enthalpy changes for chemical or physical processes can be determined .
By their definitions , the arithmetic signs of Δ V and w will always be opposite : Substituting this equation and the definition of internal energy into the enthalpy-change equation yields : where q is the heat of reaction under conditions of constant pressure .
And so , if a chemical or physical process is carried out at constant pressure with the only work done caused by expansion or contraction , then the heat flow ( q ) and enthalpy change ( Δ H ) for the process are equal .
The heat given off when you operate a Bunsen burner is equal to the enthalpy change of the methane combustion reaction that takes place , since it occurs at the essentially constant pressure of the atmosphere .
Chemists usually perform experiments under normal atmospheric conditions , at constant external pressure with q = Δ H , which makes enthalpy the most convenient choice for determining heat changes for chemical reactions .
The following conventions apply when using Δ H : A negative value of an enthalpy change , Δ H < 0 , indicates an exothermic reaction ; a positive value , Δ H > 0 , indicates an endothermic reaction .
If the direction of a chemical equation is reversed , the arithmetic sign of its Δ H is changed ( a process that is endothermic in one direction is exothermic in the opposite direction ) .
Chemists use a thermochemical equation to represent the changes in both matter and energy .
In a thermochemical equation , the enthalpy change of a reaction is shown as a Δ H value following the equation for the reaction .
This Δ H value indicates the amount of heat associated with the reaction involving the number of moles of reactants and products as shown in the chemical equation .
For example , when 1 mole of hydrogen gas and water at the same temperature and pressure , 286 kJ of heat are released .
If gaseous water forms , only 242 kJ of heat are released .
When 0.0500 mol of HCl ( aq ) reacts with 0.0500 mol of NaOH ( aq ) to form 0.0500 mol of NaCl ( aq ) , 2.9 kJ of heat are produced .
Write a balanced thermochemical equation for the reaction of one mole of HCl . ?
For the reaction of 0.0500 mol acid ( HCl ) , q = −2.9 kJ .
The reactants are provided in stoichiometric amounts ( same molar ratio as in the balanced equation ) , and so the amount of acid may be used to calculate a molar enthalpy change .
Since Δ H is an extensive property , it is proportional to the amount of acid neutralized : The thermochemical equation is then When 1.34 g Zn ( s ) reacts with 60.0 mL of 0.750 M HCl ( aq ) , 3.14 kJ of heat are produced .
Determine the enthalpy change per mole of zinc reacting for the reaction : Answer : Δ H = −153 kJ Be sure to take both stoichiometry and limiting reactants into account when determining the Δ H for a chemical reaction .
A gummy bear contains 2.67 g sucrose , C H O .
When it reacts with 7.19 g potassium chlorate , KClO , 43.7 kJ of heat are produced .
The provided amounts of the two reactants are The provided molar ratio of perchlorate-to-sucrose is then The balanced equation indicates 8 mol KClO are required for reaction with 1 mol C H O .
What is the enthalpy change for the reaction when 1 mole of FeCl ( s ) is produced ?
Answer : Δ H = −338 kJ Enthalpy changes are typically tabulated for reactions in which both the reactants and products are at the same conditions .
A standard state is a commonly accepted set of conditions used as a reference point for the determination of properties under other different conditions .
For chemists , the IUPAC standard state refers to materials under a pressure of 1 bar and solutions at 1 M , and does not specify a temperature .
Many thermochemical tables list values with a standard state of 1 atm .
Because the Δ H of a reaction changes very little with such small changes in pressure ( 1 bar = 0.987 atm ) , Δ H values ( except for the most precisely measured values ) are essentially the same under both sets of standard conditions .
We will include a superscripted “ o ” in the enthalpy change symbol to designate standard state .
Since the usual ( but not technically standard ) temperature is 298.15 K , this temperature will be assumed unless some other temperature is specified .
Thus , the symbol is used to indicate an enthalpy change for a process occurring under these conditions .
( The symbol Δ H is used to indicate an enthalpy change for a reaction occurring under nonstandard conditions . )
The enthalpy changes for many types of chemical and physical processes are available in the reference literature , including those for combustion reactions , phase transitions , and formation reactions .
As we discuss these quantities , it is important to pay attention to the extensive nature of enthalpy and enthalpy changes .
Since the enthalpy change for a given reaction is proportional to the amounts of substances involved , it may be reported on that basis ( i.e. , as the Δ H for specific amounts of reactants ) .
However , we often find it more useful to divide one extensive property ( Δ H ) by another ( amount of substance ) , and report a per-amount intensive value of Δ H , often “ normalized ” to a per-mole basis .
( Note that this is similar to determining the intensive property specific heat from the extensive property heat capacity , as seen previously . )
Enthalpies of combustion for many substances have been measured ; a few of these are listed in .
Many readily available substances with large enthalpies of combustion are used as fuels , including hydrogen , carbon ( as coal or charcoal ) , and hydrocarbons ( compounds containing only hydrogen and carbon ) , such as methane , propane , and the major components of gasoline .
As suggests , the combustion of gasoline is a highly exothermic process .
Let us determine the approximate amount of heat produced by burning 1.00 L of gasoline , assuming the enthalpy of combustion of gasoline is the same as that of isooctane , a common component of gasoline .
The density of isooctane is 0.692 g/mL .
Starting with a known amount ( 1.00 L of isooctane ) , we can perform conversions between units until we arrive at the desired amount of heat or energy .
The enthalpy of combustion of isooctane provides one of the necessary conversions .
gives this value as −5460 kJ per 1 mole of isooctane ( C H ) .
Using these data , The combustion of 1.00 L of isooctane produces 33,100 kJ of heat .
( This amount of energy is enough to melt 99.2 kg , or about 218 lbs , of ice . )
Note : If you do this calculation one step at a time , you would find : How much heat is produced by the combustion of 125 g of acetylene ?
Answer : 6.25 10 kJ A standard enthalpy of formation is an enthalpy change for a reaction in which exactly 1 mole of a pure substance is formed from free elements in their most stable states under standard state conditions .
These values are especially useful for computing or predicting enthalpy changes for chemical reactions that are impractical or dangerous to carry out , or for processes for which it is difficult to make measurements .
If we have values for the appropriate standard enthalpies of formation , we can determine the enthalpy change for any reaction , which we will practice in the next section on Hess ’ s law .
The standard enthalpy of formation of CO ( g ) is −393.5 kJ/mol .
For nitrogen dioxide , NO ( g ) , is 33.2 kJ/mol .
This is the enthalpy change for the reaction : mole of N and 1 mole of O is correct in this case because the standard enthalpy of A reaction equation with formation always refers to 1 mole of product , NO ( g ) .
You will find a table of standard enthalpies of formation of many common substances in .
These values indicate that formation reactions range from highly exothermic ( such as −2984 kJ/mol for the formation of P O ) to strongly endothermic ( such as +226.7 kJ/mol for the formation of acetylene , C H ) .
By definition , the standard enthalpy of formation of an element in its most stable form is equal to zero under standard conditions , which is 1 atm for gases and 1 M for solutions .
Ozone , O ( g ) , forms from oxygen , O ( g ) , by an endothermic process .
Ultraviolet radiation is the source of the energy that drives this reaction in the upper atmosphere .
Assuming that both the reactants and products of the reaction are in their standard states , determine the standard enthalpy of formation , of ozone from the following information : elements in their standard states .
What is the enthalpy change for the reaction of 1 mole of H ( g ) with 1 mole of Cl ( g ) if both the reactants and products are at standard state conditions ?
The standard enthalpy of formation of HCl ( g ) is −92.3 kJ/mol .
Some reactions are difficult , if not impossible , to investigate and make accurate measurements for experimentally .
And even when a reaction is not hard to perform or measure , it is convenient to be able to determine the heat involved in a reaction without having to perform an experiment .
Hess ’ s law is valid because enthalpy is a state function : Enthalpy changes depend only on where a chemical process starts and ends , but not on the path it takes from start to finish .
For example , we can think of the reaction of carbon with oxygen to form carbon dioxide as occurring either directly or by a two-step process .
The result is shown in .
We see that Δ H of the overall reaction is the same whether it occurs in one step or two .
This finding ( overall Δ H for the reaction = sum of Δ H values for reaction “ steps ” in the overall reaction ) is true in general for chemical and physical processes .
Before we further practice using Hess ’ s law , let us recall two important features of Δ H .
Δ H is directly proportional to the quantities of reactants or products .
Δ H for a reaction in one direction is equal in magnitude and opposite in sign to Δ H for the reaction in the reverse direction .
Calculate Δ H for the process : from the following information : Answer : 66.4 kJ Here is a less straightforward example that illustrates the thought process involved in solving many Hess ’ s law problems .
It shows how we can find many standard enthalpies of formation ( and other values of Δ H ) if they are difficult to determine experimentally .
Going from left to right in ( i ) , we first see that ClF ( g ) is needed as a reactant .
This can be obtained by multiplying reaction ( iii ) by which means that the Δ H ° change is also multiplied by Next , we see that F is also needed as a reactant .
This leaves only reactants ClF ( g ) and F ( g ) and product ClF ( g ) , which are what we want .
The standard enthalpy change of the overall reaction is therefore equal to : ( ii ) the sum of the standard enthalpies of formation of all the products plus ( i ) the sum of the negatives of the standard enthalpies of formation of the reactants .
This is also the procedure in using the general equation , as shown .
Calculate the heat of combustion of 1 mole of ethanol , C H OH ( l ) , when H O ( l ) and CO ( g ) are formed .
Use the following enthalpies of formation : C H OH ( l ) , −278 kJ/mol ; H O ( l ) , −286 kJ/mol ; and CO ( g ) , −394 kJ/mol .
Answer : −1368 kJ/mol In 1054 , Chinese astronomers recorded the appearance of a “ guest star ” in the sky , visible even during the day , which then disappeared slowly over the next two years .
The sudden appearance was due to a supernova explosion , which was much brighter than the original star .
Even though this supernova was observed almost a millennium ago , the remaining Crab Nebula continues to release energy today .
It emits not only visible light but also infrared light , X-rays , and other forms of electromagnetic radiation .
The nebula emits both continuous spectra ( the blue-white glow ) and atomic emission spectra ( the colored filaments ) .
In this chapter , we will discuss light and other forms of electromagnetic radiation and how they are related to the electronic structure of atoms .
We will also see how this radiation can be used to identify elements , even from thousands of light years away .
In the seventeenth century , Isaac Newton performed experiments with lenses and prisms and was able to demonstrate that white light consists of the individual colors of the rainbow combined together .
Newton explained his optics findings in terms of a `` corpuscular '' view of light , in which light was composed of streams of extremely tiny particles travelling at high speeds according to Newton 's laws of motion .
Early in the nineteenth century , Thomas Young demonstrated that light passing through narrow , closely spaced slits produced interference patterns that could not be explained in terms of Newtonian particles but could be easily explained in terms of waves .
Later in the nineteenth century , after James Clerk Maxwell developed his theory of electromagnetic radiation and showed that light was the visible part of a vast spectrum of electromagnetic waves , the particle view of light became thoroughly discredited .
By the end of the nineteenth century , scientists viewed the physical universe as roughly comprising two separate domains : matter composed of particles moving according to Newton 's laws of motion , and electromagnetic radiation consisting of waves governed by Maxwell 's equations .
Today , these domains are referred to as classical mechanics and classical electrodynamics ( or classical electromagnetism ) .
Although there were a few physical phenomena that could not be explained within this framework , scientists at that time were so confident of the overall soundness of this framework that they viewed these aberrations as puzzling paradoxes that would ultimately be resolved somehow within this framework .
As we shall see , these paradoxes led to a contemporary framework that intimately connects particles and waves at a fundamental level called wave-particle duality , which has superseded the classical view .
Visible light and other forms of electromagnetic radiation play important roles in chemistry , since they can be used to infer the energies of electrons within atoms and molecules .
Much of modern technology is based on electromagnetic radiation .
A wave is an oscillation or periodic movement that can transport energy from one point in space to another .
Common examples of waves are all around us .
In each of these cases , kinetic energy is transferred through matter ( the rope , water , or air ) while the matter remains essentially in place .
While this wave can quickly encircle a large stadium in a few seconds , none of the fans actually travel with the wave-they all stay in or above their seats .
Waves need not be restricted to travel through matter .
As Maxwell showed , electromagnetic waves consist of an electric field oscillating in step with a perpendicular magnetic field , both of which are perpendicular to the direction of travel .
These waves can travel through a vacuum at a constant speed of 2.998 10 m/s , the speed of light ( denoted by c ) .
All waves , including forms of electromagnetic radiation , are characterized by , a wavelength ( denoted by λ , the lowercase Greek letter lambda ) , a frequency ( denoted by ν , the lowercase Greek letter nu ) , and an amplitude .
As can be seen in , the wavelength is the distance between two consecutive peaks or troughs in a wave ( measured in meters in the SI system ) .
Electromagnetic waves have wavelengths that fall within an enormous range-wavelengths of kilometers ( 10 m ) to picometers ( 10 m ) have been observed .
The frequency is the number of wave cycles that pass a specified point in space in a specified amount of time ( in the SI system , this is measured in seconds ) .
A cycle corresponds to one complete wavelength .
The unit for frequency , expressed as cycles per second [ s ] , is the hertz ( Hz ) .
Common multiples of this unit are megahertz , ( 1 MHz = 1 10 Hz ) and gigahertz ( 1 GHz = 1 10 Hz ) .
The amplitude corresponds to the magnitude of the wave 's displacement and so , in , this corresponds to one-half the height between the peaks and troughs .
The amplitude is related to the intensity of the wave , which for light is the brightness , and for sound is the loudness .
The product of a wave 's wavelength ( λ ) and its frequency ( ν ) , λν , is the speed of the wave .
Thus , for electromagnetic radiation in a vacuum , speed is equal to the fundamental constant , c : Wavelength and frequency are inversely proportional : As the wavelength increases , the frequency decreases .
The inverse proportionality is illustrated in .
This figure also shows the electromagnetic spectrum , the range of all types of electromagnetic radiation .
Each of the various colors of visible light has specific frequencies and wavelengths associated with them , and you can see that visible light makes up only a small portion of the electromagnetic spectrum .
Because the technologies developed to work in various parts of the electromagnetic spectrum are different , for reasons of convenience and historical legacies , different units are typically used for different parts of the spectrum .
For example , radio waves are usually specified as frequencies ( typically in units of MHz ) , while the visible region is usually specified in wavelengths ( typically in units of nm or angstroms ) .
A sodium streetlight gives off yellow light that has a wavelength of 589 nm ( 1 nm = 1 10 m ) .
What is the frequency of this light ?
We can rearrange the equation c = λν to solve for the frequency : Since c is expressed in meters per second , we must also convert 589 nm to meters .
One of the frequencies used to transmit and receive cellular telephone signals in the United States is 850 MHz .
What is the wavelength in meters of these radio waves ?
Answer : 0.353 m = 35.3 cm One particularly characteristic phenomenon of waves results when two or more waves come into contact : They interfere with each other .
shows the interference patterns that arise when light passes through narrow slits closely spaced about a wavelength apart .
The fringe patterns produced depend on the wavelength , with the fringes being more closely spaced for shorter wavelength light passing through a given set of slits .
When the light passes through the two slits , each slit effectively acts as a new source , resulting in two closely spaced waves coming into contact at the detector ( the camera in this case ) .
Likewise , when two stones are tossed close together into a pond , interference patterns are visible in the interactions between the waves produced by the stones .
Such interference patterns can not be explained by particles moving according to the laws of classical mechanics .
Not all waves are travelling waves .
Standing waves ( also known as stationary waves ) remain constrained within some region of space .
As we shall see , standing waves play an important role in our understanding of the electronic structure of atoms and molecules .
The simplest example of a standing wave is a one-dimensional wave associated with a vibrating string that is held fixed at its two end points .
shows the four lowest-energy standing waves ( the fundamental wave and the lowest three harmonics ) for a vibrating string at a particular amplitude .
Although the string 's motion lies mostly within a plane , the wave itself is considered to be one dimensional , since it lies along the length of the string .
The motion of string segments in a direction perpendicular to the string length generates the waves and so the amplitude of the waves is visible as the maximum displacement of the curves seen in .
The key observation from the figure is that only those waves having an integer number , n , of halfwavelengths between the end points can form .
A system with fixed end points such as this restricts the number and type of the possible waveforms .
This is an example of quantization , in which only discrete values from a more general set of continuous values of some property are observed .
Another important observation is that the harmonic waves ( those waves displaying more than one-half wavelength ) all have one or more points between the two end points that are not in motion .
These special points are nodes .
The energies of the standing waves with a given amplitude in a vibrating string increase with the number of half-wavelengths n .
Since the number of nodes is n – 1 , the energy can also be said to depend on the number of nodes , generally increasing as the number of nodes increases .
An example of two-dimensional standing waves is shown in , which shows the vibrational patterns on a flat surface .
Although the vibrational amplitudes can not be seen like they could in the vibrating string , the nodes have been made visible by sprinkling the drum surface with a powder that collects on the areas of the surface that have minimal displacement .
For one-dimensional standing waves , the nodes were points on the line , but for twodimensional standing waves , the nodes are lines on the surface ( for three-dimensional standing waves , the nodes are two-dimensional surfaces within the three-dimensional volume ) .
The last few decades of the nineteenth century witnessed intense research activity in commercializing newly discovered electric lighting .
This required obtaining a better understanding of the distributions of light emitted from various sources being considered .
Artificial lighting is usually designed to mimic natural sunlight within the limitations of the underlying technology .
Such lighting consists of a range of broadly distributed frequencies that form a continuous spectrum .
shows the wavelength distribution for sunlight .
The most intense radiation is in the visible region , with the intensity dropping off rapidly for shorter wavelength ultraviolet ( UV ) light , and more slowly for longer wavelength infrared ( IR ) light .
In , the solar distribution is compared to a representative distribution , called a blackbody spectrum , that corresponds to a temperature of 5250 °C .
The blackbody spectrum matches the solar spectrum quite well .
A blackbody is a convenient , ideal emitter that approximates the behavior of many materials when heated .
It is “ ideal ” in the same sense that an ideal gas is a convenient , simple representation of real gases that works well , provided that the pressure is not too high nor the temperature too low .
A good approximation of a blackbody that can be used to observe blackbody radiation is a metal oven that can be heated to very high temperatures .
The oven has a small hole allowing for the light being emitted within the oven to be observed with a spectrometer so that the wavelengths and their intensities can be measured .
shows the resulting curves for some representative temperatures .
Each distribution depends only on a single parameter : the temperature .
This common observation was at the heart of the first paradox that showed the fundamental limitations of classical physics that we will examine .
Physicists derived mathematical expressions for the blackbody curves using well-accepted concepts from the theories of classical mechanics and classical electromagnetism .
The theoretical expressions as functions of temperature fit the observed experimental blackbody curves well at longer wavelengths , but showed significant discrepancies at shorter wavelengths .
Not only did the theoretical curves not show a peak , they absurdly showed the intensity becoming infinitely large as the wavelength became smaller , which would imply that everyday objects at room temperature should be emitting large amounts of UV light .
This became known as the “ ultraviolet catastrophe ” because no one could find any problems with the theoretical treatment that could lead to such unrealistic short-wavelength behavior .
Finally , around 1900 , Max Planck derived a theoretical expression for blackbody radiation that fit the experimental observations exactly ( within experimental error ) .
Planck developed his theoretical treatment by extending the earlier work that had been based on the premise that the atoms composing the oven vibrated at increasing frequencies ( or decreasing wavelengths ) as the temperature increased , with these vibrations being the source of the emitted electromagnetic radiation .
The quantity h is a constant now known as Planck 's constant , in his honor .
Although Planck was pleased he had resolved the blackbody radiation paradox , he was disturbed that to do so , he needed to assume the vibrating atoms required quantized energies , which he was unable to explain .
The value of Planck 's constant is very small , 6.626 10 joule seconds ( J s ) , which helps explain why energy quantization had not been observed previously in macroscopic phenomena .
The next paradox in the classical theory to be resolved concerned the photoelectric effect .
It had been observed that electrons could be ejected from the clean surface of a metal when light having a frequency greater than some threshold frequency was shone on it .
Surprisingly , the kinetic energy of the ejected electrons did not depend on the brightness of the light , but increased with increasing frequency of the light .
Since the electrons in the metal had a certain amount of binding energy keeping them there , the incident light needed to have more energy to free the electrons .
According to classical wave theory , a wave 's energy depends on its intensity ( which depends on its amplitude ) , not its frequency .
One part of these observations was that the number of electrons ejected within in a given time period was seen to increase as the brightness increased .
Electrons were ejected when hit by photons having sufficient energy ( a frequency greater than the threshold ) .
The greater the frequency , the greater the kinetic energy imparted to the escaping electrons by the collisions .
Einstein also argued that the light intensity did not depend on the amplitude of the incoming wave , but instead corresponded to the number of photons striking the surface within a given time period .
This explains why the number of ejected electrons increased with increasing brightness , since the greater the number of incoming photons , the greater the likelihood that they would collide with some of the electrons .
With Einstein 's findings , the nature of light took on a new air of mystery .
Somehow , at a deep fundamental level still not fully understood , light is both wavelike and particle-like .
This is known as wave-particle duality .
When we see light from a neon sign , we are observing radiation from excited neon atoms .
If this radiation has a wavelength of 640 nm , what is the energy of the photon being emitted ?
We use the part of Planck 's equation that includes the wavelength , λ , and convert units of nanometers to meters so that the units of λ and c are the same .
The microwaves in an oven are of a specific frequency that will heat the water molecules contained in food .
( This is why most plastics and glass do not become hot in a microwave oven-they do not contain water molecules . )
This frequency is about 3 10 Hz .
What is the energy of one photon in these microwaves ?
Answer : 2 10 J Identify which of the following statements are false and , where necessary , change the italicized word or phrase to make them true , consistent with Einstein 's explanation of the photoelectric effect .
( a ) Increasing the brightness of incoming light increases the kinetic energy of the ejected electrons .
( b ) Increasing the wavelength of incoming light increases the kinetic energy of the ejected electrons .
( c ) Increasing the brightness of incoming light increases the number of ejected electrons .
( d ) Increasing the frequency of incoming light can increase the number of ejected electrons .
( a ) False .
Increasing the brightness of incoming light has no effect on the kinetic energy of the ejected electrons .
Only energy , not the number or amplitude , of the photons influences the kinetic energy of the electrons .
( b ) False .
Increasing the frequency of incoming light increases the kinetic energy of the ejected electrons .
Frequency is proportional to energy and inversely proportional to wavelength .
Frequencies above the threshold value transfer the excess energy into the kinetic energy of the electrons .
( c ) True .
Because the number of collisions with photons increases with brighter light , the number of ejected electrons increases .
( d ) True with regard to the threshold energy binding the electrons to the metal .
Below this threshold , electrons are not emitted and above it they are .
Once over the threshold value , further increasing the frequency does not increase the number of ejected electrons Calculate the threshold energy in kJ/mol of electrons in aluminum , given that the lowest frequency photon for which the photoelectric effect is observed is 9.87 10 Hz .
Answer : 394 kJ/mol Another paradox within the classical electromagnetic theory that scientists in the late nineteenth century struggled with concerned the light emitted from atoms and molecules .
When solids , liquids , or condensed gases are heated sufficiently , they radiate some of the excess energy as light .
Photons produced in this manner have a range of energies , and thereby produce a continuous spectrum in which an unbroken series of wavelengths is present .
Most of the light generated from stars ( including our sun ) is produced in this fashion .
You can see all the visible wavelengths of light present in sunlight by using a prism to separate them .
As can be seen in , sunlight also contains UV light ( shorter wavelengths ) and IR light ( longer wavelengths ) that can be detected using instruments but that are invisible to the human eye .
Incandescent ( glowing ) solids such as tungsten filaments in incandescent lights also give off light that contains all wavelengths of visible light .
These continuous spectra can often be approximated by blackbody radiation curves at some appropriate temperature , such as those shown in .
In contrast to continuous spectra , light can also occur as discrete or line spectra having very narrow line widths interspersed throughout the spectral regions such as those shown in .
Exciting a gas at low partial pressure using an electrical current , or heating it , will produce line spectra .
Fluorescent light bulbs and neon signs operate in this way .
Each element displays its own characteristic set of lines , as do molecules , although their spectra are generally much more complicated .
Each emission line consists of a single wavelength of light , which implies that the light emitted by a gas consists of a set of discrete energies .
For example , when an electric discharge passes through a tube containing hydrogen gas at low pressure , the H molecules are broken apart into separate H atoms and we see a blue-pink color .
Passing the light through a prism produces a line spectrum , indicating that this light is composed of photons of four visible wavelengths , as shown in .
The origin of discrete spectra in atoms and molecules was extremely puzzling to scientists in the late nineteenth century , since according to classical electromagnetic theory , only continuous spectra should be observed .
Even more puzzling , in 1885 , Johann Balmer was able to derive an empirical equation that related the four visible wavelengths of light emitted by hydrogen atoms to whole integers .
That equation is the following one , in which k is a constant : Other discrete lines for the hydrogen atom were found in the UV and IR regions .
Even in the late nineteenth century , spectroscopy was a very precise science , and so the wavelengths of hydrogen were measured to very high accuracy , which implied that the Rydberg constant could be determined very precisely as well .
This picture was called the planetary model , since it pictured the atom as a miniature “ solar system ” with the electrons orbiting the nucleus like planets orbiting the sun .
The simplest atom is hydrogen , consisting of a single proton as the nucleus about which a single electron moves .
The electrostatic force attracting the electron to the proton depends only on the distance between the two particles .
This classical mechanics description of the atom is incomplete , however , since an electron moving in an elliptical orbit would be accelerating ( by changing direction ) and , according to classical electromagnetism , it should continuously emit electromagnetic radiation .
This loss in orbital energy should result in the electron ’ s orbit getting continually smaller until it spirals into the nucleus , implying that atoms are inherently unstable .
In 1913 , Niels Bohr attempted to resolve the atomic paradox by ignoring classical electromagnetism ’ s prediction that the orbiting electron in hydrogen would continuously emit light .
Instead , he incorporated into the classical mechanics description of the atom Planck ’ s ideas of quantization and Einstein ’ s finding that light consists of photons whose energy is proportional to their frequency .
Bohr assumed that the electron orbiting the nucleus would not normally emit any radiation ( the stationary state hypothesis ) , but it would emit or absorb a photon if it moved to a different orbit .
The energy absorbed or emitted would reflect differences in the orbital energies according to this equation : In this equation , h is Planck ’ s constant and E and E are the initial and final orbital energies , respectively .
The absolute value of the energy difference is used , since frequencies and wavelengths are always positive .
Instead of allowing for continuous values of energy , Bohr assumed the energies of these electron orbitals were quantized : In this expression , k is a constant comprising fundamental constants such as the electron mass and charge and Planck ’ s constant .
Inserting the expression for the orbit energies into the equation for Δ E gives or which is identical to the Rydberg equation in which When Bohr calculated his theoretical value for the Rydberg constant , and compared it with the experimentally accepted value , he got excellent agreement .
Since the Rydberg constant was one of the most precisely measured constants at that time , this level of agreement was astonishing and meant that Bohr ’ s model was taken seriously , despite the many assumptions that Bohr needed to derive it .
The lowest few energy levels are shown in .
One of the fundamental laws of physics is that matter is most stable with the lowest possible energy .
Thus , the electron in a hydrogen atom usually moves in the n = 1 orbit , the orbit in which it has the lowest energy .
When the electron is in this lowest energy orbit , the atom is said to be in its ground electronic state ( or simply ground state ) .
If the atom receives energy from an outside source , it is possible for the electron to move to an orbit with a higher n value and the atom is now in an excited electronic state ( or simply an excited state ) with a higher energy .
When an electron transitions from an excited state ( higher energy orbit ) to a less excited state , or ground state , the difference in energy is emitted as a photon .
Similarly , if a photon is absorbed by an atom , the energy of the photon moves an electron from a lower energy orbit up to a more excited one .
We can relate the energy of electrons in atoms to what we learned previously about energy .
The law of conservation of energy says that we can neither create nor destroy energy .
Thus , if a certain amount of external energy is required to excite an electron from one energy level to another , that same amount of energy will be liberated when the electron returns to its initial state .
The energy expression for hydrogen-like atoms is a generalization of the hydrogen atom energy , in which Z is the nuclear charge ( +1 for hydrogen , +2 for He , +3 for Li , and so on ) and k has a value of 2.179 10 J .
This is implied by the inverse dependence of electrostatic attraction on distance , since , as the electron moves away from the nucleus , the electrostatic attraction between it and the nucleus decreases and it is held less tightly in the atom .
Note that as n gets larger and the orbits get larger , their energies get closer to zero , and so the limits and imply that E = 0 corresponds to the ionization limit where the electron is completely removed from the nucleus .
Unfortunately , despite Bohr ’ s remarkable achievement in deriving a theoretical expression for the Rydberg constant , he was unable to extend his theory to the next simplest atom , He , which only has two electrons .
Early researchers were very excited when they were able to predict the energy of an electron at a particular distance from the nucleus in a hydrogen atom .
If a spark promotes the electron in a hydrogen atom into an orbit with n = 3 , what is the calculated energy , in joules , of the electron ?
The energy of the electron is given by this equation : The atomic number , Z , of hydrogen is 1 ; k = 2.179 10 J ; and the electron is characterized by an n value of 3 .
Thus , The electron in is promoted even further to an orbit with n = 6 .
What is its new energy ?
In what part of the electromagnetic spectrum do we find this radiation ?
In this case , the electron starts out with n = 4 , so n = 4 .
It comes to rest in the n = 6 orbit , so n = 6 .
The difference in energy between the two states is given by this expression : This energy difference is positive , indicating a photon enters the system ( is absorbed ) to excite the electron from the n = 4 orbit up to the n = 6 orbit .
The wavelength of a photon with this energy is found by the expression Rearrangement gives : From the illustration of the electromagnetic spectrum in Electromagnetic Energy , we can see that this wavelength is found in the infrared portion of the electromagnetic spectrum .
What is the energy in joules and the wavelength in meters of the photon produced when an electron falls from the n = 5 to the n = 3 level in a He ion ( Z = 2 for He ) ?
Answer : 6.198 10 J ; 3.205 10 m Bohr ’ s model of the hydrogen atom provides insight into the behavior of matter at the microscopic level , but it is does not account for electron–electron interactions in atoms with more than one electron .
It does introduce several important features of all models used to describe the distribution of electrons in an atom .
These features include the following : The energies of electrons ( energy levels ) in an atom are quantized , described by quantum numbers : integer numbers having only specific allowed value and used to characterize the arrangement of electrons in an atom .
An electron ’ s energy increases with increasing distance from the nucleus .
The discrete energies ( lines ) in the spectra of the elements result from quantized electronic energies .
Of these features , the most important is the postulate of quantized energy levels for an electron in an atom .
As a consequence , the model laid the foundation for the quantum mechanical model of the atom .
Bohr won a Nobel Prize in Physics for his contributions to our understanding of the structure of atoms and how that is related to line spectra emissions .
Why did electrons orbit at only fixed distances defined by a single quantum number n = 1 , 2 , 3 , and so on , but never in between ?
Why did the model work so well describing hydrogen and one-electron ions , but could not correctly predict the emission spectrum for helium or any larger atoms ?
To answer these questions , scientists needed to completely revise the way they thought about matter .
We know how matter behaves in the macroscopic world—objects that are large enough to be seen by the naked eye follow the rules of classical physics .
A billiard ball moving on a table will behave like a particle : It will continue in a straight line unless it collides with another ball or the table cushion , or is acted on by some other force ( such as friction ) .
The ball has a well-defined position and velocity ( or a well-defined momentum , p = mv , defined by mass m and velocity v ) at any given moment .
In other words , the ball is moving in a classical trajectory .
This is the typical behavior of a classical object .
When waves interact with each other , they show interference patterns that are not displayed by macroscopic particles such as the billiard ball .
For example , interacting waves on the surface of water can produce interference patters similar to those shown on .
This is a case of wave behavior on the macroscopic scale , and it is clear that particles and waves are very different phenomena in the macroscopic realm .
As technological improvements allowed scientists to probe the microscopic world in greater detail , it became increasingly clear by the 1920s that very small pieces of matter follow a different set of rules from those we observe for large objects .
The unquestionable separation of waves and particles was no longer the case for the microscopic world .
One of the first people to pay attention to the special behavior of the microscopic world was Louis de Broglie .
He asked the question : If electromagnetic radiation can have particle-like character , can electrons and other submicroscopic particles exhibit wavelike character ?
In his 1925 doctoral dissertation , de Broglie extended the wave–particle duality of light that Einstein used to resolve the photoelectric-effect paradox to material particles .
Unlike the other values of λ discussed in this chapter , the de Broglie wavelength is a characteristic of particles and other bodies , not electromagnetic radiation ( note that this equation involves velocity [ v , m/s ] , not frequency [ ν , Hz ] .
Although these two symbols appear nearly identical , they mean very different things ) .
The regularly spaced atomic layers served as slits , as used in other interference experiments .
shows an interference pattern .
It is strikingly similar to the interference patterns for light shown in Electromagnetic Energy for light passing through two closely spaced , narrow slits .
The wave–particle duality of matter can be seen in by observing what happens if electron collisions are recorded over a long period of time .
Initially , when only a few electrons have been recorded , they show clear particle-like behavior , having arrived in small localized packets that appear to be random .
As more and more electrons arrived and were recorded , a clear interference pattern that is the hallmark of wavelike behavior emerged .
Thus , it appears that while electrons are small localized particles , their motion does not follow the equations of motion implied by classical mechanics , but instead it is governed by some type of a wave equation .
Thus the wave–particle duality first observed with photons is actually a fundamental behavior intrinsic to all quantum particles .
If an electron travels at a velocity of 1.000 10 m s and has a mass of 9.109 10 g , what is its wavelength ?
We can use de Broglie ’ s equation to solve this problem , but we first must do a unit conversion of Planck ’ s constant .
You learned earlier that 1 J = 1 kg m /s .
Thus , we can write h = 6.626 10 J s as 6.626 10 kg m /s .
This is a small value , but it is significantly larger than the size of an electron in the classical ( particle ) view .
This size is the same order of magnitude as the size of an atom .
This means that electron wavelike behavior is going to be noticeable in an atom .
Calculate the wavelength of a softball with a mass of 100 g traveling at a velocity of 35 m s , assuming that it can be modeled as a single particle .
The de Broglie wavelength is only appreciable for matter that has a very small mass and/or a very high velocity .
Werner Heisenberg considered the limits of how accurately we can measure properties of an electron or other microscopic particles .
He determined that there is a fundamental limit to how accurately one can measure both a particle ’ s position and its momentum simultaneously .
The more accurately we measure the momentum of a particle , the less accurately we can determine its position at that time , and vice versa .
This is summed up in what we now call the Heisenberg uncertainty principle : It is fundamentally impossible to determine simultaneously and exactly both the momentum and the position of a particle .
( where This equation allows us to calculate the limit to how precisely we can know both the simultaneous position of an object and its momentum .
However , the mass of a microscopic object such as an electron is small enough that the uncertainty can be large and significant .
It should be noted that Heisenberg ’ s uncertainty principle is not just limited to uncertainties in position and momentum , but it also links other dynamical variables .
The uncertainty principle can be shown to be a consequence of wave–particle duality , which lies at the heart of what distinguishes modern quantum theory from classical mechanics .
When Schrödinger applied his equation to hydrogen-like atoms , he was able to reproduce Bohr ’ s expression for the energy and , thus , the Rydberg formula governing hydrogen spectra .
Schrödinger described electrons as three-dimensional stationary waves , or wavefunctions , represented by the Greek letter psi , ψ .
A few years later , Max Born proposed an interpretation of the wavefunction ψ that is still accepted today : Electrons are still particles , and so the waves represented by ψ are not physical waves but , instead , are complex probability amplitudes .
The square of the magnitude of a wavefunction describes the probability of the quantum particle being present near a certain location in space .
This means that wavefunctions can be used to determine the distribution of the electron ’ s density with respect to the nucleus in an atom .
Schrödinger ’ s work , as well as that of Heisenberg and many other scientists following in their footsteps , is generally referred to as quantum mechanics .
The goal of this section is to understand the electron orbitals ( location of electrons in atoms ) , their different energies , and other properties .
The use of quantum theory provides the best understanding to these topics .
This knowledge is a precursor to chemical bonding .
As was described previously , electrons in atoms can exist only on discrete energy levels but not between them .
It is said that the energy of an electron in an atom is quantized , that is , it can be equal only to certain specific values and can jump from one energy level to another but not transition smoothly or stay between these levels .
The energy levels are labeled with an n value , where n = 1 , 2 , 3 , … .
Generally speaking , the energy of an electron in an atom is greater for greater values of n .
This number , n , is referred to as the principal quantum number .
The principal quantum number defines the location of the energy level .
It is essentially the same concept as the n in the Bohr atom description .
Another name for the principal quantum number is the shell number .
The shells of an atom can be thought of concentric circles radiating out from the nucleus .
The electrons that belong to a specific shell are most likely to be found within the corresponding circular area .
The further we proceed from the nucleus , the higher the shell number , and so the higher the energy level .
The positively charged protons in the nucleus stabilize the electronic orbitals by electrostatic attraction between the positive charges of the protons and the negative charges of the electrons .
So the further away the electron is from the nucleus , the greater the energy it has .
This quantum mechanical model for where electrons reside in an atom can be used to look at electronic transitions , the events when an electron moves from one energy level to another .
If the transition is to a higher energy level , energy is absorbed , and the energy change has a positive value .
To obtain the amount of energy necessary for the transition to a higher energy level , a photon is absorbed by the atom .
A transition to a lower energy level involves a release of energy , and the energy change is negative .
This process is accompanied by emission of a photon by the atom .
The following equation summarizes these relationships and is based on the hydrogen atom : The values n and n are the final and initial energy states of the electron .
in the previous section of the chapter demonstrates calculations of such energy changes .
The principal quantum number is one of three quantum numbers used to characterize an orbital .
An atomic orbital is a general region in an atom within which an electron is most probable to reside .
The quantum mechanical model specifies the probability of finding an electron in the three-dimensional space around the nucleus and is based on solutions of the Schrödinger equation .
Another quantum number is l , the secondary ( angular momentum ) quantum number .
It is an integer that may take the values , l = 0 , 1 , 2 , … , n – 1 .
This means that an orbital with n = 1 can have only one value of l , l = 0 , whereas n = 2 permits l = 0 and l = 1 , and so on .
Whereas the principal quantum number , n , defines the general size and energy of the orbital , the secondary quantum number l specifies the shape of the orbital .
Orbitals with the same value of l define a subshell .
Orbitals with l = 0 are called s orbitals and they make up the s subshells .
The value l = 1 corresponds to the p orbitals .
For a given n , p orbitals constitute a p subshell ( e.g. , 3 p if n = 3 ) .
The orbitals with l = 2 are called the d orbitals , followed by the f- , g- , and horbitals for l = 3 , 4 , and 5 .
There are certain distances from the nucleus at which the probability density of finding an electron located at a particular orbital is zero .
In other words , the value of the wavefunction ψ is zero at this distance for this orbital .
Such a value of radius r is called a radial node .
The number of radial nodes in an orbital is n – l – 1 .
Consider the examples in .
The orbitals depicted are of the s type , thus l = 0 for all of them .
The s subshell electron density distribution is spherical and the p subshell has a dumbbell shape .
The d and f orbitals are more complex .
These shapes represent the three-dimensional regions within which the electron is likely to be found .
The magnetic quantum number , m , specifies the relative spatial orientation of a particular orbital .
Generally speaking , m can be equal to – l , – ( l – 1 ) , … , 0 , … , ( l – 1 ) , l .
The total number of possible orbitals with the same value of l ( that is , in the same subshell ) is 2 l + 1 .
The principal quantum number defines the general value of the electronic energy .
The angular momentum quantum number determines the shape of the orbital .
And the magnetic quantum number specifies orientation of the orbital in space , as can be seen in .
illustrates the energy levels for various orbitals .
The number before the orbital name ( such as 2 s , 3 p , and so forth ) stands for the principal quantum number , n .
The letter in the orbital name defines the subshell with a specific angular momentum quantum number l = 0 for s orbitals , 1 for p orbitals , 2 for d orbitals .
Finally , there are more than one possible orbitals for l ≥ 1 , each corresponding to a specific value of m .
In the case of a hydrogen atom or a one-electron ion ( such as He , Li , and so on ) , energies of all the orbitals with the same n are the same .
This is called a degeneracy , and the energy levels for the same principal quantum number , n , are called degenerate orbitals .
However , in atoms with more than one electron , this degeneracy is eliminated by the electron–electron interactions , and orbitals that belong to different subshells have different energies , as shown on .
Orbitals within the same subshell are still degenerate and have the same energy .
While the three quantum numbers discussed in the previous paragraphs work well for describing electron orbitals , some experiments showed that they were not sufficient to explain all observed results .
It was demonstrated in the 1920s that when hydrogen-line spectra are examined at extremely high resolution , some lines are actually not single peaks but , rather , pairs of closely spaced lines .
This is the so-called fine structure of the spectrum , and it implies that there are additional small differences in energies of electrons even when they are located in the same orbital .
These observations led Samuel Goudsmit and George Uhlenbeck to propose that electrons have a fourth quantum number .
They called this the spin quantum number , or m .
The other three quantum numbers , n , l , and m , are properties of specific atomic orbitals that also define in what part of the space an electron is most likely to be located .
Orbitals are a result of solving the Schrödinger equation for electrons in atoms .
The electron spin is a different kind of property .
It is a completely quantum phenomenon with no analogues in the classical realm .
In addition , it can not be derived from solving the Schrödinger equation and is not related to the normal spatial coordinates ( such as the Cartesian x , y , and z ) .
Electron spin describes an intrinsic electron `` rotation '' or `` spinning . ''
Each electron acts as a tiny magnet or a tiny rotating object with an angular momentum , or as a loop with an electric current , even though this rotation or current can not be observed in terms of spatial coordinates .
The magnitude of the overall electron spin can only have one value , and an electron can only “ spin ” in one of two quantized states .
One is termed the α state , with the z component of the spin being in the positive direction of the z axis .
This corresponds to the spin quantum number The other is called the β state , with the z component of the spin being negative and one of those two values of the spin quantum number .
The energies of electrons having different if an external magnetic field is applied .
Any electron , regardless of the atomic orbital it is located in , can only have are and illustrates this phenomenon .
An electron acts like a tiny magnet .
This is why an electron with has a slightly lower energy in an external field in the positive z direction , and an electron with has a slightly higher energy in the same field .
This is true even for an electron occupying the same orbital in an atom .
A spectral line corresponding to a transition for electrons from the same orbital but with different spin quantum numbers has two possible values of energy ; thus , the line in the spectrum will show a fine structure splitting .
An electron in an atom is completely described by four quantum numbers : n , l , m , and m .
The first three quantum numbers define the orbital and the fourth quantum number describes the intrinsic electron property called spin .
An Austrian physicist Wolfgang Pauli formulated a general principle that gives the last piece of information that we need to understand the general behavior of electrons in atoms .
The Pauli exclusion principle can be formulated as follows : No two electrons in the same atom can have exactly the same set of all the four quantum numbers .
What this means is that two electrons can share the same orbital ( the same set of the quantum numbers n , l , and m ) only if their spin quantum numbers m have different values .
Since the spin quantum number can only have two values no more than two electrons can occupy the same orbital ( and if two electrons are located in the same orbital , they must have opposite spins ) .
Therefore , any atomic orbital can be populated by only zero , one , or two electrons .
The properties and meaning of the quantum numbers of electrons in atoms are briefly summarized in .
Indicate the number of subshells , the number of orbitals in each subshell , and the values of l and m for the orbitals in the n = 4 shell of an atom .
For n = 4 , l can have values of 0 , 1 , 2 , and 3 .
Thus , s , p , d , and f subshells are found in the n = 4 shell of an atom .
For l = 0 ( the s subshell ) , m can only be 0 .
Thus , there is only one 4 s orbital .
For l = 1 ( p -type orbitals ) , m can have values of –1 , 0 , +1 , so we find three 4 p orbitals .
For l = 2 ( d -type orbitals ) , m can have values of –2 , –1 , 0 , +1 , +2 , so we have five 4 d orbitals .
When l = 3 ( f -type orbitals ) , m can have values of –3 , –2 , –1 , 0 , +1 , +2 , +3 , and we can have seven 4 f orbitals .
Thus , we find a total of 16 orbitals in the n = 4 shell of an atom .
Identify the subshell in which electrons with the following quantum numbers are found : ( a ) n = 3 , l = 1 ; ( b ) n = 5 , l = 3 ; ( c ) n = 2 , l = 0 .
Note you are only looking at the orbitals with the specified n value , not those at lower energies .
( a ) When n = 2 , there are four orbitals ( a single 2 s orbital , and three orbitals labeled 2 p ) .
These four orbitals can contain eight electrons .
( b ) When n = 5 , there are five subshells of orbitals that we need to sum : Again , each orbital holds two electrons , so 50 electrons can fit in this shell .
( c ) The number of orbitals in any shell n will equal n the maximum number of electrons will be 2 n .
If a shell contains a maximum of 32 electrons , what is the principal quantum number , n ?
The number of radial nodes is equal to n – l – 1 .
How many orbitals have l = 2 and n = 3 ?
This allows us to determine which orbitals are occupied by electrons in each atom .
The specific arrangement of electrons in orbitals of an atom determines many of the chemical properties of that atom .
The energy of atomic orbitals increases as the principal quantum number , n , increases .
The 1 s orbital at the bottom of the diagram is the orbital with electrons of lowest energy .
The energy increases as we move up to the 2 s and then 2 p , 3 s , and 3 p orbitals , showing that the increasing n value has more influence on energy than the increasing l value for small atoms .
However , this pattern does not hold for larger atoms .
The 3 d orbital is higher in energy than the 4 s orbital .
Such overlaps continue to occur frequently as we move up the chart .
Electrons in successive atoms on the periodic table tend to fill low-energy orbitals first .
Thus , many students find it confusing that , for example , the 5 p orbitals fill immediately after the 4 d , and immediately before the 6 s .
The filling order is based on observed experimental results , and has been confirmed by theoretical calculations .
As the principal quantum number , n , increases , the size of the orbital increases and the electrons spend more time farther from the nucleus .
Thus , the attraction to the nucleus is weaker and the energy associated with the orbital is higher ( less stabilized ) .
But this is not the only effect we have to take into account .
Within each shell , as the value of l increases , the electrons are less penetrating ( meaning there is less electron density found close to the nucleus ) , in the order s > p > d > f .
Electrons that are closer to the nucleus slightly repel electrons that are farther out , offsetting the more dominant electron–nucleus attractions slightly ( recall that all electrons have −1 charges , but nuclei have + Z charges ) .
This phenomenon is called shielding and will be discussed in more detail in the next section .
Electrons in orbitals that experience more shielding are less stabilized and thus higher in energy .
For small orbitals ( 1 s through 3 p ) , the increase in energy due to n is more significant than the increase due to l ; however , for larger orbitals the two trends are comparable and can not be simply predicted .
We will discuss methods for remembering the observed order .
The arrangement of electrons in the orbitals of an atom is called the electron configuration of the atom .
For example , the notation 2 p ( read `` two–p–four '' ) indicates four electrons in a p subshell ( l = 1 ) with a principal quantum number ( n ) of 2 .
The notation 3 d ( read `` three–d–eight '' ) indicates eight electrons in the d subshell ( i.e. , l = 2 ) of the principal shell for which n = 3 .
To determine the electron configuration for any particular atom , we can “ build ” the structures in the order of atomic numbers .
Beginning with hydrogen , and continuing across the periods of the periodic table , we add one proton at a time to the nucleus and one electron to the proper subshell until we have described the electron configurations of all the elements .
This procedure is called the Aufbau principle , from the German word Aufbau ( “ to build up ” ) .
Each added electron occupies the subshell of lowest energy available ( in the order shown in ) , subject to the limitations imposed by the allowed quantum numbers according to the Pauli exclusion principle .
Electrons enter higher-energy subshells only after lower-energy subshells have been filled to capacity .
illustrates the traditional way to remember the filling order for atomic orbitals .
Since the arrangement of the periodic table is based on the electron configurations , provides an alternative method for determining the electron configuration .
The filling order simply begins at hydrogen and includes each subshell as you proceed in increasing Z order .
For example , after filling the 3 p block up to Ar , we see the orbital will be 4s ( K , Ca ) , followed by the 3 d orbitals .
We will now construct the ground-state electron configuration and orbital diagram for a selection of atoms in the first and second periods of the periodic table .
Orbital diagrams are pictorial representations of the electron configuration , showing the individual orbitals and the pairing arrangement of electrons .
We start with a single hydrogen atom ( atomic number 1 ) , which consists of one proton and one electron .
Referring to or , we would expect to find the electron in the 1 s orbital .
By convention , the value is usually filled first .
The electron configuration and the orbital diagram are : Following hydrogen is the noble gas helium , which has an atomic number of 2 .
The helium atom contains two protons and two electrons .
The first electron has the same four quantum numbers as the hydrogen atom electron ( n = 1 , l = 0 , m = 0 , ) .
The second electron also goes into the 1 s orbital and fills that orbital .
For orbital diagrams , this means two arrows go in each box ( representing two electrons in each orbital ) and the arrows must point in opposite directions ( representing paired spins ) .
The electron configuration and orbital diagram of helium are : The n = 1 shell is completely filled in a helium atom .
The next atom is the alkali metal lithium with an atomic number of 3 .
The first two electrons in lithium fill the 1 s orbital and have the same sets of four quantum numbers as the two electrons in helium .
The remaining electron must occupy the orbital of next lowest energy , the 2 s orbital ( or ) .
Thus , the electron configuration and orbital diagram of lithium are : An atom of the alkaline earth metal beryllium , with an atomic number of 4 , contains four protons in the nucleus and four electrons surrounding the nucleus .
The fourth electron fills the remaining space in the 2 s orbital .
An atom of boron ( atomic number 5 ) contains five electrons .
The n = 1 shell is filled with two electrons and three electrons will occupy the n = 2 shell .
Because any s subshell can contain only two electrons , the fifth electron must occupy the next energy level , which will be a 2 p orbital .
There are three degenerate 2 p orbitals ( m = −1 , 0 , +1 ) and the electron can occupy any one of these p orbitals .
When drawing orbital diagrams , we include empty boxes to depict any empty orbitals in the same subshell that we are filling .
Carbon ( atomic number 6 ) has six electrons .
Four of them fill the 1 s and 2 s orbitals .
The remaining two electrons occupy the 2 p subshell .
We now have a choice of filling one of the 2 p orbitals and pairing the electrons or of leaving the electrons unpaired in two different , but degenerate , p orbitals .
The orbitals are filled as described by Hund ’ s rule : the lowest-energy configuration for an atom with electrons within a set of degenerate orbitals is that having the maximum number of unpaired electrons .
Thus , the two electrons in the carbon 2 p orbitals have identical n , l , and m quantum numbers and differ in their m quantum number ( in accord with the Pauli exclusion principle ) .
The electron configuration and orbital diagram for carbon are : Nitrogen ( atomic number 7 ) fills the 1 s and 2 s subshells and has one electron in each of the three 2 p orbitals , in accordance with Hund ’ s rule .
These three electrons have unpaired spins .
Oxygen ( atomic number 8 ) has a pair of electrons in any one of the 2 p orbitals ( the electrons have opposite spins ) and a single electron in each of the other two .
Fluorine ( atomic number 9 ) has only one 2 p orbital containing an unpaired electron .
All of the electrons in the noble gas neon ( atomic number 10 ) are paired , and all of the orbitals in the n = 1 and the n = 2 shells are filled .
The electron configurations and orbital diagrams of these four elements are : The alkali metal sodium ( atomic number 11 ) has one more electron than the neon atom .
This electron must go into the lowest-energy subshell available , the 3 s orbital , giving a 1 s 2 s 2 p 3 s configuration .
The electrons occupying the outermost shell orbital ( s ) ( highest value of n ) are called valence electrons , and those occupying the inner shell orbitals are called core electrons .
Since the core electron shells correspond to noble gas electron configurations , we can abbreviate electron configurations by writing the noble gas that matches the core electron configuration , along with the valence electrons in a condensed format .
For our sodium example , the symbol [ Ne ] represents core electrons , ( 1 s 2 s 2 p ) and our abbreviated or condensed configuration is [ Ne ] 3 s .
Similarly , the abbreviated configuration of lithium can be represented as [ He ] 2 s , where [ He ] represents the configuration of the helium atom , which is identical to that of the filled inner shell of lithium .
Writing the configurations in this way emphasizes the similarity of the configurations of lithium and sodium .
Both atoms , which are in the alkali metal family , have only one electron in a valence s subshell outside a filled set of inner shells .
The alkaline earth metal magnesium ( atomic number 12 ) , with its 12 electrons in a [ Ne ] 3 s configuration , is analogous to its family member beryllium , [ He ] 2 s .
Both atoms have a filled s subshell outside their filled inner shells .
Aluminum ( atomic number 13 ) , with 13 electrons and the electron configuration [ Ne ] 3 s 3 p , is analogous to its family member boron , [ He ] 2 s 2 p .
When we come to the next element in the periodic table , the alkali metal potassium ( atomic number 19 ) , we might expect that we would begin to add electrons to the 3 d subshell .
However , all available chemical and physical evidence indicates that potassium is like lithium and sodium , and that the next electron is not added to the 3 d level but is , instead , added to the 4 s level .
As discussed previously , the 3 d orbital with no radial nodes is higher in energy because it is less penetrating and more shielded from the nucleus than the 4 s , which has three radial nodes .
Thus , potassium has an electron configuration of [ Ar ] 4 s .
Hence , potassium corresponds to Li and Na in its valence shell configuration .
The next electron is added to complete the 4 s subshell and calcium has an electron configuration of [ Ar ] 4 s .
This gives calcium an outer-shell electron configuration corresponding to that of beryllium and magnesium .
Beginning with the transition metal scandium ( atomic number 21 ) , additional electrons are added successively to the 3 d subshell .
The 4 p subshell fills next .
What is the electron configuration and orbital diagram for a phosphorus atom ?
What are the four quantum numbers for the last electron added ?
The atomic number of phosphorus is 15 .
Thus , a phosphorus atom contains 15 electrons .
The order of filling of the energy levels is 1 s , 2 s , 2 p , 3 s , 3 p , 4 s , .
The 15 electrons of the phosphorus atom will fill up to the 3 p orbital , which will contain three electrons : The last electron added is a 3 p electron .
Therefore , n = 3 and , for a p -type orbital , l = 1 .
The m value could be –1 , 0 , or +1 .
The three p orbitals are degenerate , so any of these m values is correct .
However , we do find exceptions to the order of filling of orbitals that are shown in or .
For instance , the electron configurations ( shown in ) of the transition metals chromium ( Cr ; atomic number 24 ) and copper ( Cu ; atomic number 29 ) , among others , are not those we would expect .
In general , such exceptions involve subshells with very similar energy , and small effects can lead to changes in the order of filling .
In the case of Cr and Cu , we find that half-filled and completely filled subshells apparently represent conditions of preferred stability .
This stability is such that an electron shifts from the 4 s into the 3 d orbital to gain the extra stability of a half-filled 3 d subshell ( in Cr ) or a filled 3 d subshell ( in Cu ) .
Other exceptions also occur .
For example , niobium ( Nb , atomic number 41 ) is predicted to have the electron configuration [ Kr ] 5 s 4 d .
Experimentally , we observe that its ground-state electron configuration is actually [ Kr ] 5 s 4 d .
We can rationalize this observation by saying that the electron–electron repulsions experienced by pairing the electrons in the 5 s orbital are larger than the gap in energy between the 5 s and 4 d orbitals .
There is no simple method to predict the exceptions for atoms where the magnitude of the repulsions between electrons is greater than the small differences in energy between subshells .
As described earlier , the periodic table arranges atoms based on increasing atomic number so that elements with the same chemical properties recur periodically .
When their electron configurations are added to the table , we also see a periodic recurrence of similar electron configurations in the outer shells of these elements .
Because they are in the outer shells of an atom , valence electrons play the most important role in chemical reactions .
The outer electrons have the highest energy of the electrons in an atom and are more easily lost or shared than the core electrons .
Valence electrons are also the determining factor in some physical properties of the elements .
The similarity in chemical properties among elements of the same group occurs because they have the same number of valence electrons .
It is the loss , gain , or sharing of valence electrons that defines how elements react .
It is important to remember that the periodic table was developed on the basis of the chemical behavior of the elements , well before any idea of their atomic structure was available .
Now we can understand why the periodic table has the arrangement it has—the arrangement puts elements whose atoms have the same number of valence electrons in the same group .
This arrangement is emphasized in , which shows in periodic-table form the electron configuration of the last subshell to be filled by the Aufbau principle .
The colored sections of show the three categories of elements classified by the orbitals being filled : main group , transition , and inner transition elements .
These classifications determine which orbitals are counted in the valence shell , or highest energy level orbitals of an atom .
Main group elements ( sometimes called representative elements ) are those in which the last electron added enters an s or a p orbital in the outermost shell , shown in blue and red in .
This category includes all the nonmetallic elements , as well as many metals and the metalloids .
The valence electrons for main group elements are those with the highest n level .
For example , gallium ( Ga , atomic number 31 ) has the electron configuration [ Ar ] 4 s 3 d 4 p , which contains three valence electrons ( underlined ) .
The completely filled d orbitals count as core , not valence , electrons .
Transition elements or transition metals .
These are metallic elements in which the last electron added enters a d orbital .
The valence electrons ( those added after the last noble gas configuration ) in these elements include the ns and ( n – 1 ) d electrons .
The official IUPAC definition of transition elements specifies those with partially filled d orbitals .
Thus , the elements with completely filled orbitals ( Zn , Cd , Hg , as well as Cu , Ag , and Au in ) are not technically transition elements .
However , the term is frequently used to refer to the entire d block ( colored yellow in ) , and we will adopt this usage in this textbook .
Inner transition elements are metallic elements in which the last electron added occupies an f orbital .
They are shown in green in .
The valence shells of the inner transition elements consist of the ( n – 2 ) f , the ( n – 1 ) d , and the ns subshells .
Ions are formed when atoms gain or lose electrons .
A cation ( positively charged ion ) forms when one or more electrons are removed from a parent atom .
For main group elements , the electrons that were added last are the first electrons removed .
An anion ( negatively charged ion ) forms when one or more electrons are added to a parent atom .
The added electrons fill in the order predicted by the Aufbau principle .
What is the electron configuration of : ( a ) Na ( b ) P ( c ) Al ( d ) Fe ( e ) Sm First , write out the electron configuration for each parent atom .
We have chosen to show the full , unabbreviated configurations to provide more practice for students who want it , but listing the coreabbreviated electron configurations is also acceptable .
Next , determine whether an electron is gained or lost .
Remember electrons are negatively charged , so ions with a positive charge have lost an electron .
For main group elements , the last orbital gains or loses the electron .
For transition metals , the last s orbital loses an electron before the d orbitals .
( a ) Na : 1 s 2 s 2 p 3 s .
Sodium cation loses one electron , so Na : 1 s 2 s 2 p 3 s = Na : 1 s 2 s 2 p .
( b ) P : 1 s 2 s 2 p 3 s 3 p .
Phosphorus trianion gains three electrons , so P : 1 s 2 s 2 p 3 s 3 p .
( c ) Al : 1 s 2 s 2 p 3 s 3 p .
Aluminum dication loses two electrons Al : 1 s 2 s 2 p 3 s 3 p = Al : 1 s 2 s 2 p 3 s .
( d ) Fe : 1 s 2 s 2 p 3 s 3 p 4 s 3 d .
( e ) .
Sm : 1 s 2 s 2 p 3 s 3 p 4 s 3 d 4 p 5 s 4 d 5 p 6 s 4 f .
Samarium trication loses three electrons .
The first two will be lost from the 6 s orbital , and the final one is removed from the 4 f orbital .
Which ion with a +2 charge has the electron configuration 1 s 2 s 2 p 3 s 3 p 3 d 4 s 4 p 4 d ?
Which ion with a +3 charge has this configuration ?
This similarity occurs because the members of a group have the same number and distribution of electrons in their valence shells .
However , there are also other patterns in chemical properties on the periodic table .
For example , as we move down a group , the metallic character of the atoms increases .
Oxygen , at the top of group 16 ( 6A ) , is a colorless gas ; in the middle of the group , selenium is a semiconducting solid ; and , toward the bottom , polonium is a silver-grey solid that conducts electricity .
As we go across a period from left to right , we add a proton to the nucleus and an electron to the valence shell with each successive element .
As we go down the elements in a group , the number of electrons in the valence shell remains constant , but the principal quantum number increases by one each time .
An understanding of the electronic structure of the elements allows us to examine some of the properties that govern their chemical behavior .
These properties vary periodically as the electronic structure of the elements changes .
They are ( 1 ) size ( radius ) of atoms and ions , ( 2 ) ionization energies , and ( 3 ) electron affinities .
The quantum mechanical picture makes it difficult to establish a definite size of an atom .
However , there are several practical ways to define the radius of atoms and , thus , to determine their relative sizes that give roughly similar values .
We will use the covalent radius , which is defined as one-half the distance between the nuclei of two identical atoms when they are joined by a covalent bond ( this measurement is possible because atoms within molecules still retain much of their atomic identity ) .
We know that as we scan down a group , the principal quantum number , n , increases by one for each element .
Thus , the electrons are being added to a region of space that is increasingly distant from the nucleus .
Consequently , the size of the atom ( and its covalent radius ) must increase as we increase the distance of the outermost electrons from the nucleus .
This trend is illustrated for the covalent radii of the halogens in and .
The trends for the entire periodic table can be seen in .
As shown in , as we move across a period from left to right , we generally find that each element has a smaller covalent radius than the element preceding it .
This might seem counterintuitive because it implies that atoms with more electrons have a smaller atomic radius .
This can be explained with the concept of effective nuclear charge , Z .
This is the pull exerted on a specific electron by the nucleus , taking into account any electron–electron repulsions .
For hydrogen , there is only one electron and so the nuclear charge ( Z ) and the effective nuclear charge ( Z ) are equal .
Core electrons are adept at shielding , while electrons in the same valence shell do not block the nuclear attraction experienced by each other as efficiently .
Thus , each time we move from one element to the next across a period , Z increases by one , but the shielding increases only slightly .
Thus , Z increases as we move from left to right across a period .
The stronger pull ( higher effective nuclear charge ) experienced by electrons on the right side of the periodic table draws them closer to the nucleus , making the covalent radii smaller .
Thus , as we would expect , the outermost or valence electrons are easiest to remove because they have the highest energies , are shielded more , and are farthest from the nucleus .
As a general rule , when the representative elements form cations , they do so by the loss of the ns or np electrons that were added last in the Aufbau process .
The transition elements , on the other hand , lose the ns electrons before they begin to lose the ( n – 1 ) d electrons , even though the ns electrons are added first , according to the Aufbau principle .
Predict the order of increasing covalent radius for Ge , Fl , Br , Kr .
Radius increases as we move down a group , so Ge < Fl ( Note : Fl is the symbol for flerovium , element 114 , NOT fluorine ) .
Radius decreases as we move across a period , so Kr < Br < Ge .
Putting the trends together , we obtain Kr < Br < Ge < Fl .
Give an example of an atom whose size is smaller than fluorine .
Answer : Ne or He Ionic radius is the measure used to describe the size of an ion .
A cation always has fewer electrons and the same number of protons as the parent atom ; it is smaller than the atom from which it is derived .
For example , the covalent radius of an aluminum atom ( 1 s 2 s 2 p 3 s 3 p ) is 118 pm , whereas the ionic radius of an Al ( 1 s 2 s 2 p ) is 68 pm .
As electrons are removed from the outer valence shell , the remaining core electrons occupying smaller shells experience a greater effective nuclear charge Z ( as discussed ) and are drawn even closer to the nucleus .
Cations with larger charges are smaller than cations with smaller charges ( e.g. , V has an ionic radius of 79 pm , while that of V is 64 pm ) .
Proceeding down the groups of the periodic table , we find that cations of successive elements with the same charge generally have larger radii , corresponding to an increase in the principal quantum number , n .
An anion ( negative ion ) is formed by the addition of one or more electrons to the valence shell of an atom .
This results in a greater repulsion among the electrons and a decrease in Z per electron .
Both effects ( the increased number of electrons and the decreased Z ) cause the radius of an anion to be larger than that of the parent atom .
For example , a sulfur atom ( [ Ne ] 3 s 3 p ) has a covalent radius of 104 pm , whereas the ionic radius of the sulfide anion ( [ Ne ] 3 s 3 p ) is 170 pm .
For consecutive elements proceeding down any group , anions have larger principal quantum numbers and , thus , larger radii .
Atoms and ions that have the same electron configuration are said to be isoelectronic .
Examples of isoelectronic species are N , O , F , Ne , Na , Mg , and Al ( 1 s 2 s 2 p ) .
Another isoelectronic series is P , S , Cl , Ar , K , Ca , and Sc ( [ Ne ] 3 s 3 p ) .
For atoms or ions that are isoelectronic , the number of protons determines the size .
The greater the nuclear charge , the smaller the radius in a series of isoelectronic ions and atoms .
The amount of energy required to remove the most loosely bound electron from a gaseous atom in its ground state is called its first ionization energy ( IE ) .
The first ionization energy for an element , X , is the energy required to form a cation with +1 charge : The energy required to remove the second most loosely bound electron is called the second ionization energy ( IE ) .
The energy required to remove the third electron is the third ionization energy , and so on .
Energy is always required to remove electrons from atoms or ions , so ionization processes are endothermic and IE values are always positive .
For larger atoms , the most loosely bound electron is located farther from the nucleus and so is easier to remove .
Thus , as size ( atomic radius ) increases , the ionization energy should decrease .
Relating this logic to what we have just learned about radii , we would expect first ionization energies to decrease down a group and to increase across a period .
graphs the relationship between the first ionization energy and the atomic number of several elements .
The values of first ionization energy for the elements are given in .
Within a period , the IE generally increases with increasing Z .
Down a group , the IE value generally decreases with increasing Z .
There are some systematic deviations from this trend , however .
Note that the ionization energy of boron ( atomic number 5 ) is less than that of beryllium ( atomic number 4 ) even though the nuclear charge of boron is greater by one proton .
This can be explained because the energy of the subshells increases as l increases , due to penetration and shielding ( as discussed previously in this chapter ) .
Within any one shell , the s electrons are lower in energy than the p electrons .
This means that an s electron is harder to remove from an atom than a p electron in the same shell .
Thus , we see a small deviation from the predicted trend occurring each time a new subshell begins .
Another deviation occurs as orbitals become more than one-half filled .
The first ionization energy for oxygen is slightly less than that for nitrogen , despite the trend in increasing IE values across a period .
Looking at the orbital diagram of oxygen , we can see that removing one electron will eliminate the electron–electron repulsion caused by pairing the electrons in the 2 p orbital and will result in a half-filled orbital ( which is energetically favorable ) .
Analogous changes occur in succeeding periods ( note the dip for sulfur after phosphorus in ) .
Removing an electron from a cation is more difficult than removing an electron from a neutral atom because of the greater electrostatic attraction to the cation .
Likewise , removing an electron from a cation with a higher positive charge is more difficult than removing an electron from an ion with a lower charge .
Thus , successive ionization energies for one element always increase .
As seen in , there is a large increase in the ionization energies for each element .
This jump corresponds to removal of the core electrons , which are harder to remove than the valence electrons .
For example , Sc and Ga both have three valence electrons , so the rapid increase in ionization energy occurs after the third ionization .
Predict the order of increasing energy for the following processes : IE for Al , IE for Tl , IE for Na , IE for Al .
The second ionization energy for sodium removes a core electron , which is a much higher energy process than removing valence electrons .
Putting this all together , we obtain : IE ( Tl ) < IE ( Al ) < IE ( Al ) < IE ( Na ) .
Which has the lowest value for IE : O , Po , Pb , or Ba ?
from the nucleus , so IE ( Tl ) < IE ( Al ) .
is farther Answer : Ba The electron affinity ( EA ) is the energy change for the process of adding an electron to a gaseous atom to form an anion ( negative ion ) .
This process can be either endothermic or exothermic , depending on the element .
The EA of some of the elements is given in .
You can see that many of these elements have negative values of EA , which means that energy is released when the gaseous atom accepts an electron .
However , for some elements , energy is required for the atom to become negatively charged and the value of their EA is positive .
Just as with ionization energy , subsequent EA values are associated with forming ions with more charge .
The second EA is the energy associated with adding an electron to an anion to form a –2 ion , and so on .
As we might predict , it becomes easier to add an electron across a series of atoms as the effective nuclear charge of the atoms increases .
We find , as we go from left to right across a period , EAs tend to become more negative .
The exceptions found among the elements of group 2 ( 2A ) , group 15 ( 5A ) , and group 18 ( 8A ) can be understood based on the electronic structure of these groups .
The noble gases , group 18 ( 8A ) , have a completely filled shell and the incoming electron must be added to a higher n level , which is more difficult to do .
Group 2 ( 2A ) has a filled ns subshell , and so the next electron added goes into the higher energy np , so , again , the observed EA value is not as the trend would predict .
Finally , group 15 ( 5A ) has a half-filled np subshell and the next electron must be paired with an existing np electron .
In all of these cases , the initial relative stability of the electron configuration disrupts the trend in EA .
We also might expect the atom at the top of each group to have the most negative EA ; their first ionization potentials suggest that these atoms have the largest effective nuclear charges .
However , as we move down a group , we see that the second element in the group most often has the most negative EA .
This can be attributed to the small size of the n = 2 shell and the resulting large electron–electron repulsions .
For example , chlorine , with an EA value of –348 kJ/ mol , has the highest value of any element in the periodic table .
The EA of fluorine is –322 kJ/mol .
When we add an electron to a fluorine atom to form a fluoride anion ( F ) , we add an electron to the n = 2 shell .
The electron is attracted to the nucleus , but there is also significant repulsion from the other electrons already present in this small valence shell .
The chlorine atom has the same electron configuration in the valence shell , but because the entering electron is going into the n = 3 shell , it occupies a considerably larger region of space and the electron–electron repulsions are reduced .
The entering electron does not experience as much repulsion and the chlorine atom accepts an additional electron more readily , resulting in a more negative EA .
The properties discussed in this section ( size of atoms and ions , effective nuclear charge , ionization energies , and electron affinities ) are central to understanding chemical reactivity .
For example , because fluorine has an energetically favorable EA and a large energy barrier to ionization ( IE ) , it is much easier to form fluorine anions than cations .
Metallic properties including conductivity and malleability ( the ability to be formed into sheets ) depend on having electrons that can be removed easily .
Thus , metallic character increases as we move down a group and decreases across a period in the same trend observed for atomic size because it is easier to remove an electron that is farther away from the nucleus .
It has long been known that pure carbon occurs in different forms ( allotropes ) including graphite and diamonds .
But it was not until 1985 that a new form of carbon was recognized : buckminsterfullerene .
This molecule was named after the architect and inventor R. Buckminster Fuller ( 1895–1983 ) , whose signature architectural design was the geodesic dome , characterized by a lattice shell structure supporting a spherical surface .
Experimental evidence revealed the formula , C , and then scientists determined how 60 carbon atoms could form one symmetric , stable molecule .
They were guided by bonding theory—the topic of this chapter—which explains how individual atoms connect to form more complex structures .
A cation ( a positive ion ) forms when a neutral atom loses one or more electrons from its valence shell , and an anion ( a negative ion ) forms when a neutral atom gains one or more electrons in its valence shell .
Compounds composed of ions are called ionic compounds ( or salts ) , and their constituent ions are held together by ionic bonds : electrostatic forces of attraction between oppositely charged cations and anions .
The properties of ionic compounds shed some light on the nature of ionic bonds .
Ionic solids exhibit a crystalline structure and tend to be rigid and brittle ; they also tend to have high melting and boiling points , which suggests that ionic bonds are very strong .
Ionic solids are also poor conductors of electricity for the same reason—the strength of ionic bonds prevents ions from moving freely in the solid state .
Most ionic solids , however , dissolve readily in water .
Once dissolved or melted , ionic compounds are excellent conductors of electricity and heat because the ions can move about freely .
Neutral atoms and their associated ions have very different physical and chemical properties .
Sodium atoms form sodium metal , a soft , silvery-white metal that burns vigorously in air and reacts explosively with water .
Chlorine atoms form chlorine gas , Cl , a yellow-green gas that is extremely corrosive to most metals and very poisonous to animals and plants .
The vigorous reaction between the elements sodium and chlorine forms the white , crystalline compound sodium chloride , common table salt , which contains sodium cations and chloride anions .
The compound composed of these ions exhibits properties entirely different from the properties of the elements sodium and chlorine .
Chlorine is poisonous , but sodium chloride is essential to life ; sodium atoms react vigorously with water , but sodium chloride simply dissolves in water .
Binary ionic compounds are composed of just two elements : a metal ( which forms the cations ) and a nonmetal ( which forms the anions ) .
For example , NaCl is a binary ionic compound .
We can think about the formation of such compounds in terms of the periodic properties of the elements .
Many metallic elements have relatively low ionization potentials and lose electrons easily .
These elements lie to the left in a period or near the bottom of a group on the periodic table .
Nonmetal atoms have relatively high electron affinities and thus readily gain electrons lost by metal atoms , thereby filling their valence shells .
Nonmetallic elements are found in the upper-right corner of the periodic table .
As all substances must be electrically neutral , the total number of positive charges on the cations of an ionic compound must equal the total number of negative charges on its anions .
The formula of an ionic compound represents the simplest ratio of the numbers of ions necessary to give identical numbers of positive and negative charges .
For example , the formula for aluminum oxide , Al O , indicates that this ionic compound contains two aluminum cations , Al , for every three oxide anions , O [ thus , ( 2 +3 ) + ( 3 –2 ) = 0 ] .
It is important to note , however , that the formula for an ionic compound does not represent the physical arrangement of its ions .
It is incorrect to refer to a sodium chloride ( NaCl ) “ molecule ” because there is not a single ionic bond , per se , between any specific pair of sodium and chloride ions .
The attractive forces between ions are isotropic—the same in all directions—meaning that any particular ion is equally attracted to all of the nearby ions of opposite charge .
This results in the ions arranging themselves into a tightly bound , three-dimensional lattice structure .
Sodium chloride , for example , consists of a regular arrangement of equal numbers of Na cations and Cl anions .
The strong electrostatic attraction between Na and Cl ions holds them tightly together in solid NaCl .
For example , calcium is a group 2 element whose neutral atoms have 20 electrons and a ground state electron configuration of 1 s 2 s 2 p 3 s 3 p 4 s .
When a Ca atom loses both of its valence electrons , the result is a cation with 18 electrons , a 2+ charge , and an electron configuration of 1 s 2 s 2 p 3 s 3 p .
The Ca ion is therefore isoelectronic with the noble gas Ar .
For groups 13–17 , the group numbers exceed the number of valence electrons by 10 ( accounting for the possibility of full d subshells in atoms of elements in the fourth and greater periods ) .
Thus , the charge of a cation formed by the loss of all valence electrons is equal to the group number minus 10 .
For example , aluminum ( in group 13 ) forms 3+ ions ( Al ) .
Exceptions to the expected behavior involve elements toward the bottom of the groups .
In addition to the expected ions Tl , Sn , Pb , and Bi , a partial loss of these atoms ’ valence shell electrons can also lead to the formation of Tl , Sn , Pb , and Bi ions .
Mercury ( group 12 ) also exhibits an unexpected behavior : it forms a diatomic ion , from two mercury atoms , with an Hg-Hg bond ) , in addition to the expected monatomic ion Hg ( formed from only one mercury atom ) .
Transition and inner transition metal elements behave differently than main group elements .
Most transition metal cations have 2+ or 3+ charges that result from the loss of their outermost s electron ( s ) first , sometimes followed by the loss of one or two d electrons from the next-to-outermost shell .
Although the d orbitals of the transition elements are—according to the Aufbau principle—the last to fill when building up electron configurations , the outermost s electrons are the first to be lost when these atoms ionize .
When the inner transition metals form ions , they usually have a 3+ charge , resulting from the loss of their outermost s electrons and a d or f electron .
There are at least 14 elements categorized as “ essential trace elements ” for the human body .
They are called “ essential ” because they are required for healthy bodily functions , “ trace ” because they are required only in small amounts , and “ elements ” in spite of the fact that they are really ions .
Two of these essential trace elements , chromium and zinc , are required as Cr and Zn .
Write the electron configurations of these cations .
First , write the electron configuration for the neutral atoms : Zn : [ Ar ] 3 d 4 s Cr : [ Ar ] 3 d 4 s Next , remove electrons from the highest energy orbital .
For the transition metals , electrons are removed from the s orbital first and then from the d orbital .
For the p -block elements , electrons are removed from the p orbitals and then from the s orbital .
Zinc is a member of group 12 , so it should have a charge of 2+ , and thus loses only the two electrons in its s orbital .
Chromium is a transition element and should lose its s electrons and then its d electrons when forming a cation .
Thus , we find the following electron configurations of the ions : Zn : [ Ar ] 3 d Cr : [ Ar ] 3 d Potassium and magnesium are required in our diet .
Write the electron configurations of the ions expected from these elements .
Answer : K : [ Ar ] , Mg : [ Ne ] Most monatomic anions form when a neutral nonmetal atom gains enough electrons to completely fill its outer s and p orbitals , thereby reaching the electron configuration of the next noble gas .
Thus , it is simple to determine the charge on such a negative ion : The charge is equal to the number of electrons that must be gained to fill the s and p orbitals of the parent atom .
Oxygen , for example , has the electron configuration 1 s 2 s 2 p , whereas the oxygen anion has the electron configuration of the noble gas neon ( Ne ) , 1 s 2 s 2 p .
The two additional electrons required to fill the valence orbitals give the oxide ion the charge of 2– ( O ) .
Selenium and iodine are two essential trace elements that form anions .
Write the electron configurations of the anions .
Se : [ Ar ] 3 d 4 s 4 p I : [ Kr ] 4 d 5 s 5 p Write the electron configurations of a phosphorus atom and its negative ion .
Give the charge on the anion .
A different type of bonding results from the mutual attraction of atoms for a “ shared ” pair of electrons .
Such bonds are called covalent bonds .
Covalent bonds are formed between two atoms when both have similar tendencies to attract electrons to themselves ( i.e. , when both atoms have identical or fairly similar ionization energies and electron affinities ) .
For example , two hydrogen atoms bond covalently to form an H molecule ; each hydrogen atom in the H molecule has two electrons stabilizing it , giving each atom the same number of valence electrons as the noble gas He .
Compounds that contain covalent bonds exhibit different physical properties than ionic compounds .
Because the attraction between molecules , which are electrically neutral , is weaker than that between electrically charged ions , covalent compounds generally have much lower melting and boiling points than ionic compounds .
In fact , many covalent compounds are liquids or gases at room temperature , and , in their solid states , they are typically much softer than ionic solids .
Furthermore , whereas ionic compounds are good conductors of electricity when dissolved in water , most covalent compounds are insoluble in water ; since they are electrically neutral , they are poor conductors of electricity in any state .
Nonmetal atoms frequently form covalent bonds with other nonmetal atoms .
For example , the hydrogen molecule , H , contains a covalent bond between its two hydrogen atoms .
illustrates why this bond is formed .
Starting on the far right , we have two separate hydrogen atoms with a particular potential energy , indicated by the red line .
Along the x -axis is the distance between the two atoms .
As the two atoms approach each other ( moving left along the x -axis ) , their valence orbitals ( 1 s ) begin to overlap .
The single electrons on each hydrogen atom then interact with both atomic nuclei , occupying the space around both atoms .
The strong attraction of each shared electron to both nuclei stabilizes the system , and the potential energy decreases as the bond distance decreases .
If the atoms continue to approach each other , the positive charges in the two nuclei begin to repel each other , and the potential energy increases .
The bond length is determined by the distance at which the lowest potential energy is achieved .
It is essential to remember that energy must be added to break chemical bonds ( an endothermic process ) , whereas forming chemical bonds releases energy ( an exothermic process ) .
We refer to this as a pure covalent bond .
Electrons shared in pure covalent bonds have an equal probability of being near each nucleus .
Since the bonding atoms are identical , Cl also features a pure covalent bond .
When the atoms linked by a covalent bond are different , the bonding electrons are shared , but no longer equally .
Instead , the bonding electrons are more attracted to one atom than the other , giving rise to a shift of electron density toward that atom .
This unequal distribution of electrons is known as a polar covalent bond , characterized by a partial positive charge on one atom and a partial negative charge on the other .
The atom that attracts the electrons more strongly acquires the partial negative charge and vice versa .
For example , the electrons in the H–Cl bond of a hydrogen chloride molecule spend more time near the chlorine atom than near the hydrogen atom .
Thus , in an HCl molecule , the chlorine atom carries a partial negative charge and the hydrogen atom has a partial positive charge .
shows the distribution of electrons in the H–Cl bond .
Note that the shaded area around Cl is much larger than it is around H. Compare this to , which shows the even distribution of electrons in the H nonpolar bond .
This symbolism is shown for the H–Cl molecule in .
Whether a bond is nonpolar or polar covalent is determined by a property of the bonding atoms called electronegativity .
Electronegativity is a measure of the tendency of an atom to attract electrons ( or electron density ) towards itself .
It determines how the shared electrons are distributed between the two atoms in a bond .
The more strongly an atom attracts the electrons in its bonds , the larger its electronegativity .
Electrons in a polar covalent bond are shifted toward the more electronegative atom ; thus , the more electronegative atom is the one with the partial negative charge .
The greater the difference in electronegativity , the more polarized the electron distribution and the larger the partial charges of the atoms .
shows the electronegativity values of the elements as proposed by one of the most famous chemists of the twentieth century : Linus Pauling .
In general , electronegativity increases from left to right across a period in the periodic table and decreases down a group .
Thus , the nonmetals , which lie in the upper right , tend to have the highest electronegativities , with fluorine the most electronegative element of all ( EN = 4.0 ) .
Metals tend to be less electronegative elements , and the group 1 metals have the lowest electronegativities .
Note that noble gases are excluded from this figure because these atoms usually do not share electrons with others atoms since they have a full valence shell .
( While noble gas compounds such as XeO do exist , they can only be formed under extreme conditions , and thus they do not fit neatly into the general model of electronegativity . )
We must be careful not to confuse electronegativity and electron affinity .
The electron affinity of an element is a measurable physical quantity , namely , the energy released or absorbed when an isolated gas-phase atom acquires an electron , measured in kJ/mol .
Electronegativity , on the other hand , describes how tightly an atom attracts electrons in a bond .
It is a dimensionless quantity that is calculated , not measured .
Pauling derived the first electronegativity values by comparing the amounts of energy required to break different types of bonds .
He chose an arbitrary relative scale ranging from 0 to 4 .
The absolute value of the difference in electronegativity ( ΔEN ) of two bonded atoms provides a rough measure of the polarity to be expected in the bond and , thus , the bond type .
When the difference is very small or zero , the bond is covalent and nonpolar .
When it is large , the bond is polar covalent or ionic .
The absolute values of the electronegativity differences between the atoms in the bonds H–H , H–Cl , and Na–Cl are 0 ( nonpolar ) , 0.9 ( polar covalent ) , and 2.1 ( ionic ) , respectively .
The degree to which electrons are shared between atoms varies from completely equal ( pure covalent bonding ) to not at all ( ionic bonding ) .
shows the relationship between electronegativity difference and bond type .
A rough approximation of the electronegativity differences associated with covalent , polar covalent , and ionic bonds is shown in .
This table is just a general guide , however , with many exceptions .
For example , the H and F atoms in HF have an electronegativity difference of 1.9 , and the N and H atoms in NH a difference of 0.9 , yet both of these compounds form bonds that are considered polar covalent .
Likewise , the Na and Cl atoms in NaCl have an electronegativity difference of 2.1 , and the Mn and I atoms in MnI have a difference of 1.0 , yet both of these substances form ionic compounds .
The best guide to the covalent or ionic character of a bond is to consider the types of atoms involved and their relative positions in the periodic table .
Bonds between two nonmetals are generally covalent ; bonding between a metal and a nonmetal is often ionic .
Some compounds contain both covalent and ionic bonds .
The atoms in polyatomic ions , such as OH , and are held together by polar covalent bonds .
However , these polyatomic ions form ionic compounds by combining with ions of opposite charge .
For example , potassium nitrate , KNO , contains the K cation and the anion .
Thus , bonding in potassium nitrate is ionic , resulting from the electrostatic attraction polyatomic between the ions K and as well as covalent between the nitrogen and oxygen atoms in Bond polarities play an important role in determining the structure of proteins .
Using the electronegativity values in , arrange the following covalent bonds—all commonly found in amino acids—in order of increasing polarity .
Then designate the positive and negative atoms using the symbols δ+ and δ– : C–H , C–N , C–O , N–H , O–H , S–H The polarity of these bonds increases as the absolute value of the electronegativity difference increases .
The atom with the δ– designation is the more electronegative of the two .
shows these bonds in order of increasing polarity .
Silicones are polymeric compounds containing , among others , the following types of covalent bonds : Si–O , Si–C , C–H , and C–C .
Using the electronegativity values in , arrange the bonds in order of increasing polarity and designate the positive and negative atoms using the symbols δ+ and δ– .
In all cases , these bonds involve the sharing or transfer of valence shell electrons between atoms .
In this section , we will explore the typical method for depicting valence shell electrons and chemical bonds , namely Lewis symbols and Lewis structures .
We use Lewis symbols to describe valence electron configurations of atoms and monatomic ions .
A Lewis symbol consists of an elemental symbol surrounded by one dot for each of its valence electrons : shows the Lewis symbols for the elements of the third period of the periodic table .
We also use Lewis symbols to indicate the formation of covalent bonds , which are shown in Lewis structures , drawings that describe the bonding in molecules and polyatomic ions .
A dash ( or line ) is sometimes used to indicate a shared pair of electrons : A single shared pair of electrons is called a single bond .
Each Cl atom interacts with eight valence electrons : the six in the lone pairs and the two in the single bond .
The other halogen molecules ( F , Br , I , and At ) form bonds like those in the chlorine molecule : one single bond between atoms and three lone pairs of electrons per atom .
This allows each halogen atom to have a noble gas electron configuration .
The tendency of main group atoms to form enough bonds to obtain eight valence electrons is known as the octet rule .
For example , each atom of a group 14 element has four electrons in its outermost shell and therefore requires four more electrons to reach an octet .
These four electrons can be gained by forming four covalent bonds , as illustrated here for carbon in CCl ( carbon tetrachloride ) and silicon in SiH ( silane ) .
Because hydrogen only needs two electrons to fill its valence shell , it is an exception to the octet rule .
The transition elements and inner transition elements also do not follow the octet rule : Group 15 elements such as nitrogen have five valence electrons in the atomic Lewis symbol : one lone pair and three unpaired electrons .
To obtain an octet , these atoms form three covalent bonds , as in NH ( ammonia ) .
Oxygen and other atoms in group 16 obtain an octet by forming two covalent bonds : As previously mentioned , when a pair of atoms shares one pair of electrons , we call this a single bond .
However , a pair of atoms may need to share more than one pair of electrons in order to achieve the requisite octet .
See these examples : For more complicated molecules and molecular ions , it is helpful to follow the step-by-step procedure outlined here : Determine the total number of valence ( outer shell ) electrons .
For cations , subtract one electron for each positive charge .
For anions , add one electron for each negative charge .
Draw a skeleton structure of the molecule or ion , arranging the atoms around a central atom .
( Generally , the least electronegative element should be placed in the center . )
Connect each atom to the central atom with a single bond ( one electron pair ) .
Distribute the remaining electrons as lone pairs on the terminal atoms ( except hydrogen ) , completing an octet around each atom .
Place all remaining electrons on the central atom .
Rearrange the electrons of the outer atoms to make multiple bonds with the central atom in order to obtain octets wherever possible .
Let us determine the Lewis structures of SiH , NO , and OF as examples in following this procedure : Determine the total number of valence ( outer shell ) electrons in the molecule or ion .
( Note that we denote ions with brackets around the structure , indicating the charge outside the brackets : ) we must use experimental evidence to When several arrangements of atoms are possible , as for choose the correct one .
In general , the less electronegative elements are more likely to be central atoms .
In the less electronegative carbon atom occupies the central position with the oxygen and hydrogen An exception is that atoms surrounding it .
Other examples include P in POCl , S in SO , and Cl in hydrogen is almost never a central atom .
As the most electronegative element , fluorine also can not be a central atom .
Distribute the remaining electrons as lone pairs on the terminal atoms ( except hydrogen ) to complete their valence shells with an octet of electrons .
There are no remaining electrons on SiH , so it is unchanged : Place all remaining electrons on the central atom .
SiH : Si already has an octet , so nothing needs to be done .
We have distributed the valence electrons as lone pairs on the oxygen atoms , but the carbon atom lacks an octet : NO : For this ion , we added eight valence electrons , but neither atom has an octet .
NASA ’ s Cassini-Huygens mission detected a large cloud of toxic hydrogen cyanide ( HCN ) on Titan , one of Saturn ’ s moons .
Titan also contains ethane ( H CCH ) , acetylene ( HCCH ) , and ammonia ( NH ) .
What are the Lewis structures of these molecules ?
Calculate the number of valence electrons .
Both of these gases also cause problems : CO is toxic and CO has been implicated in global climate change .
What are the Lewis structures of these two molecules ?
Answer : Many covalent molecules have central atoms that do not have eight electrons in their Lewis structures .
These molecules fall into three categories : Odd-electron molecules have an odd number of valence electrons , and therefore have an unpaired electron .
Electron-deficient molecules have a central atom that has fewer electrons than needed for a noble gas configuration .
Hypervalent molecules have a central atom that has more electrons than needed for a noble gas configuration .
We call molecules that contain an odd number of electrons free radicals .
Nitric oxide , NO , is an example of an oddelectron molecule ; it is produced in internal combustion engines when oxygen and nitrogen react at high temperatures .
To draw the Lewis structure for an odd-electron molecule like NO , we follow the same five steps we would for other molecules , but with a few minor changes : Determine the total number of valence ( outer shell ) electrons .
The sum of the valence electrons is 5 ( from N ) + 6 ( from O ) = 11 .
The odd number immediately tells us that we have a free radical , so we know that not every atom can have eight electrons in its valence shell .
Draw a skeleton structure of the molecule .
We can easily draw a skeleton with an N–O single bond : N–O Distribute the remaining electrons as lone pairs on the terminal atoms .
In this case , there is no central atom , so we distribute the electrons around both atoms .
We give eight electrons to the more electronegative atom in these situations ; thus oxygen has the filled valence shell : Place all remaining electrons on the central atom .
Since there are no remaining electrons , this step does not apply .
Rearrange the electrons to make multiple bonds with the central atom in order to obtain octets wherever possible .
We know that an odd-electron molecule can not have an octet for every atom , but we want to get each atom as close to an octet as possible .
In this case , nitrogen has only five electrons around it .
To move closer to an octet for nitrogen , we take one of the lone pairs from oxygen and use it to form a NO double bond .
( We can not take another lone pair of electrons on oxygen and form a triple bond because nitrogen would then have nine electrons : ) We will also encounter a few molecules that contain central atoms that do not have a filled valence shell .
Generally , these are molecules with central atoms from groups 2 and 13 , outer atoms that are hydrogen , or other atoms that do not form multiple bonds .
For example , in the Lewis structures of beryllium dihydride , BeH , and boron trifluoride , BF , the beryllium and boron atoms each have only four and six electrons , respectively .
It is possible to draw a structure with a double bond between a boron atom and a fluorine atom in BF , satisfying the octet rule , but experimental evidence indicates the bond lengths are closer to that expected for B–F single bonds .
This suggests the best Lewis structure has three B–F single bonds and an electron deficient boron .
The reactivity of the compound is also consistent with an electron deficient boron .
However , the B–F bonds are slightly shorter than what is actually expected for B–F single bonds , indicating that some double bond character is found in the actual molecule .
An atom like the boron atom in BF , which does not have eight electrons , is very reactive .
It readily combines with a molecule containing an atom with a lone pair of electrons .
Elements in the third and higher periods ( n ≥ 3 ) have more than four valence orbitals and can share more than four pairs of electrons with other atoms because they have empty d orbitals in the same shell .
Molecules formed from these elements are sometimes called hypervalent molecules .
These additional electrons must be assigned to the central atom .
Xenon is a noble gas , but it forms a number of stable compounds .
We examined XeF earlier .
What are the Lewis structures of XeF and XeF ?
We can draw the Lewis structure of any covalent molecule by following the six steps discussed earlier .
In this case , we can condense the last few steps , since not all of them apply .
Calculate the number of valence electrons : XeF : 8 + ( 2 7 ) = 22 XeF : 8 + ( 6 7 ) = 50 Draw a skeleton joining the atoms by single bonds .
Xenon will be the central atom because fluorine can not be a central atom : Distribute the remaining electrons .
XeF : We place three lone pairs of electrons around each F atom , accounting for 12 electrons and giving each F atom 8 electrons .
Thus , six electrons ( three lone pairs ) remain .
These lone pairs must be placed on the Xe atom .
This is acceptable because Xe atoms have empty valence shell d orbitals and can accommodate more than eight electrons .
The Lewis structure of XeF shows two bonding pairs and three lone pairs of electrons around the Xe atom : XeF : We place three lone pairs of electrons around each F atom , accounting for 36 electrons .
Two electrons remain , and this lone pair is placed on the Xe atom : The halogens form a class of compounds called the interhalogens , in which halogen atoms covalently bond to each other .
As we have seen , however , in some cases , there is seemingly more than one valid structure for a molecule .
We can use the concept of formal charges to help us predict the most appropriate Lewis structure when more than one is reasonable .
The formal charge of an atom in a molecule is the hypothetical charge the atom would have if we could redistribute the electrons in the bonds evenly between the atoms .
Another way of saying this is that formal charge results when we take the number of valence electrons of a neutral atom , subtract the nonbonding electrons , and then subtract the number of bonds connected to that atom in the Lewis structure .
Thus , we calculate formal charge as follows : We can double-check formal charge calculations by determining the sum of the formal charges for the whole structure .
The sum of the formal charges of all atoms in a molecule must be zero ; the sum of the formal charges in an ion should equal the charge of the ion .
We must remember that the formal charge calculated for an atom is not the actual charge of the atom in the molecule .
Formal charge is only a useful bookkeeping procedure ; it does not indicate the presence of actual charges .
Assign formal charges to each atom in the interhalogen ion We divide the bonding electron pairs equally for all I–Cl bonds : We assign lone pairs of electrons to their atoms .
Each Cl atom now has seven electrons assigned to it , and the I atom has eight .
Calculate the formal charge for each atom in the carbon monoxide molecule : Answer : C −1 , O +1 Assign formal charges to each atom in the interhalogen molecule BrCl .
Assign one of the electrons in each Br–Cl bond to the Br atom and one to the Cl atom in that bond : Assign the lone pairs to their atom .
Now each Cl atom has seven electrons and the Br atom has seven electrons .
Subtract this number from the number of valence electrons for the neutral atom .
This gives the formal charge : Br : 7 – 7 = 0 Cl : 7 – 7 = 0 All atoms in BrCl have a formal charge of zero , and the sum of the formal charges totals zero , as it must in a neutral molecule .
Determine the formal charge for each atom in NCl .
Answer : N : 0 ; all three Cl atoms : 0 The arrangement of atoms in a molecule or ion is called its molecular structure .
In many cases , following the steps for writing Lewis structures may lead to more than one possible molecular structure—different multiple bond and lone-pair electron placements or different arrangements of atoms , for instance .
A few guidelines involving formal charge can be helpful in deciding which of the possible structures is most likely for a particular molecule or ion : A molecular structure in which all formal charges are zero is preferable to one in which some formal charges are not zero .
If the Lewis structure must have nonzero formal charges , the arrangement with the smallest nonzero formal charges is preferable .
Lewis structures are preferable when adjacent formal charges are zero or of the opposite sign .
When we must choose among several Lewis structures with similar distributions of formal charges , the structure with the negative formal charges on the more electronegative atoms is preferable .
To see how these guidelines apply , let us consider some possible structures for carbon dioxide , CO .
We know from our previous discussion that the less electronegative atom typically occupies the central position , but formal charges allow us to understand why this occurs .
As another example , the thiocyanate ion , an ion formed from a carbon atom , a nitrogen atom , and a sulfur atom , could have three different molecular structures : CNS , NCS , or CSN .
The formal charges present in each of these molecular structures can help us pick the most likely arrangement of atoms .
Possible Lewis structures and the formal charges for each of the three possible structures for the thiocyanate ion are shown here : Note that the sum of the formal charges in each case is equal to the charge of the ion ( –1 ) .
However , the first arrangement of atoms is preferred because it has the lowest number of atoms with nonzero formal charges ( Guideline 2 ) .
Also , it places the least electronegative atom in the center , and the negative charge on the more electronegative element ( Guideline 4 ) .
Nitrous oxide , N O , commonly known as laughing gas , is used as an anesthetic in minor surgeries , such as the routine extraction of wisdom teeth .
Which is the likely structure for nitrous oxide ?
This is again consistent with the preference for having the less electronegative atom in the central position .
Which is the most likely molecular structure for the nitrite ion ?
You may have noticed that the nitrite anion in can have two possible structures with the atoms in the same positions .
The electrons involved in the N–O double bond , however , are in different positions : Answer : ONO If nitrite ions do indeed contain a single and a double bond , we would expect for the two bond lengths to be different .
A double bond between two atoms is shorter ( and stronger ) than a single bond between the same two atoms .
have the same strength and length , and are identical in Experiments show , however , that both N–O bonds in all other properties .
in which nitrogen has an octet and both bonds are It is not possible to write a single Lewis structure for equivalent .
Instead , we use the concept of resonance : if two or more Lewis structures with the same arrangement of atoms can be written for a molecule or ion , the actual distribution of electrons is an average of that shown by the various Lewis structures .
The actual distribution of electrons in each of the nitrogen-oxygen bonds in is the average of a double bond and a single bond .
We call the individual Lewis structures resonance forms .
The actual electronic structure of the molecule ( the average of the resonance forms ) is called a resonance hybrid of the individual resonance forms .
A double-headed arrow between Lewis structures indicates that they are resonance forms .
Thus , the electronic structure of the ion is shown as : We should remember that a molecule described as a resonance hybrid never possesses an electronic structure described by either resonance form .
It does not fluctuate between resonance forms ; rather , the actual electronic structure is always the average of that shown by all resonance forms .
George Wheland , one of the pioneers of resonance theory , used a historical analogy to describe the relationship between resonance forms and resonance hybrids .
A medieval traveler , having never before seen a rhinoceros , described it as a hybrid of a dragon and a unicorn because it had many properties in common with both .
Just as a rhinoceros is neither a dragon sometimes nor a unicorn at other times , a resonance hybrid is neither of its resonance forms at any given time .
Like a rhinoceros , it is a real entity that experimental evidence has shown to exist .
It has some characteristics in common with its resonance forms , but the resonance forms themselves are convenient , imaginary images ( like the unicorn and the dragon ) .
The carbonate anion , provides a second example of resonance : One oxygen atom must have a double bond to carbon to complete the octet on the central atom .
All oxygen atoms , however , are equivalent , and the double bond could form from any one of the three atoms .
This gives rise to three resonance forms of the carbonate ion .
Because we can write three identical resonance structures , we know that the actual arrangement of electrons in the carbonate ion is the average of the three structures .
Again , experiments show that all three C–O bonds are exactly the same .
In this section , you will learn about the bond strength of covalent bonds , and then compare that to the strength of ionic bonds , which is related to the lattice energy of a compound .
Stable molecules exist because covalent bonds hold the atoms together .
We measure the strength of a covalent bond by the energy required to break it , that is , the energy necessary to separate the bonded atoms .
Separating any pair of bonded atoms requires energy ( see ) .
The stronger a bond , the greater the energy required to break it .
The energy required to break a specific covalent bond in one mole of gaseous molecules is called the bond energy or the bond dissociation energy .
The sum of all bond energies in such a molecule is equal to the standard enthalpy change for the endothermic reaction that breaks all the bonds in the molecule .
Although the four C–H bonds are equivalent in the original molecule , they do not each require the same energy to break ; once the first bond is broken ( which requires 439 kJ/mol ) , the remaining bonds are easier to break .
The 415 kJ/mol value is the average , not the exact value required to break any one bond .
The strength of a bond between two atoms increases as the number of electron pairs in the bond increases .
Generally , as the bond strength increases , the bond length decreases .
Thus , we find that triple bonds are stronger and shorter than double bonds between the same two atoms ; likewise , double bonds are stronger and shorter than single bonds between the same two atoms .
Average bond energies for some common bonds appear in , and a comparison of bond lengths and bond strengths for some common bonds appears in .
When one atom bonds to various atoms in a group , the bond strength typically decreases as we move down the group .
For example , C–F is 439 kJ/mol , C–Cl is 330 kJ/mol , and C–Br is 275 kJ/mol .
We can use bond energies to calculate approximate enthalpy changes for reactions where enthalpies of formation are not available .
Calculations of this type will also tell us whether a reaction is exothermic or endothermic .
An exothermic reaction ( Δ H negative , heat produced ) results when the bonds in the products are stronger than the bonds in the reactants .
An endothermic reaction ( Δ H positive , heat absorbed ) results when the bonds in the products are weaker than those in the reactants .
This can be expressed mathematically in the following way : In this expression , the symbol means “ the sum of ” and D represents the bond energy in kilojoules per mole , which is always a positive number .
The bond energy is obtained from a table ( like ) and will depend on whether the particular bond is a single , double , or triple bond .
Thus , in calculating enthalpies in this manner , it is important that we consider the bonding in all reactants and products .
Because D values are typically averages for one type of bond in many different molecules , this calculation provides a rough estimate , not an exact value , for the enthalpy of reaction .
Consider the following reaction : or To form two moles of HCl , one mole of H–H bonds and one mole of Cl–Cl bonds must be broken .
The energy required to break these bonds is the sum of the bond energy of the H–H bond ( 436 kJ/mol ) and the Cl–Cl bond ( 243 kJ/mol ) .
During the reaction , two moles of H–Cl bonds are formed ( bond energy = 432 kJ/mol ) , releasing 2 432 kJ ; or 864 kJ .
Because the bonds in the products are stronger than those in the reactants , the reaction releases more energy than it consumes : This excess energy is released as heat , so the reaction is exothermic .
gives a value for the standard molar enthalpy of formation of HCl ( g ) , of –92.307 kJ/mol .
Twice that value is –184.6 kJ , which agrees well with the answer obtained earlier for the formation of two moles of HCl .
Methanol , CH OH , may be an excellent alternative fuel .
The high-temperature reaction of steam and carbon produces a mixture of the gases carbon monoxide , CO , and hydrogen , H , from which methanol can be produced .
This occurs because D values are the average of different bond strengths ; therefore , they often give only rough agreement with other data .
Ethyl alcohol , CH CH OH , was one of the first organic chemicals deliberately synthesized by humans .
It has many uses in industry , and it is the alcohol contained in alcoholic beverages .
It can be obtained by the fermentation of sugar or synthesized by the hydration of ethylene in the following reaction : Using the bond energies in , calculate an approximate enthalpy change , Δ H , for this reaction .
Answer : –35 kJ An ionic compound is stable because of the electrostatic attraction between its positive and negative ions .
The lattice energy of a compound is a measure of the strength of this attraction .
The lattice energy ( Δ H ) of an ionic compound is defined as the energy required to separate one mole of the solid into its component gaseous ions .
For the ionic solid MX , the lattice energy is the enthalpy change of the process : Note that we are using the convention where the ionic solid is separated into ions , so our lattice energies will be endothermic ( positive values ) .
Some texts use the equivalent but opposite convention , defining lattice energy as the energy released when separate ions combine to form a lattice and giving negative ( exothermic ) values .
Thus , if you are looking up lattice energies in another reference , be certain to check which definition is being used .
In both cases , a larger magnitude for lattice energy indicates a more stable ionic compound .
For sodium chloride , Δ H = 769 kJ .
Thus , it requires 769 kJ to separate one mole of solid NaCl into gaseous Na and Cl ions .
When one mole each of gaseous Na and Cl ions form solid NaCl , 769 kJ of heat is released .
Thus , the lattice energy of an ionic crystal increases rapidly as the charges of the ions increase and the sizes of the ions decrease .
When all other parameters are kept constant , doubling the charge of both the cation and anion quadruples the lattice energy .
For example , the lattice energy of LiF ( Z and Z = 1 ) is 1023 kJ/mol , whereas that of MgO ( Z and Z = 2 ) is 3900 kJ/ mol ( R is nearly the same—about 200 pm for both compounds ) .
Different interatomic distances produce different lattice energies .
For example , we can compare the lattice energy of MgF ( 2957 kJ/mol ) to that of MgI ( 2327 kJ/mol ) to observe the effect on lattice energy of the smaller ionic size of F as compared to I .
The precious gem ruby is aluminum oxide , Al O , containing traces of Cr .
The compound Al Se is used in the fabrication of some semiconductor devices .
Which has the larger lattice energy , Al O or Al Se ?
In these two ionic compounds , the charges Z and Z are the same , so the difference in lattice energy will depend upon R .
The O ion is smaller than the Se ion .
Thus , Al O would have a shorter interionic distance than Al Se , and Al O would have the larger lattice energy .
Zinc oxide , ZnO , is a very effective sunscreen .
How would the lattice energy of ZnO compare to that of NaCl ?
Answer : ZnO would have the larger lattice energy because the Z values of both the cation and the anion in ZnO are greater , and the interionic distance of ZnO is smaller than that of NaCl .
It is not possible to measure lattice energies directly .
However , the lattice energy can be calculated using the equation given in the previous section or by using a thermochemical cycle .
represents the conversion of We begin with the elements in their most common states , Cs ( s ) and F ( g ) .
The solid cesium into a gas , and then the ionization energy converts the gaseous cesium atoms into cations .
In the next step , we account for the energy required to break the F–F bond to produce fluorine atoms .
Converting one mole of fluorine atoms into fluoride ions is an exothermic process , so this step gives off energy ( the electron affinity ) and is shown as decreasing along the y -axis .
We now have one mole of Cs cations and one mole of F anions .
These ions combine to produce solid cesium fluoride .
The enthalpy change in this step is the negative of the lattice energy , so it is also an exothermic quantity .
The total energy involved in this conversion is equal to the experimentally determined enthalpy of formation , of the compound from its elements .
In this case , the overall change is exothermic .
Hess ’ s law can also be used to show the relationship between the enthalpies of the individual steps and the enthalpy of formation .
shows this for fluoride , CsF .
Thus , the lattice energy can be calculated from other values .
For cesium fluoride , using this data , the lattice energy is : The Born-Haber cycle may also be used to calculate any one of the other quantities in the equation for lattice energy , ionization energy provided that the remainder is known .
For example , if the relevant enthalpy of sublimation ( IE ) , bond dissociation enthalpy ( D ) , lattice energy Δ H and standard enthalpy of formation are known , the Born-Haber cycle can be used to determine the electron affinity of an atom .
Lattice energies calculated for ionic compounds are typically much higher than bond dissociation energies measured for covalent bonds .
Whereas lattice energies typically fall in the range of 600–4000 kJ/mol ( some even higher ) , covalent bond dissociation energies are typically between 150–400 kJ/mol for single bonds .
Keep in mind , however , that these are not directly comparable values .
For ionic compounds , lattice energies are associated with many interactions , as cations and anions pack together in an extended lattice .
For covalent bonds , the bond dissociation energy is associated with the interaction of just two atoms .
However , molecular structure is actually three-dimensional , and it is important to be able to describe molecular bonds in terms of their distances , angles , and relative arrangements in space .
A bond angle is the angle between any two bonds that include a common atom , usually measured in degrees .
A bond distance ( or bond length ) is the distance between the nuclei of two bonded atoms along the straight line joining the nuclei .
Bond distances are measured in Ångstroms ( 1 Å = 10 m ) or picometers ( 1 pm = 10 m , 100 pm = 1 Å ) .
Valence shell electron-pair repulsion theory ( VSEPR theory ) enables us to predict the molecular structure , including approximate bond angles around a central atom , of a molecule from an examination of the number of bonds and lone electron pairs in its Lewis structure .
The VSEPR model assumes that electron pairs in the valence shell of a central atom will adopt an arrangement that minimizes repulsions between these electron pairs by maximizing the distance between them .
The electrons in the valence shell of a central atom form either bonding pairs of electrons , located primarily between bonded atoms , or lone pairs .
The electrostatic repulsion of these electrons is reduced when the various regions of high electron density assume positions as far from each other as possible .
VSEPR theory predicts the arrangement of electron pairs around each central atom and , usually , the correct arrangement of atoms in a molecule .
We should understand , however , that the theory only considers electron-pair repulsions .
Other interactions , such as nuclear-nuclear repulsions and nuclear-electron attractions , are also involved in the final arrangement that atoms adopt in a particular molecular structure .
As a simple example of VSEPR theory , let us predict the structure of a gaseous BeF molecule .
The Lewis structure of BeF shows only two electron pairs around the central beryllium atom .
The bond angle is 180° .
illustrates this and other electron-pair geometries that minimize the repulsions among regions of high electron density ( bonds and/or lone pairs ) .
Two regions of electron density around a central atom in a molecule form a linear geometry ; three regions form a trigonal planar geometry ; four regions form a tetrahedral geometry ; five regions form a trigonal bipyramidal geometry ; and six regions form an octahedral geometry .
It is important to note that electron-pair geometry around a central atom is not the same thing as its molecular structure .
The electron-pair geometries shown in describe all regions where electrons are located , bonds as well as lone pairs .
Molecular structure describes the location of the atoms , not the electrons .
We differentiate between these two situations by naming the geometry that includes all electron pairs the electronpair geometry .
The structure that includes only the placement of the atoms in the molecule is called the molecular structure .
The electron-pair geometries will be the same as the molecular structures when there are no lone electron pairs around the central atom , but they will be different when there are lone pairs present on the central atom .
For example , the methane molecule , CH , which is the major component of natural gas , has four bonding pairs of electrons around the central carbon atom ; the electron-pair geometry is tetrahedral , as is the molecular structure .
On the other hand , the ammonia molecule , NH , also has four electron pairs associated with the nitrogen atom , and thus has a tetrahedral electron-pair geometry .
One of these regions , however , is a lone pair , which is not included in the molecular structure , and this lone pair influences the shape of the molecule .
As seen in , small distortions from the ideal angles in can result from differences in repulsion between various regions of electron density .
VSEPR theory predicts these distortions by establishing an order of repulsions and an order of the amount of space occupied by different kinds of electron pairs .
The order of electron-pair repulsions from greatest to least repulsion is : This order of repulsions determines the amount of space occupied by different regions of electrons .
A lone pair of electrons occupies a larger region of space than the electrons in a triple bond ; in turn , electrons in a triple bond occupy more space than those in a double bond , and so on .
The order of sizes from largest to smallest is : Consider formaldehyde , H CO , which is used as a preservative for biological and anatomical specimens .
This molecule has regions of high electron density that consist of two single bonds and one double bond .
The basic geometry is trigonal planar with 120° bond angles , but we see that the double bond causes slightly larger angles ( 121° ) , and the angle between the single bonds is slightly smaller ( 118° ) .
In the ammonia molecule , the three hydrogen atoms attached to the central nitrogen are not arranged in a flat , trigonal planar molecular structure , but rather in a three-dimensional trigonal pyramid with the nitrogen atom at the apex and the three hydrogen atoms forming the base .
The ideal bond angles in a trigonal pyramid are based on the tetrahedral electron pair geometry .
Again , there are slight deviations from the ideal because lone pairs occupy larger regions of space than do bonding electrons .
The H–N–H bond angles in NH are slightly smaller than the 109.5° angle in a regular tetrahedron because the lone pair-bonding pair repulsion is greater than the bonding pair-bonding pair repulsion .
illustrates the ideal molecular structures , which are predicted based on the electron-pair geometries for various combinations of lone pairs and bonding pairs .
According to VSEPR theory , the terminal atom locations ( Xs in ) are equivalent within the linear , trigonal planar , and tetrahedral electron-pair geometries ( the first three rows of the table ) .
It does not matter which X is replaced with a lone pair because the molecules can be rotated to convert positions .
As shown in , the axial position is surrounded by bond angles of 90° , whereas the equatorial position has more space available because of the 120° bond angles .
In a trigonal bipyramidal electron-pair geometry , lone pairs always occupy equatorial positions because these more spacious positions can more easily accommodate the larger lone pairs .
Theoretically , we can come up with three possible arrangements for the three bonds and two lone pairs for the ClF molecule .
The stable structure is the one that puts the lone pairs in equatorial locations , giving a Tshaped molecular structure .
When a central atom has two lone electron pairs and four bonding regions , we have an octahedral electron-pair geometry .
The two lone pairs are on opposite sides of the octahedron ( 180° apart ) , giving a square planar molecular structure that minimizes lone pair-lone pair repulsions .
The following procedure uses VSEPR theory to determine the electron pair geometries and the molecular structures : Write the Lewis structure of the molecule or polyatomic ion .
Count the number of regions of electron density ( lone pairs and bonds ) around the central atom .
A single , double , or triple bond counts as one region of electron density .
Identify the electron-pair geometry based on the number of regions of electron density : linear , trigonal planar , tetrahedral , trigonal bipyramidal , or octahedral ( , first column ) .
Use the number of lone pairs to determine the molecular structure .
If more than one arrangement of lone pairs and chemical bonds is possible , choose the one that will minimize repulsions , remembering that lone pairs occupy more space than multiple bonds , which occupy more space than single bonds .
In trigonal bipyramidal arrangements , repulsion is minimized when every lone pair is in an equatorial position .
In an octahedral arrangement with two lone pairs , repulsion is minimized when the lone pairs are on opposite sides of the central atom .
The following examples illustrate the use of VSEPR theory to predict the molecular structure of molecules or ions that have no lone pairs of electrons .
In this case , the molecular structure is identical to the electron pair geometry .
Using VSEPR theory , we predict that the two regions of electron density arrange themselves on opposite sides of the central atom with a bond angle of 180° .
The electron-pair geometry and molecular structure are identical , and CO molecules are linear .
( b ) We write the Lewis structure of BCl as : Thus we see that BCl contains three bonds , and there are no lone pairs of electrons on boron .
The arrangement of three regions of high electron density gives a trigonal planar electron-pair geometry .
The B–Cl bonds lie in a plane with 120° angles between them .
BCl also has a trigonal planar molecular structure .
The electron-pair geometry and molecular structure of BCl are both trigonal planar .
Note that the VSEPR geometry indicates the correct bond angles ( 120° ) , unlike the Lewis structure shown above .
Carbonate , What are the electron-pair geometry and molecular structure of this polyatomic ion ?
Answer : The electron-pair geometry is trigonal planar and the molecular structure is trigonal planar .
Due to resonance , all three C–O bonds are identical .
Whether they are single , double , or an average of the two , each bond counts as one region of electron density .
is a common polyatomic ion found in various materials from eggshells to antacids .
Two of the top 50 chemicals produced in the United States , ammonium nitrate and ammonium sulfate , both used as fertilizers , contain the ammonium ion .
Predict the electron-pair geometry and molecular structure of the We write the Lewis structure of cation .
as : We can see that contains four bonds from the nitrogen atom to hydrogen atoms and no lone pairs .
We expect the four regions of high electron density to arrange themselves so that they point to the corners of a tetrahedron with the central nitrogen atom in the middle .
Therefore , the electron pair geometry of is tetrahedral , and the molecular structure is also tetrahedral .
Identify a molecule with trigonal bipyramidal molecular structure .
Answer : Any molecule with five electron pairs around the central atoms including no lone pairs will be trigonal bipyramidal .
PF is a common example .
The next several examples illustrate the effect of lone pairs of electrons on molecular structure .
Predict the electron-pair geometry and molecular structure of a water molecule .
The Lewis structure of H O indicates that there are four regions of high electron density around the oxygen atom : two lone pairs and two chemical bonds : We predict that these four regions are arranged in a tetrahedral fashion , as indicated in .
Thus , the electron-pair geometry is tetrahedral and the molecular structure is bent with an angle slightly less than 109.5° .
In fact , the bond angle is 104.5° .
The hydronium ion , H O , forms when acids are dissolved in water .
Predict the electron-pair geometry and molecular structure of this cation .
Answer : electron pair geometry : tetrahedral ; molecular structure : trigonal pyramidal Sulfur tetrafluoride , SF , is extremely valuable for the preparation of fluorine-containing compounds used as herbicides ( i.e. , SF is used as a fluorinating agent ) .
Predict the electron-pair geometry and molecular structure of a SF molecule .
The Lewis structure of SF indicates five regions of electron density around the sulfur atom : one lone pair and four bonding pairs : We expect these five regions to adopt a trigonal bipyramidal electron-pair geometry .
To minimize lone pair repulsions , the lone pair occupies one of the equatorial positions .
The molecular structure is that of a seesaw .
Predict the electron pair geometry and molecular structure for molecules of XeF .
Answer : The electron-pair geometry is trigonal bipyramidal .
The molecular structure is linear .
Of all the noble gases , xenon is the most reactive , frequently reacting with elements such as oxygen and fluorine .
Predict the electron-pair geometry and molecular structure of the XeF molecule .
The Lewis structure of XeF indicates six regions of high electron density around the xenon atom : two lone pairs and four bonds : These six regions adopt an octahedral arrangement , which is the electron-pair geometry .
To minimize repulsions , the lone pairs should be on opposite sides of the central atom .
The five atoms are all in the same plane and have a square planar molecular structure .
In a certain molecule , the central atom has three lone pairs and two bonds .
What will the electron pair geometry and molecular structure be ?
Answer : electron pair geometry : trigonal bipyramidal ; molecular structure : linear When a molecule or polyatomic ion has only one central atom , the molecular structure completely describes the shape of the molecule .
Larger molecules do not have a single central atom , but are connected by a chain of interior atoms that each possess a “ local ” geometry .
The way these local structures are oriented with respect to each other also influences the molecular shape , but such considerations are largely beyond the scope of this introductory discussion .
For our purposes , we will only focus on determining the local structures .
The Lewis structure for the simplest amino acid , glycine , H NCH CO H , is shown here .
Predict the local geometry for the nitrogen atom , the two carbon atoms , and the oxygen atom with a hydrogen atom attached : Consider each central atom independently .
We can also use the “ Name ” checkboxes at bottom-left to display or hide the electron pair geometry ( called “ electron geometry ” in the simulator ) and/or molecular structure ( called “ molecular shape ” in the simulator ) .
Build the molecule HCN in the simulator based on the following Lewis structure : Click on each bond type or lone pair at right to add that group to the central atom .
Once you have the complete molecule , rotate it to examine the predicted molecular structure .
What molecular structure is this ?
The molecular structure is linear .
Build a more complex molecule in the simulator .
Identify the electron-group geometry , molecular structure , and bond angles .
Then try to find a chemical formula that would match the structure you have drawn .
Answer : Answers will vary .
For example , an atom with four single bonds , a double bond , and a lone pair has an octahedral electron-group geometry and a square pyramidal molecular structure .
XeOF is a molecule that adopts this structure .
As discussed previously , polar covalent bonds connect two atoms with differing electronegativities , leaving one atom with a partial positive charge ( δ+ ) and the other atom with a partial negative charge ( δ– ) , as the electrons are pulled toward the more electronegative atom .
This separation of charge gives rise to a bond dipole moment .
Dipole vectors are shown as arrows pointing along the bond from the less electronegative atom toward the more electronegative atom .
A small plus sign is drawn on the less electronegative end to indicate the partially positive end of the bond .
The length of the arrow is proportional to the magnitude of the electronegativity difference between the two atoms .
A whole molecule may also have a separation of charge , depending on its molecular structure and the polarity of each of its bonds .
If such a charge separation exists , the molecule is said to be a polar molecule ( or dipole ) ; otherwise the molecule is said to be nonpolar .
The dipole moment measures the extent of net charge separation in the molecule as a whole .
We determine the dipole moment by adding the bond moments in three-dimensional space , taking into account the molecular structure .
For diatomic molecules , there is only one bond , so its bond dipole moment determines the molecular polarity .
Homonuclear diatomic molecules such as Br and N have no difference in electronegativity , so their dipole moment is zero .
For heteronuclear molecules such as CO , there is a small dipole moment .
For HF , there is a larger dipole moment because there is a larger difference in electronegativity .
When a molecule contains more than one bond , the geometry must be taken into account .
If the bonds in a molecule are arranged such that their bond moments cancel ( vector sum equals zero ) , then the molecule is nonpolar .
This is the situation in CO .
Each of the bonds is polar , but the molecule as a whole is nonpolar .
From the Lewis structure , and using VSEPR theory , we determine that the CO molecule is linear with polar C=O bonds on opposite sides of the carbon atom .
The bond moments cancel because they are pointed in opposite directions .
In the case of the water molecule , the Lewis structure again shows that there are two bonds to a central atom , and the electronegativity difference again shows that each of these bonds has a nonzero bond moment .
In this case , however , the molecular structure is bent because of the lone pairs on O , and the two bond moments do not cancel .
Therefore , water does have a net dipole moment and is a polar molecule ( dipole ) .
The OCS molecule has a structure similar to CO , but a sulfur atom has replaced one of the oxygen atoms .
To determine if this molecule is polar , we draw the molecular structure .
VSEPR theory predicts a linear molecule : The C-O bond is considerably polar .
Although C and S have very similar electronegativity values , S is slightly more electronegative than C , and so the C-S bond is just slightly polar .
Because oxygen is more electronegative than sulfur , the oxygen end of the molecule is the negative end .
Chloromethane , CH Cl , is a tetrahedral molecule with three slightly polar C-H bonds and a more polar C-Cl bond .
The relative electronegativities of the bonded atoms is H < C < Cl , and so the bond moments all point toward the Cl end of the molecule and sum to yield a considerable dipole moment ( the molecules are relatively polar ) .
Molecules of less geometric symmetry , however , may be polar even when all bond moments are identical .
For these molecules , the directions of the equal bond moments are such that they sum to give a nonzero dipole moment and a polar molecule .
Examples of such molecules include hydrogen sulfide , H S ( nonlinear ) , and ammonia , NH ( trigonal pyramidal ) .
To summarize , to be polar , a molecule must : Contain at least one polar covalent bond .
Have a molecular structure such that the sum of the vectors of each bond dipole moment does not cancel .
Polar molecules tend to align when placed in an electric field with the positive end of the molecule oriented toward the negative plate and the negative end toward the positive plate .
We can use an electrically charged object to attract polar molecules , but nonpolar molecules are not attracted .
Also , polar solvents are better at dissolving polar substances , and nonpolar solvents are better at dissolving nonpolar substances .
Open the and select the “ Three Atoms ” tab at the top .
This should display a molecule ABC with three electronegativity adjustors .
You can display or hide the bond moments , molecular dipoles , and partial charges at the right .
Turning on the Electric Field will show whether the molecule moves when exposed to a field , similar to .
Use the electronegativity controls to determine how the molecular dipole will look for the starting bent molecule if : ( a ) A and C are very electronegative and B is in the middle of the range .
( b ) A is very electronegative , and B and C are not .
( a ) Molecular dipole moment points immediately between A and C. ( b ) Molecular dipole moment points along the A–B bond , toward A .
Determine the partial charges that will give the largest possible bond dipoles .
Answer : The largest bond moments will occur with the largest partial charges .
The two solutions above represent how unevenly the electrons are shared in the bond .
The bond moments will be maximized when the electronegativity difference is greatest .
The controls for A and C should be set to one extreme , and B should be set to the opposite extreme .
Although the magnitude of the bond moment will not change based on whether B is the most electronegative or the least , the direction of the bond moment will .
We have examined the basic ideas of bonding , showing that atoms share electrons to form molecules with stable Lewis structures and that we can predict the shapes of those molecules by valence shell electron pair repulsion ( VSEPR ) theory .
These ideas provide an important starting point for understanding chemical bonding .
But these models sometimes fall short in their abilities to predict the behavior of real substances .
How can we reconcile the geometries of s , p , and d atomic orbitals with molecular shapes that show angles like 120° and 109.5° ?
Furthermore , we know that electrons and magnetic behavior are related through electromagnetic fields .
Both N and O have fairly similar Lewis structures that contain lone pairs of electrons .
Yet oxygen demonstrates very different magnetic behavior than nitrogen .
We can pour liquid nitrogen through a magnetic field with no visible interactions , while liquid oxygen ( shown in ) is attracted to the magnet and floats in the magnetic field .
We need to understand the additional concepts of valence bond theory , orbital hybridization , and molecular orbital theory to understand these observations .
For a theory to be accepted , it must explain experimental data and be able to predict behavior .
For example , VSEPR theory has gained widespread acceptance because it predicts three-dimensional molecular shapes that are consistent with experimental data collected for thousands of different molecules .
However , VSEPR theory does not provide an explanation of chemical bonding .
There are successful theories that describe the electronic structure of atoms .
We can use quantum mechanics to predict the specific regions around an atom where electrons are likely to be located : A spherical shape for an s orbital , a dumbbell shape for a p orbital , and so forth .
However , these predictions only describe the orbitals around free atoms .
When atoms bond to form molecules , atomic orbitals are not sufficient to describe the regions where electrons will be located in the molecule .
A more complete understanding of electron distributions requires a model that can account for the electronic structure of molecules .
One popular theory holds that a covalent bond forms when a pair of electrons is shared by two atoms and is simultaneously attracted by the nuclei of both atoms .
In the following sections , we will discuss how such bonds are described by valence bond theory and hybridization .
Valence bond theory describes a covalent bond as the overlap of half-filled atomic orbitals ( each containing a single electron ) that yield a pair of electrons shared between the two bonded atoms .
We say that orbitals on two different atoms overlap when a portion of one orbital and a portion of a second orbital occupy the same region of space .
According to valence bond theory , a covalent bond results when two conditions are met : ( 1 ) an orbital on one atom overlaps an orbital on a second atom and ( 2 ) the single electrons in each orbital combine to form an electron pair .
The mutual attraction between this negatively charged electron pair and the two atoms ’ positively charged nuclei serves to physically link the two atoms through a force we define as a covalent bond .
The strength of a covalent bond depends on the extent of overlap of the orbitals involved .
Orbitals that overlap extensively form bonds that are stronger than those that have less overlap .
The energy of the system depends on how much the orbitals overlap .
illustrates how the sum of the energies of two hydrogen atoms ( the colored curve ) changes as they approach each other .
When the atoms are far apart there is no overlap , and by convention we set the sum of the energies at zero .
As the atoms move together , their orbitals begin to overlap .
Each electron begins to feel the attraction of the nucleus in the other atom .
In addition , the electrons begin to repel each other , as do the nuclei .
While the atoms are still widely separated , the attractions are slightly stronger than the repulsions , and the energy of the system decreases .
( A bond begins to form . )
As the atoms move closer together , the overlap increases , so the attraction of the nuclei for the electrons continues to increase ( as do the repulsions among electrons and between the nuclei ) .
At some specific distance between the atoms , which varies depending on the atoms involved , the energy reaches its lowest ( most stable ) value .
This optimum distance between the two bonded nuclei is the bond distance between the two atoms .
The bond is stable because at this point , the attractive and repulsive forces combine to create the lowest possible energy configuration .
If the distance between the nuclei were to decrease further , the repulsions between nuclei and the repulsions as electrons are confined in closer proximity to each other would become stronger than the attractive forces .
The energy of the system would then rise ( making the system destabilized ) , as shown at the far left of .
The bond energy is the difference between the energy minimum ( which occurs at the bond distance ) and the energy of the two separated atoms .
This is the quantity of energy released when the bond is formed .
Conversely , the same amount of energy is required to break the bond .
For the H molecule shown in , at the bond distance of 74 pm the system is 7.24 10 J lower in energy than the two separated hydrogen atoms .
This may seem like a small number .
However , we know from our earlier description of thermochemistry that bond energies are often discussed on a per-mole basis .
For example , it requires 7.24 10 J to break one H–H bond , but it takes 4.36 10 J to break 1 mole of H–H bonds .
A comparison of some bond lengths and energies is shown in .
We can find many of these bonds in a variety of molecules , and this table provides average values .
For example , breaking the first C–H bond in CH requires 439.3 kJ/mol , while breaking the first C–H bond in H–CH C H ( a common paint thinner ) requires 375.5 kJ/mol .
In addition to the distance between two orbitals , the orientation of orbitals also affects their overlap ( other than for two s orbitals , which are spherically symmetric ) .
Greater overlap is possible when orbitals are oriented such that they overlap on a direct line between the two nuclei .
illustrates this for two p orbitals from different atoms ; the overlap is greater when the orbitals overlap end to end rather than at an angle .
A σ bond is a covalent bond in which the electron density is concentrated in the region along the internuclear axis ; that is , a line between the nuclei would pass through the center of the overlap region .
Single bonds in Lewis structures are described as σ bonds in valence bond theory .
A pi bond ( π bond ) is a type of covalent bond that results from the side-by-side overlap of two p orbitals , as illustrated in .
In a π bond , the regions of orbital overlap lie on opposite sides of the internuclear axis .
Along the axis itself , there is a node , that is , a plane with no probability of finding an electron .
While all single bonds are σ bonds , multiple bonds consist of both σ and π bonds .
As the Lewis structures below suggest , O contains a double bond , and N contains a triple bond .
The double bond consists of one σ bond and one π bond , and the triple bond consists of one σ bond and two π bonds .
Between any two atoms , the first bond formed will always be a σ bond , but there can only be one σ bond in any one location .
In any multiple bond , there will be one σ bond , and the remaining one or two bonds will be π bonds .
These bonds are described in more detail later in this chapter .
As seen in , an average carbon-carbon single bond is 347 kJ/mol , while in a carbon-carbon double bond , the π bond increases the bond strength by 267 kJ/mol .
Adding an additional π bond causes a further increase of 225 kJ/mol .
We can see a similar pattern when we compare other σ and π bonds .
Thus , each individual π bond is generally weaker than a corresponding σ bond between the same two atoms .
In a σ bond , there is a greater degree of orbital overlap than in a π bond .
Butadiene , C H , is used to make synthetic rubber .
Identify the number of σ and π bonds contained in this molecule .
There are six σ C–H bonds and one σ C–C bond , for a total of seven from the single bonds .
There are two double bonds that each have a π bond in addition to the σ bond .
This gives a total nine σ and two π bonds overall .
However , to understand how molecules with more than two atoms form stable bonds , we require a more detailed model .
As an example , let us consider the water molecule , in which we have one oxygen atom bonding to two hydrogen atoms .
Oxygen has the electron configuration 1 s 2 s 2 p , with two unpaired electrons ( one in each of the two 2 p orbitals ) .
Valence bond theory would predict that the two O–H bonds form from the overlap of these two 2 p orbitals with the 1 s orbitals of the hydrogen atoms .
If this were the case , the bond angle would be 90° , as shown in , because p orbitals are perpendicular to each other .
Experimental evidence shows that the bond angle is 104.5° , not 90° .
The prediction of the valence bond theory model does not match the real-world observations of a water molecule ; a different model is needed .
Quantum-mechanical calculations suggest why the observed bond angles in H O differ from those predicted by the overlap of the 1 s orbital of the hydrogen atoms with the 2 p orbitals of the oxygen atom .
The mathematical expression known as the wave function , ψ , contains information about each orbital and the wavelike properties of electrons in an isolated atom .
When atoms are bound together in a molecule , the wave functions combine to produce new mathematical descriptions that have different shapes .
This process of combining the wave functions for atomic orbitals is called hybridization and is mathematically accomplished by the linear combination of atomic orbitals , LCAO , ( a technique that we will encounter again later ) .
The new orbitals that result are called hybrid orbitals .
The valence orbitals in an isolated oxygen atom are a 2 s orbital and three 2 p orbitals .
The valence orbitals in an oxygen atom in a water molecule differ ; they consist of four equivalent hybrid orbitals that point approximately toward the corners of a tetrahedron .
Consequently , the overlap of the O and H orbitals should result in a tetrahedral bond angle ( 109.5° ) .
The observed angle of 104.5° is experimental evidence for which quantummechanical calculations give a useful explanation : Valence bond theory must include a hybridization component to give accurate predictions .
The following ideas are important in understanding hybridization : Hybrid orbitals do not exist in isolated atoms .
They are formed only in covalently bonded atoms .
Hybrid orbitals have shapes and orientations that are very different from those of the atomic orbitals in isolated atoms .
A set of hybrid orbitals is generated by combining atomic orbitals .
The number of hybrid orbitals in a set is equal to the number of atomic orbitals that were combined to produce the set .
All orbitals in a set of hybrid orbitals are equivalent in shape and energy .
The type of hybrid orbitals formed in a bonded atom depends on its electron-pair geometry as predicted by the VSEPR theory .
Hybrid orbitals overlap to form σ bonds .
Unhybridized orbitals overlap to form π bonds .
In the following sections , we shall discuss the common types of hybrid orbitals .
The beryllium atom in a gaseous BeCl molecule is an example of a central atom with no lone pairs of electrons in a linear arrangement of three atoms .
There are two regions of valence electron density in the BeCl molecule that correspond to the two covalent Be–Cl bonds .
To accommodate these two electron domains , two of the Be atom ’ s four valence orbitals will mix to yield two hybrid orbitals .
This hybridization process involves mixing of the valence s orbital with one of the valence p orbitals to yield two equivalent sp hybrid orbitals that are oriented in a linear geometry .
In this figure , the set of sp orbitals appears similar in shape to the original p orbital , but there is an important difference .
The number of atomic orbitals combined always equals the number of hybrid orbitals formed .
The p orbital is one orbital that can hold up to two electrons .
The sp set is two equivalent orbitals that point 180° from each other .
The two electrons that were originally in the s orbital are now distributed to the two sp orbitals , which are half filled .
In gaseous BeCl , these half-filled hybrid orbitals will overlap with orbitals from the chlorine atoms to form two identical σ bonds .
We illustrate the electronic differences in an isolated Be atom and in the bonded Be atom in the orbital energy-level diagram in .
These diagrams represent each orbital by a horizontal line ( indicating its energy ) and each electron by an arrow .
Energy increases toward the top of the diagram .
We use one upward arrow to indicate one electron in an orbital and two arrows ( up and down ) to indicate two electrons of opposite spin .
When atomic orbitals hybridize , the valence electrons occupy the newly created orbitals .
The Be atom had two valence electrons , so each of the sp orbitals gets one of these electrons .
Each of these electrons pairs up with the unpaired electron on a chlorine atom when a hybrid orbital and a chlorine orbital overlap during the formation of the Be–Cl bonds .
Any central atom surrounded by just two regions of valence electron density in a molecule will exhibit sp hybridization .
Other examples include the mercury atom in the linear HgCl molecule , the zinc atom in Zn ( CH ) , which contains a linear C–Zn–C arrangement , and the carbon atoms in HCCH and CO .
The valence orbitals of a central atom surrounded by three regions of electron density consist of a set of three sp hybrid orbitals and one unhybridized p orbital .
This arrangement results from sp hybridization , the mixing of one s orbital and two p orbitals to produce three identical hybrid orbitals oriented in a trigonal planar geometry .
Although quantum mechanics yields the “ plump ” orbital lobes as depicted in , sometimes for clarity these orbitals are drawn thinner and without the minor lobes , as in , to avoid obscuring other features of a given illustration .
We will use these “ thinner ” representations whenever the true view is too crowded to easily visualize .
The observed structure of the borane molecule , BH suggests sp hybridization for boron in this compound .
The molecule is trigonal planar , and the boron atom is involved in three bonds to hydrogen atoms .
We can illustrate the comparison of orbitals and electron distribution in an isolated boron atom and in the bonded atom in BH as shown in the orbital energy level diagram in .
We redistribute the three valence electrons of the boron atom in the three sp hybrid orbitals , and each boron electron pairs with a hydrogen electron when B–H bonds form .
Any central atom surrounded by three regions of electron density will exhibit sp hybridization .
This includes molecules with a lone pair on the central atom , such as ClNO , or molecules with two single bonds and a double bond connected to the central atom , as in formaldehyde , CH O , and ethene , H CCH .
The valence orbitals of an atom surrounded by a tetrahedral arrangement of bonding pairs and lone pairs consist of a set of four sp hybrid orbitals .
The hybrids result from the mixing of one s orbital and all three p orbitals that produces four identical sp hybrid orbitals .
Each of these hybrid orbitals points toward a different corner of a tetrahedron .
A molecule of methane , CH , consists of a carbon atom surrounded by four hydrogen atoms at the corners of a tetrahedron .
The carbon atom in methane exhibits sp hybridization .
We illustrate the orbitals and electron distribution in an isolated carbon atom and in the bonded atom in CH in .
The four valence electrons of the carbon atom are distributed equally in the hybrid orbitals , and each carbon electron pairs with a hydrogen electron when the C–H bonds form .
In a methane molecule , the 1 s orbital of each of the four hydrogen atoms overlaps with one of the four sp orbitals of the carbon atom to form a sigma ( σ ) bond .
This results in the formation of four strong , equivalent covalent bonds between the carbon atom and each of the hydrogen atoms to produce the methane molecule , CH .
The structure of ethane , C H is similar to that of methane in that each carbon in ethane has four neighboring atoms arranged at the corners of a tetrahedron—three hydrogen atoms and one carbon atom .
However , in ethane an sp orbital of one carbon atom overlaps end to end with an sp orbital of a second carbon atom to form a σ bond between the two carbon atoms .
Each of the remaining sp hybrid orbitals overlaps with an s orbital of a hydrogen atom to form carbon–hydrogen σ bonds .
The structure and overall outline of the bonding orbitals of ethane are shown in .
The orientation of the two CH groups is not fixed relative to each other .
Experimental evidence shows that rotation around σ bonds occurs easily .
An sp hybrid orbital can also hold a lone pair of electrons .
For example , the nitrogen atom in ammonia is surrounded by three bonding pairs and a lone pair of electrons directed to the four corners of a tetrahedron .
The nitrogen atom is sp hybridized with one hybrid orbital occupied by the lone pair .
The molecular structure of water is consistent with a tetrahedral arrangement of two lone pairs and two bonding pairs of electrons .
Thus we say that the oxygen atom is sp hybridized , with two of the hybrid orbitals occupied by lone pairs and two by bonding pairs .
Since lone pairs occupy more space than bonding pairs , structures that contain lone pairs have bond angles slightly distorted from the ideal .
Perfect tetrahedra have angles of 109.5° , but the observed angles in ammonia ( 107.3° ) and water ( 104.5° ) are slightly smaller .
Other examples of sp hybridization include CCl , PCl , and NCl .
To describe the five bonding orbitals in a trigonal bipyramidal arrangement , we must use five of the valence shell atomic orbitals ( the s orbital , the three p orbitals , and one of the d orbitals ) , which gives five sp d hybrid orbitals .
With an octahedral arrangement of six hybrid orbitals , we must use six valence shell atomic orbitals ( the s orbital , the three p orbitals , and two of the d orbitals in its valence shell ) , which gives six sp d hybrid orbitals .
These hybridizations are only possible for atoms that have d orbitals in their valence subshells ( that is , not those in the first or second period ) .
In a molecule of phosphorus pentachloride , PCl , there are five P–Cl bonds ( thus five pairs of valence electrons around the phosphorus atom ) directed toward the corners of a trigonal bipyramid .
We use the 3 s orbital , the three 3 p orbitals , and one of the 3 d orbitals to form the set of five sp d hybrid orbitals that are involved in the P–Cl bonds .
Other atoms that exhibit sp d hybridization include the sulfur atom in SF and the chlorine atoms in ClF and in ( The electrons on fluorine atoms are omitted for clarity . )
The sulfur atom in sulfur hexafluoride , SF , exhibits sp d hybridization .
A molecule of sulfur hexafluoride has six bonding pairs of electrons connecting six fluorine atoms to a single sulfur atom .
There are no lone pairs of electrons on the central atom .
To bond six fluorine atoms , the 3 s orbital , the three 3 p orbitals , and two of the 3 d orbitals form six equivalent sp d hybrid orbitals , each directed toward a different corner of an octahedron .
Other atoms that exhibit sp d hybridization include the phosphorus atom in IF , the iodine atom in the interhalogens and the xenon atom in XeF .
The hybridization of an atom is determined based on the number of regions of electron density that surround it .
The geometrical arrangements characteristic of the various sets of hybrid orbitals are shown in .
These arrangements are identical to those of the electron-pair geometries predicted by VSEPR theory .
VSEPR theory predicts the shapes of molecules , and hybrid orbital theory provides an explanation for how those shapes are formed .
To find the hybridization of a central atom , we can use the following guidelines : Determine the Lewis structure of the molecule .
Determine the number of regions of electron density around an atom using VSEPR theory , in which single bonds , multiple bonds , radicals , and lone pairs each count as one region .
Assign the set of hybridized orbitals from that corresponds to this geometry .
It is important to remember that hybridization was devised to rationalize experimentally observed molecular geometries .
The model works well for molecules containing small central atoms , in which the valence electron pairs are close together in space .
However , for larger central atoms , the valence-shell electron pairs are farther from the nucleus , and there are fewer repulsions .
Their compounds exhibit structures that are often not consistent with VSEPR theory , and hybridized orbitals are not necessary to explain the observed data .
For example , we have discussed the H–O–H bond angle in H O , 104.5° , which is more consistent with sp hybrid orbitals ( 109.5° ) on the central atom than with 2 p orbitals ( 90° ) .
Sulfur is in the same group as oxygen , and H S has a similar Lewis structure .
However , it has a much smaller bond angle ( 92.1° ) , which indicates much less hybridization on sulfur than oxygen .
Continuing down the group , tellurium is even larger than sulfur , and for H Te , the observed bond angle ( 90° ) is consistent with overlap of the 5 p orbitals , without invoking hybridization .
We invoke hybridization where it is necessary to explain the observed structures .
Ammonium sulfate is important as a fertilizer .
What is the hybridization of the sulfur atom in the sulfate ion , The Lewis structure of sulfate shows there are four regions of electron density .
The hybridization is sp .
What is the hybridization of the selenium atom in SeF ?
Answer : The selenium atom is sp d hybridized .
Urea , NH C ( O ) NH , is sometimes used as a source of nitrogen in fertilizers .
What is the hybridization of each nitrogen and carbon atom in urea ?
The Lewis structure of urea is The nitrogen atoms are surrounded by four regions of electron density , which arrange themselves in a tetrahedral electron-pair geometry .
The hybridization in a tetrahedral arrangement is sp .
This is the hybridization of the nitrogen atoms in urea .
The carbon atom is surrounded by three regions of electron density , positioned in a trigonal planar arrangement .
The hybridization in a trigonal planar electron pair geometry is sp , which is the hybridization of the carbon atom in urea .
Acetic acid , H CC ( O ) OH , is the molecule that gives vinegar its odor and sour taste .
What is the hybridization of the two carbon atoms in acetic acid ?
Is it also capable of describing molecules containing double and triple bonds ?
We have already discussed that multiple bonds consist of σ and π bonds .
Next we can consider how we visualize these components and how they relate to hybrid orbitals .
The Lewis structure of ethene , C H , shows us that each carbon atom is surrounded by one other carbon atom and two hydrogen atoms .
The three bonding regions form a trigonal planar electron-pair geometry .
Thus we expect the σ bonds from each carbon atom are formed using a set of sp hybrid orbitals that result from hybridization of two of the 2 p orbitals and the 2 s orbital .
These orbitals form the C–H single bonds and the σ bond in the double bond .
The π bond in the double bond results from the overlap of the third ( remaining ) 2 p orbital on each carbon atom that is not involved in hybridization .
This unhybridized p orbital ( lobes shown in red and blue in ) is perpendicular to the plane of the sp hybrid orbitals .
Thus the unhybridized 2 p orbitals overlap in a side-by-side fashion , above and below the internuclear axis and form a π bond .
In an ethene molecule , the four hydrogen atoms and the two carbon atoms are all in the same plane .
If the two planes of sp hybrid orbitals tilted relative to each other , the p orbitals would not be oriented to overlap efficiently to create the π bond .
The planar configuration for the ethene molecule occurs because it is the most stable bonding arrangement .
This is a significant difference between σ and π bonds ; rotation around single ( σ ) bonds occurs easily because the end-to-end orbital overlap does not depend on the relative orientation of the orbitals on each atom in the bond .
In other words , rotation around the internuclear axis does not change the extent to which the σ bonding orbitals overlap because the bonding electron density is symmetric about the axis .
Rotation about the internuclear axis is much more difficult for multiple bonds ; however , this would drastically alter the off-axis overlap of the π bonding orbitals , essentially breaking the π bond .
In molecules with sp hybrid orbitals , two unhybridized p orbitals remain on the atom .
We find this situation in acetylene , which is a linear molecule .
The sp hybrid orbitals of the two carbon atoms overlap end to end to form a σ bond between the carbon atoms .
The remaining sp orbitals form σ bonds with hydrogen atoms .
The two unhybridized p orbitals per carbon are positioned such that they overlap side by side and , hence , form two π bonds .
The two carbon atoms of acetylene are thus bound together by one σ bond and two π bonds , giving a triple bond .
Hybridization involves only σ bonds , lone pairs of electrons , and single unpaired electrons ( radicals ) .
Structures that account for these features describe the correct hybridization of the atoms .
However , many structures also include resonance forms .
Remember that resonance forms occur when various arrangements of π bonds are possible .
Since the arrangement of π bonds involves only the unhybridized orbitals , resonance does not influence the assignment of hybridization .
For example , molecule benzene has two resonance forms .
We can use either of these forms to determine that each of the carbon atoms is bonded to three other atoms with no lone pairs , so the correct hybridization is sp .
The electrons in the unhybridized p orbitals form π bonds .
Neither resonance structure completely describes the electrons in the π bonds .
They are not located in one position or the other , but in reality are delocalized throughout the ring .
Valence bond theory does not easily address delocalization .
Bonding in molecules with resonance forms is better described by molecular orbital theory .
( See the next module . )
Some acid rain results from the reaction of sulfur dioxide with atmospheric water vapor , followed by the formation of sulfuric acid .
Sulfur dioxide , SO , is a major component of volcanic gases as well as a product of the combustion of sulfur-containing coal .
What is the hybridization of the S atom in SO ?
The resonance structures of SO are The sulfur atom is surrounded by two bonds and one lone pair of electrons in either resonance structure .
Therefore , the electron-pair geometry is trigonal planar , and the hybridization of the sulfur atom is sp .
Another acid in acid rain is nitric acid , HNO , which is produced by the reaction of nitrogen dioxide , NO , with atmospheric water vapor .
What is the hybridization of the nitrogen atom in NO ?
( Note : the lone electron on nitrogen occupies a hybridized orbital just as a lone pair would . )
However , one of the most important molecules we know , the oxygen molecule O , presents a problem with respect to its Lewis structure .
We would write the following Lewis structure for O : This electronic structure adheres to all the rules governing Lewis theory .
There is an O=O double bond , and each oxygen atom has eight electrons around it .
However , this picture is at odds with the magnetic behavior of oxygen .
By itself , O is not magnetic , but it is attracted to magnetic fields .
Thus , when we pour liquid oxygen past a strong magnet , it collects between the poles of the magnet and defies gravity , as in .
Such attraction to a magnetic field is called paramagnetism , and it arises in molecules that have unpaired electrons .
And yet , the Lewis structure of O indicates that all electrons are paired .
How do we account for this discrepancy ?
Magnetic susceptibility measures the force experienced by a substance in a magnetic field .
When we compare the weight of a sample to the weight measured in a magnetic field , paramagnetic samples that are attracted to the magnet will appear heavier because of the force exerted by the magnetic field .
We can calculate the number of unpaired electrons based on the increase in weight .
Experiments show that each O molecule has two unpaired electrons .
The Lewis-structure model does not predict the presence of these two unpaired electrons .
Unlike oxygen , the apparent weight of most molecules decreases slightly in the presence of an inhomogeneous magnetic field .
Materials in which all of the electrons are paired are diamagnetic and weakly repel a magnetic field .
Paramagnetic and diamagnetic materials do not act as permanent magnets .
Only in the presence of an applied magnetic field do they demonstrate attraction or repulsion .
Molecular orbital theory ( MO theory ) provides an explanation of chemical bonding that accounts for the paramagnetism of the oxygen molecule .
It also explains the bonding in a number of other molecules , such as violations of the octet rule and more molecules with more complicated bonding ( beyond the scope of this text ) that are difficult to describe with Lewis structures .
Additionally , it provides a model for describing the energies of electrons in a molecule and the probable location of these electrons .
Unlike valence bond theory , which uses hybrid orbitals that are assigned to one specific atom , MO theory uses the combination of atomic orbitals to yield molecular orbitals that are delocalized over the entire molecule rather than being localized on its constituent atoms .
MO theory also helps us understand why some substances are electrical conductors , others are semiconductors , and still others are insulators .
summarizes the main points of the two complementary bonding theories .
Both theories provide different , useful ways of describing molecular structure .
Molecular orbital theory describes the distribution of electrons in molecules in much the same way that the distribution of electrons in atoms is described using atomic orbitals .
Using quantum mechanics , the behavior of an electron in a molecule is still described by a wave function , Ψ , analogous to the behavior in an atom .
Just like electrons around isolated atoms , electrons around atoms in molecules are limited to discrete ( quantized ) energies .
The region of space in which a valence electron in a molecule is likely to be found is called a molecular orbital ( Ψ ) .
Like an atomic orbital , a molecular orbital is full when it contains two electrons with opposite spin .
We will consider the molecular orbitals in molecules composed of two identical atoms ( H or Cl , for example ) .
Such molecules are called homonuclear diatomic molecules .
In these diatomic molecules , several types of molecular orbitals occur .
The mathematical process of combining atomic orbitals to generate molecular orbitals is called the linear combination of atomic orbitals ( LCAO ) .
The wave function describes the wavelike properties of an electron .
Molecular orbitals are combinations of atomic orbital wave functions .
Combining waves can lead to constructive interference , in which peaks line up with peaks , or destructive interference , in which peaks line up with troughs .
In orbitals , the waves are three dimensional , and they combine with in-phase waves producing regions with a higher probability of electron density and out-of-phase waves producing nodes , or regions of no electron density .
There are two types of molecular orbitals that can form from the overlap of two atomic s orbitals on adjacent atoms .
The two types are illustrated in .
The in-phase combination produces a lower energy σ molecular orbital ( read as `` sigma-s '' ) in which most of the electron density is directly between the nuclei .
The out-of-phase addition ( which can also be thought of as subtracting the wave functions ) produces a higher energy molecular orbital ( read as `` sigma-s-star '' ) molecular orbital in which there is a node between the nuclei .
The asterisk signifies that the orbital is an antibonding orbital .
Electrons in a σ orbital are attracted by both nuclei at the same time and are more stable ( of lower energy ) than they would be in the isolated atoms .
Adding electrons to these orbitals creates a force that holds the two nuclei together , so we call these orbitals bonding orbitals .
Electrons in the orbitals are located well away from the region between the two nuclei .
The attractive force between the nuclei and these electrons pulls the two nuclei apart .
Hence , these orbitals are called antibonding orbitals .
Electrons fill the lower-energy bonding orbital before the higher-energy antibonding orbital , just as they fill lower-energy atomic orbitals before they fill higher-energy atomic orbitals .
In p orbitals , the wave function gives rise to two lobes with opposite phases , analogous to how a two-dimensional wave has both parts above and below the average .
We indicate the phases by shading the orbital lobes different colors .
When orbital lobes of the same phase overlap , constructive wave interference increases the electron density .
When regions of opposite phase overlap , the destructive wave interference decreases electron density and creates nodes .
When p orbitals overlap end to end , they create σ and σ* orbitals .
If two atoms are located along the x -axis in a Cartesian coordinate system , the two p orbitals overlap end to end and form σ ( bonding ) and ( antibonding ) ( read as `` sigma-p-x '' and `` sigma-p-x star , '' respectively ) .
Just as with s -orbital overlap , the asterisk indicates the orbital with a node between the nuclei , which is a higher-energy , antibonding orbital .
The side-by-side overlap of two p orbitals gives rise to a pi ( π ) bonding molecular orbital and a π* antibonding molecular orbital , as shown in .
In valence bond theory , we describe π bonds as containing a nodal plane containing the internuclear axis and perpendicular to the lobes of the p orbitals , with electron density on either side of the node .
In molecular orbital theory , we describe the π orbital by this same shape , and a π bond exists when this orbital contains electrons .
Electrons in this orbital interact with both nuclei and help hold the two atoms together , making it a bonding orbital .
For the out-of-phase combination , there are two nodal planes created , one along the internuclear axis and a perpendicular one between the nuclei .
In the molecular orbitals of diatomic molecules , each atom also has two sets of p orbitals oriented side by side ( p and p ) , so these four atomic orbitals combine pairwise to create two π orbitals and two π* orbitals .
The π and orbitals are oriented at right angles to the π and orbitals .
Except for their orientation , the π and π orbitals are identical and have the same energy ; they are degenerate orbitals .
The and antibonding orbitals are also degenerate and identical except for their orientation .
The orbitals are all similar in energy .
( a ) is an in-phase combination , resulting in a σ orbital ( b ) will not result in a new orbital because the in-phase component ( bottom ) and out-of-phase component ( top ) cancel out .
Only orbitals with the correct alignment can combine .
( c ) is an out-of-phase combination , resulting in a orbital .
Label the molecular orbital shown as σ or π , bonding or antibonding and indicate where the node occurs .
Answer : The orbital is located along the internuclear axis , so it is a σ orbital .
There is a node bisecting the internuclear axis , so it is an antibonding orbital .
The relative energy levels of atomic and molecular orbitals are typically shown in a molecular orbital diagram .
For a diatomic molecule , the atomic orbitals of one atom are shown on the left , and those of the other atom are shown on the right .
Each horizontal line represents one orbital that can hold two electrons .
The molecular orbitals formed by the combination of the atomic orbitals are shown in the center .
Dashed lines show which of the atomic orbitals combine to form the molecular orbitals .
For each pair of atomic orbitals that combine , one lower-energy ( bonding ) molecular orbital and one higher-energy ( antibonding ) orbital result .
Thus we can see that combining the six 2 p atomic orbitals results in three bonding orbitals ( one σ and two π ) and three antibonding orbitals ( one σ* and two π* ) .
We predict the distribution of electrons in these molecular orbitals by filling the orbitals in the same way that we fill atomic orbitals , by the Aufbau principle .
Lower-energy orbitals fill first , electrons spread out among degenerate orbitals before pairing , and each orbital can hold a maximum of two electrons with opposite spins .
Just as we write electron configurations for atoms , we can write the molecular electronic configuration by listing the orbitals with superscripts indicating the number of electrons present .
For clarity , we place parentheses around molecular orbitals with the same energy .
In this case , each orbital is at a different energy , so parentheses separate each would have the orbital .
Thus we would expect a diatomic molecule or ion containing seven electrons ( such as molecular electron configuration It is common to omit the core electrons from molecular orbital diagrams and configurations and include only the valence electrons .
The filled molecular orbital diagram shows the number of electrons in both bonding and antibonding molecular orbitals .
The net contribution of the electrons to the bond strength of a molecule is identified by determining the bond order that results from the filling of the molecular orbitals by electrons .
When using Lewis structures to describe the distribution of electrons in molecules , we define bond order as the number of bonding pairs of electrons between two atoms .
Thus a single bond has a bond order of 1 , a double bond has a bond order of 2 , and a triple bond has a bond order of 3 .
We define bond order differently when we use the molecular orbital description of the distribution of electrons , but the resulting bond order is usually the same .
The MO technique is more accurate and can handle cases when the Lewis structure method fails , but both methods describe the same phenomenon .
In the molecular orbital model , an electron contributes to a bonding interaction if it occupies a bonding orbital and it contributes to an antibonding interaction if it occupies an antibonding orbital .
The bond order is calculated by subtracting the destabilizing ( antibonding ) electrons from the stabilizing ( bonding ) electrons .
Since a bond consists of two electrons , we divide by two to get the bond order .
We can determine bond order with the following equation : The order of a covalent bond is a guide to its strength ; a bond between two given atoms becomes stronger as the bond order increases .
If the distribution of electrons in the molecular orbitals between two atoms is such that the resulting bond would have a bond order of zero , a stable bond does not form .
We next look at some specific examples of MO diagrams and bond orders .
A dihydrogen molecule ( H ) forms from two hydrogen atoms .
When the atomic orbitals of the two atoms combine , the electrons occupy the molecular orbital of lowest energy , the σ bonding orbital .
A dihydrogen molecule , H , readily forms because the energy of a H molecule is lower than that of two H atoms .
The σ orbital that contains both electrons is lower in energy than either of the two 1 s atomic orbitals .
A dihydrogen molecule contains two bonding electrons and no antibonding electrons so we have Because the bond order for the H–H bond is equal to 1 , the bond is a single bond .
A helium atom has two electrons , both of which are in its 1 s orbital .
Two helium atoms do not combine to form a dihelium molecule , He , with four electrons , because the stabilizing effect of the two electrons in the lower-energy bonding orbital would be offset by the destabilizing effect of the two electrons in the higher-energy antibonding molecular orbital .
We would write the hypothetical electron configuration of He as as in .
The net energy change would be zero , so there is no driving force for helium atoms to form the diatomic molecule .
In fact , helium exists as discrete atoms rather than as diatomic molecules .
The bond order in a hypothetical dihelium molecule would be zero .
A bond order of zero indicates that no bond is formed between two atoms .
Eight possible homonuclear diatomic molecules might be formed by the atoms of the second period of the periodic table : Li , Be , B , C , N , O , F , and Ne .
However , we can predict that the Be molecule and the Ne molecule would not be stable .
We can see this by a consideration of the molecular electron configurations .
We predict valence molecular orbital electron configurations just as we predict electron configurations of atoms .
Valence electrons are assigned to valence molecular orbitals with the lowest possible energies .
Consistent with Hund ’ s rule , whenever there are two or more degenerate molecular orbitals , electrons fill each orbital of that type singly before any pairing of electrons takes place .
As we saw in valence bond theory , σ bonds are generally more stable than π bonds formed from degenerate atomic orbitals .
Similarly , in molecular orbital theory , σ orbitals are usually more stable than π orbitals .
However , this is not always the case .
The MOs for the valence orbitals of the second period are shown in .
Looking at Ne molecular orbitals , we see that the order is consistent with the generic diagram shown in the previous section .
However , for atoms with three or fewer electrons in the p orbitals ( Li through N ) we observe a different pattern , in which the σ orbital is higher in energy than the π set .
Obtain the molecular orbital diagram for a homonuclear diatomic ion by adding or subtracting electrons from the diagram for the neutral molecule .
This switch in orbital ordering occurs because of a phenomenon called s-p mixing .
s-p mixing does not create new orbitals ; it merely influences the energies of the existing molecular orbitals .
The σ wavefunction mathematically combines with the σ wavefunction , with the result that the σ orbital becomes more stable , and the σ orbital becomes less stable .
Similarly , the antibonding orbitals also undergo s-p mixing , with the σ becoming more stable and the σ becoming less stable .
s-p mixing occurs when the s and p orbitals have similar energies .
All of the other period 2 diatomic molecules do have s-p mixing , which leads to the pattern where the σ orbital is raised above the π set .
Using the MO diagrams shown in , we can add in the electrons and determine the molecular electron configuration and bond order for each of the diatomic molecules .
As shown in , Be and Ne molecules would have a bond order of 0 , and these molecules do not exist .
The combination of two lithium atoms to form a lithium molecule , Li , is analogous to the formation of H , but the atomic orbitals involved are the valence 2 s orbitals .
Each of the two lithium atoms has one valence electron .
Hence , we have two valence electrons available for the σ bonding molecular orbital .
Because both valence electrons would be in a bonding orbital , we would predict the Li molecule to be stable .
The molecule is , in fact , present in appreciable concentration in lithium vapor at temperatures near the boiling point of the element .
All of the other molecules in with a bond order greater than zero are also known .
The O molecule has enough electrons to half fill the level .
We expect the two electrons that occupy these two degenerate orbitals to be unpaired , and this molecular electronic configuration for O is in accord with the fact that the oxygen molecule has two unpaired electrons .
The presence of two unpaired electrons has proved to be difficult to explain using Lewis structures , but the molecular orbital theory explains it quite well .
In fact , the unpaired electrons of the oxygen molecule provide a strong piece of support for the molecular orbital theory .
Draw the molecular orbital diagram for the oxygen molecule , O .
From this diagram , calculate the bond order for O .
How does this diagram account for the paramagnetism of O ?
We draw a molecular orbital energy diagram similar to that shown in .
Each oxygen atom contributes six electrons , so the diagram appears as shown in .
We calculate the bond order as Oxygen 's paramagnetism is explained by the presence of two unpaired electrons in the ( π , π ) * molecular orbitals .
The main component of air is N .
From the molecular orbital diagram of N , predict its bond order and whether it is diamagnetic or paramagnetic .
Answer : N has a bond order of 3 and is diamagnetic .
Give the molecular orbital configuration for the valence electrons in Looking at the appropriate MO diagram , we see that the π orbitals are lower in energy than the σ orbital .
The valence electron configuration for C is Adding two more electrons to Will this ion be stable ?
anion will give a valence electron configuration of generate the Since this has six more bonding electrons than antibonding , the bond order will be 3 , and the ion should be stable .
How many unpaired electrons would be present on a diamagnetic ?
Would it be paramagnetic or Answer : two , paramagnetic We are surrounded by an ocean of gas—the atmosphere—and many of the properties of gases are familiar to us from our daily activities .
Heated gases expand , which can make a hot air balloon rise or cause a blowout in a bicycle tire left in the sun on a hot day .
Gases have played an important part in the development of chemistry .
In the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries , many scientists investigated gas behavior , providing the first mathematical descriptions of the behavior of matter .
In this chapter , we will examine the relationships between gas temperature , pressure , amount , and volume .
We will study a simple theoretical model and use it to analyze the experimental behavior of gases .
The results of these analyses will show us the limitations of the theory and how to improve on it .
Although we do not normally notice atmospheric pressure , we are sensitive to pressure changes—for example , when your ears “ pop ” during take-off and landing while flying , or when you dive underwater .
Gas pressure is caused by the force exerted by gas molecules colliding with the surfaces of objects .
Although the force of each collision is very small , any surface of appreciable area experiences a large number of collisions in a short time , which can result in a high pressure .
In fact , normal air pressure is strong enough to crush a metal container when not balanced by equal pressure from inside the container .
Atmospheric pressure is caused by the weight of the column of air molecules in the atmosphere above an object , such as the tanker car .
At sea level , this pressure is roughly the same as that exerted by a full-grown African elephant standing on a doormat , or a typical bowling ball resting on your thumbnail .
These may seem like huge amounts , and they are , but life on earth has evolved under such atmospheric pressure .
If you actually perch a bowling ball on your thumbnail , the pressure experienced is twice the usual pressure , and the sensation is unpleasant .
In general , pressure is defined as the force exerted on a given area : Note that pressure is directly proportional to force and inversely proportional to area .
Thus , pressure can be increased either by increasing the amount of force or by decreasing the area over which it is applied ; pressure can be decreased by decreasing the force or increasing the area .
Let ’ s apply this concept to determine which would be more likely to fall through thin ice in —the elephant or the figure skater ?
One pascal is a small pressure ; in many cases , it is more convenient to use units of kilopascal ( 1 kPa = 1000 Pa ) or bar ( 1 bar = 100,000 Pa ) .
In the United States , pressure is often measured in pounds of force on an area of one square inch— pounds per square inch ( psi ) —for example , in car tires .
Pressure can also be measured using the unit atmosphere ( atm ) , which originally represented the average sea level air pressure at the approximate latitude of Paris ( 45° ) .
provides some information on these and a few other common units for pressure measurements The United States National Weather Service reports pressure in both inches of Hg and millibars .
Convert a pressure of 29.2 in .
Hg into : ( a ) torr ( b ) atm ( c ) kPa ( d ) mbar This is a unit conversion problem .
The relationships between the various pressure units are given in .
( a ) ( b ) ( c ) ( d ) A typical barometric pressure in Kansas City is 740 torr .
What is this pressure in atmospheres , in millimeters of mercury , in kilopascals , and in bar ?
Answer : 0.974 atm ; 740 mm Hg ; 98.7 kPa ; 0.987 bar We can measure atmospheric pressure , the force exerted by the atmosphere on the earth ’ s surface , with a barometer .
A barometer is a glass tube that is closed at one end , filled with a nonvolatile liquid such as mercury , and then inverted and immersed in a container of that liquid .
The atmosphere exerts pressure on the liquid outside the tube , the column of liquid exerts pressure inside the tube , and the pressure at the liquid surface is the same inside and outside the tube .
The height of the liquid in the tube is therefore proportional to the pressure exerted by the atmosphere .
If the liquid is water , normal atmospheric pressure will support a column of water over 10 meters high , which is rather inconvenient for making ( and reading ) a barometer .
Because mercury ( Hg ) is about 13.6-times denser than water , a mercury barometer only needs to be as tall as a water barometer—a more suitable size .
Standard atmospheric pressure of 1 atm at sea level ( 101,325 Pa ) corresponds to a column of mercury that is about 760 mm ( 29.92 in . )
The torr was originally intended to be a unit equal to one millimeter of mercury , but it no longer corresponds exactly .
The pressure exerted by a fluid due to gravity is known as hydrostatic pressure , p : where h is the height of the fluid , ρ is the density of the fluid , and g is acceleration due to gravity .
Show the calculation supporting the claim that atmospheric pressure near sea level corresponds to the pressure exerted by a column of mercury that is about 760 mm high .
The density of mercury = 13.6 g/cm .
The hydrostatic pressure is given by p = hρg , with h = 760 mm , ρ = 13.6 g/cm , and g = 9.81 m/s .
Plugging these values into the equation and doing the necessary unit conversions will give us the value we seek .
( Note : We are expecting to find a pressure of ~101,325 Pa. ) Calculate the height of a column of water at 25 °C that corresponds to normal atmospheric pressure .
The density of water at this temperature is 1.0 g/cm .
Answer : 10.3 m A manometer is a device similar to a barometer that can be used to measure the pressure of a gas trapped in a container .
A closed-end manometer is a U-shaped tube with one closed arm , one arm that connects to the gas to be measured , and a nonvolatile liquid ( usually mercury ) in between .
As with a barometer , the distance between the liquid levels in the two arms of the tube ( h in the diagram ) is proportional to the pressure of the gas in the container .
An open-end manometer is the same as a closed-end manometer , but one of its arms is open to the atmosphere .
In this case , the distance between the liquid levels corresponds to the difference in pressure between the gas in the container and the atmosphere .
The pressure of a sample of gas is measured with a closed-end manometer , as shown to the right .
The liquid in the manometer is mercury .
Determine the pressure of the gas in : ( a ) torr ( b ) Pa ( c ) bar The pressure of the gas is equal to a column of mercury of height 26.4 cm .
( The pressure at the bottom horizontal line is equal on both sides of the tube .
The pressure on the left is due to the gas and the pressure on the right is due to 26.4 cm Hg , or mercury . )
We could use the equation p = hρg as in , but it is simpler to just convert between units using .
( a ) ( b ) ( c ) The pressure of a sample of gas is measured with a closed-end manometer .
The liquid in the manometer is mercury .
( The pressure at the bottom horizontal line is equal on both sides of the tube .
The pressure on the left is due to the gas and the pressure on the right is due to 13.7 cm of Hg plus atmospheric pressure . )
Eventually , these individual laws were combined into a single equation—the ideal gas law —that relates gas quantities for gases and is quite accurate for low pressures and moderate temperatures .
We will consider the key developments in individual relationships ( for pedagogical reasons not quite in historical order ) , then put them together in the ideal gas law .
Imagine filling a rigid container attached to a pressure gauge with gas and then sealing the container so that no gas may escape .
If the container is cooled , the gas inside likewise gets colder and its pressure is observed to decrease .
Since the container is rigid and tightly sealed , both the volume and number of moles of gas remain constant .
If we heat the sphere , the gas inside gets hotter and the pressure increases .
This relationship between temperature and pressure is observed for any sample of gas confined to a constant volume .
An example of experimental pressure-temperature data is shown for a sample of air under these conditions in .
Guillaume Amontons was the first to empirically establish the relationship between the pressure and the temperature of a gas ( ~1700 ) , and Joseph Louis Gay-Lussac determined the relationship more precisely ( ~1800 ) .
Because of this , the P T relationship for gases is known as either Amontons ’ s law or Gay-Lussac ’ s law .
Under either name , it states that the pressure of a given amount of gas is directly proportional to its temperature on the kelvin scale when the volume is held constant .
Mathematically , this can be written : where means “ is proportional to , ” and k is a proportionality constant that depends on the identity , amount , and volume of the gas .
For a confined , constant volume of gas , the ratio ) .
Note that temperatures must be on the kelvin scale for any gas law calculations ( 0 on the kelvin scale and the lowest possible temperature is called absolute zero ) .
( Also note that there are at least three ways we can describe how the pressure of a gas changes as its temperature changes : We can use a table of values , a graph , or a mathematical equation . )
which reduces to is therefore constant ( i.e. , and A can of hair spray is used until it is empty except for the propellant , isobutane gas .
( a ) On the can is the warning “ Store only at temperatures below 120 °F ( 48.8 °C ) .
Do not incinerate. ” Why ?
( b ) The gas in the can is initially at 24 °C and 360 kPa , and the can has a volume of 350 mL .
If the can is left in a car that reaches 50 °C on a hot day , what is the new pressure in the can ?
( a ) The can contains an amount of isobutane gas at a constant volume , so if the temperature is increased by heating , the pressure will increase proportionately .
High temperature could lead to high pressure , causing the can to burst .
( Also , isobutane is combustible , so incineration could cause the can to explode . )
( b ) We are looking for a pressure change due to a temperature change at constant volume , so we will use Amontons ’ s/Gay-Lussac ’ s law .
What pressure will it have if cooled to –73 °C while the volume remains constant ?
Answer : 400 torr If we fill a balloon with air and seal it , the balloon contains a specific amount of air at atmospheric pressure , let ’ s say 1 atm .
If we put the balloon in a refrigerator , the gas inside gets cold and the balloon shrinks ( although both the amount of gas and its pressure remain constant ) .
If we make the balloon very cold , it will shrink a great deal , and it expands again when it warms up .
These examples of the effect of temperature on the volume of a given amount of a confined gas at constant pressure are true in general : The volume increases as the temperature increases , and decreases as the temperature decreases .
Volume-temperature data for a 1-mole sample of methane gas at 1 atm are listed and graphed in .
The relationship between the volume and temperature of a given amount of gas at constant pressure is known as Charles ’ s law in recognition of the French scientist and balloon flight pioneer Jacques Alexandre César Charles .
Charles ’ s law states that the volume of a given amount of gas is directly proportional to its temperature on the kelvin scale when the pressure is held constant .
Mathematically , this can be written as : with k being a proportionality constant that depends on the amount and pressure of the gas .
What volume will the gas have at 30 °C and 750 torr ?
Because we are looking for the volume change caused by a temperature change at constant pressure , this is a job for Charles ’ s law .
A sample of oxygen , O , occupies 32.2 mL at 30 °C and 452 torr .
What volume will it occupy at –70 °C and the same pressure ?
Answer : 21.6 mL Temperature is sometimes measured with a gas thermometer by observing the change in the volume of the gas as the temperature changes at constant pressure .
The hydrogen in a particular hydrogen gas thermometer has a volume of 150.0 cm when immersed in a mixture of ice and water ( 0.00 °C ) .
When immersed in boiling liquid ammonia , the volume of the hydrogen , at the same pressure , is 131.7 cm .
Find the temperature of boiling ammonia on the kelvin and Celsius scales .
A volume change caused by a temperature change at constant pressure means we should use Charles ’ s law .
What is the volume of a sample of ethane at 467 K and 1.1 atm if it occupies 405 mL at 298 K and 1.1 atm ?
Answer : 635 mL If we partially fill an airtight syringe with air , the syringe contains a specific amount of air at constant temperature , say 25 °C .
If we slowly push in the plunger while keeping temperature constant , the gas in the syringe is compressed into a smaller volume and its pressure increases ; if we pull out the plunger , the volume increases and the pressure decreases .
This example of the effect of volume on the pressure of a given amount of a confined gas is true in general .
Decreasing the volume of a contained gas will increase its pressure , and increasing its volume will decrease its pressure .
In fact , if the volume increases by a certain factor , the pressure decreases by the same factor , and vice versa .
Volume-pressure data for an air sample at room temperature are graphed in .
Unlike the P T and V T relationships , pressure and volume are not directly proportional to each other .
Instead , P and V exhibit inverse proportionality : Increasing the pressure results in a decrease of the volume of the gas .
Mathematically this can be written : versus the volume ( V ) , or the inverse of volume with k being a constant .
Graphically , this relationship is shown by the straight line that results when plotting the inverse of the pressure versus the pressure ( P ) .
Graphs with curved lines are difficult to read accurately at low or high values of the variables , and they are more difficult to use in fitting theoretical equations and parameters to experimental data .
For those reasons , scientists often try to find a way to “ linearize ” their data .
If we plot P versus V , we obtain a hyperbola ( see ) .
The relationship between the volume and pressure of a given amount of gas at constant temperature was first published by the English natural philosopher Robert Boyle over 300 years ago .
It is summarized in the statement now known as Boyle ’ s law : The volume of a given amount of gas held at constant temperature is inversely proportional to the pressure under which it is measured .
The sample of gas in has a volume of 15.0 mL at a pressure of 13.0 psi .
Determine the pressure of the gas at a volume of 7.5 mL , using : ( a ) the P V graph in ( b ) the vs. V graph in ( c ) the Boyle ’ s law equation Comment on the likely accuracy of each method .
( a ) Estimating from the P V graph gives a value for P somewhere around 27 psi .
( b ) Estimating from the versus V graph give a value of about 26 psi .
( c ) From Boyle ’ s law , we know that the product of pressure and volume ( PV ) for a given sample of gas at a constant temperature is always equal to the same value .
Therefore we have P V = k and P V = k which means that P V = P V .
The calculation will be as accurate as the equation and measurements allow .
The sample of gas in has a volume of 30.0 mL at a pressure of 6.5 psi .
Determine the volume of the gas at a pressure of 11.0 psi , using : ( a ) the P V graph in ( b ) the vs. V graph in ( c ) the Boyle ’ s law equation Comment on the likely accuracy of each method .
Over time , this relationship was supported by many experimental observations as expressed by Avogadro ’ s law : For a confined gas , the volume ( V ) and number of moles ( n ) are directly proportional if the pressure and temperature both remain constant .
In equation form , this is written as : Mathematical relationships can also be determined for the other variable pairs , such as P versus n , and n versus T .
The units used to express pressure , volume , and temperature will determine the proper form of the gas constant as required by dimensional analysis , the most commonly encountered values being 0.08206 L atm mol K and 8.314 kPa L mol K .
Gases whose properties of P , V , and T are accurately described by the ideal gas law ( or the other gas laws ) are said to exhibit ideal behavior or to approximate the traits of an ideal gas .
An ideal gas is a hypothetical construct that may be used along with kinetic molecular theory to effectively explain the gas laws as will be described in a later module of this chapter .
Although all the calculations presented in this module assume ideal behavior , this assumption is only reasonable for gases under conditions of relatively low pressure and high temperature .
In the final module of this chapter , a modified gas law will be introduced that accounts for the non-ideal behavior observed for many gases at relatively high pressures and low temperatures .
The ideal gas equation contains five terms , the gas constant R and the variable properties P , V , n , and T .
Specifying any four of these terms will permit use of the ideal gas law to calculate the fifth term as demonstrated in the following example exercises .
Methane , CH , is being considered for use as an alternative automotive fuel to replace gasoline .
One gallon of gasoline could be replaced by 655 g of CH .
What is the volume of this much methane at 25 °C and 745 torr ?
We must rearrange PV = nRT to solve for V : If we choose to use R = 0.08206 L atm mol K , then the amount must be in moles , temperature must be in kelvin , and pressure must be in atm .
Converting into the “ right ” units : It would require 1020 L ( 269 gal ) of gaseous methane at about 1 atm of pressure to replace 1 gal of gasoline .
It requires a large container to hold enough methane at 1 atm to replace several gallons of gasoline .
Calculate the pressure in bar of 2520 moles of hydrogen gas stored at 27 °C in the 180-L storage tank of a modern hydrogen-powered car .
When filled with air , a typical scuba tank with a volume of 13.2 L has a pressure of 153 atm .
If the water temperature is 27 °C , how many liters of air will such a tank provide to a diver ’ s lungs at a depth of approximately 70 feet in the ocean where the pressure is 3.13 atm ?
Despite this limitation , the calculated volume can be viewed as a good “ ballpark ” estimate . )
A sample of ammonia is found to occupy 0.250 L under laboratory conditions of 27 °C and 0.850 atm .
Find the volume of this sample at 0 °C and 1.00 atm .
Answer : 0.193 L We have seen that the volume of a given quantity of gas and the number of molecules ( moles ) in a given volume of gas vary with changes in pressure and temperature .
Chemists sometimes make comparisons against a standard temperature and pressure ( STP ) for reporting properties of gases : 273.15 K and 1 atm ( 101.325 kPa ) .
At STP , one mole of an ideal gas has a volume of about 22.4 L—this is referred to as the standard molar volume .
French nobleman Antoine Lavoisier , widely regarded as the “ father of modern chemistry , ” changed chemistry from a qualitative to a quantitative science through his work with gases .
He discovered the law of conservation of matter , discovered the role of oxygen in combustion reactions , determined the composition of air , explained respiration in terms of chemical reactions , and more .
He was a casualty of the French Revolution , guillotined in 1794 .
For gases , molar amount can be derived from convenient experimental measurements of pressure , temperature , and volume .
Therefore , these measurements are useful in assessing the stoichiometry of pure gases , gas mixtures , and chemical reactions involving gases .
This section will not introduce any new material or ideas , but will provide examples of applications and ways to integrate concepts already discussed .
The ideal gas law described previously in this chapter relates the properties of pressure P , volume V , temperature T , and molar amount n .
This law is universal , relating these properties in identical fashion regardless of the chemical identity of the gas : The density d of a gas , on the other hand , is determined by its identity .
As described in another chapter of this text , the density of a substance is a characteristic property that may be used to identify the substance .
What is the density of molecular nitrogen gas at STP ?
The molar mass of molecular nitrogen , N , is 28.01 g/mol .
Substituting this value along with standard temperature and pressure into the gas density equation yields What is the density of molecular hydrogen gas at 17.0 °C and a pressure of 760 torr ?
Answer : d = 0.0847 g/L When the identity of a gas is unknown , measurements of the mass , pressure , volume , and temperature of a sample can be used to calculate the molar mass of the gas ( a useful property for identification purposes ) .
Combining the ideal gas equation and the definition of molarity yields the following equation : Determining the molar mass of a gas via this approach is demonstrated in .
Cyclopropane , a gas once used with oxygen as a general anesthetic , is composed of 85.7 % carbon and 14.3 % hydrogen by mass .
Find the empirical formula .
If 1.56 g of cyclopropane occupies a volume of 1.00 L at 0.984 atm and 50 °C , what is the molecular formula for cyclopropane ?
First determine the empirical formula of the gas .
Assume 100 g and convert the percentage of each element into grams .
Determine the number of moles of carbon and hydrogen in the 100-g sample of cyclopropane .
Divide by the smallest number of moles to relate the number of moles of carbon to the number of moles of hydrogen .
In the last step , realize that the smallest whole number ratio is the empirical formula : Empirical formula is CH [ empirical mass ( EM ) of 14.03 g/empirical unit ] .
Find the empirical formula .
If 1.10 g of acetylene occupies of volume of 1.00 L at 1.15 atm and 59.5 °C , what is the molecular formula for acetylene ?
What is the approximate molar mass of chloroform ?
Since then substituting and rearranging gives and A sample of phosphorus that weighs 3.243 10 g exerts a pressure of 31.89 kPa in a 56.0-mL bulb at 550 °C .
What are the molar mass and molecular formula of phosphorus vapor ?
Answer : 124 g/mol P Unless they chemically react with each other , the individual gases in a mixture of gases do not affect each other ’ s pressure .
Each individual gas in a mixture exerts the same pressure that it would exert if it were present alone in the container .
The pressure exerted by each individual gas in a mixture is called its partial pressure .
A 10.0-L vessel contains 2.50 10 mol of H , 1.00 10 mol of He , and 3.00 10 mol of Ne at 35 °C .
( a ) What are the partial pressures of each of the gases ?
( b ) What is the total pressure in atmospheres ?
What is the total pressure in the flask in atmospheres ?
Answer : 1.137 atm Here is another example of this concept , but dealing with mole fraction calculations .
A gas mixture used for anesthesia contains 2.83 mol oxygen , O , and 8.41 mol nitrous oxide , N O .
The total pressure of the mixture is 192 kPa .
( a ) What are the mole fractions of O and N O ?
( b ) What are the partial pressures of O and N O ?
The mole fraction is given by For O , and the partial pressure is P = X P .
and For N O , and What is the pressure of a mixture of 0.200 g of H , 1.00 g of N , and 0.820 g of Ar in a container with a volume of 2.00 L at 20 °C ?
Answer : 1.87 atm A simple way to collect gases that do not react with water is to capture them in a bottle that has been filled with water and inverted into a dish filled with water .
The pressure of the gas inside the bottle can be made equal to the air pressure outside by raising or lowering the bottle .
When the water level is the same both inside and outside the bottle , the pressure of the gas is equal to the atmospheric pressure , which can be measured with a barometer .
However , there is another factor we must consider when we measure the pressure of the gas by this method .
Water evaporates and there is always gaseous water ( water vapor ) above a sample of liquid water .
As a gas is collected over water , it becomes saturated with water vapor and the total pressure of the mixture equals the partial pressure of the gas plus the partial pressure of the water vapor .
The pressure of the pure gas is therefore equal to the total pressure minus the pressure of the water vapor—this is referred to as the “ dry ” gas pressure , that is , the pressure of the gas only , without water vapor .
If 0.200 L of argon is collected over water at a temperature of 26 °C and a pressure of 750 torr in a system like that shown in , what is the partial pressure of argon ?
Answer : 0.583 L Chemical stoichiometry describes the quantitative relationships between reactants and products in chemical reactions .
We have previously measured quantities of reactants and products using masses for solids and volumes in conjunction with the molarity for solutions ; now we can also use gas volumes to indicate quantities .
If we know the volume , pressure , and temperature of a gas , we can use the ideal gas equation to calculate how many moles of the gas are present .
If we know how many moles of a gas are involved , we can calculate the volume of a gas at any temperature and pressure .
Sometimes we can take advantage of a simplifying feature of the stoichiometry of gases that solids and solutions do not exhibit : All gases that show ideal behavior contain the same number of molecules in the same volume ( at the same temperature and pressure ) .
Thus , the ratios of volumes of gases involved in a chemical reaction are given by the coefficients in the equation for the reaction , provided that the gas volumes are measured at the same temperature and pressure .
For example , since nitrogen and hydrogen gases react to produce ammonia gas according to a given volume of nitrogen gas reacts with three times that volume of hydrogen gas to produce two times that volume of ammonia gas , if pressure and temperature remain constant .
The explanation for this is illustrated in .
According to Avogadro ’ s law , equal volumes of gaseous N , H , and NH , at the same temperature and pressure , contain the same number of molecules .
Because one molecule of N reacts with three molecules of H to produce two molecules of NH , the volume of H required is three times the volume of N , and the volume of NH produced is two times the volume of N .
Propane , C H ( g ) , is used in gas grills to provide the heat for cooking .
What volume of O ( g ) measured at 25 °C and 760 torr is required to react with 2.7 L of propane measured under the same conditions of temperature and pressure ?
Assume that the propane undergoes complete combustion .
An acetylene tank for an oxyacetylene welding torch provides 9340 L of acetylene gas , C H , at 0 °C and 1 atm .
How many tanks of oxygen , each providing 7.00 10 L of O at 0 °C and 1 atm , will be required to burn the acetylene ?
Answer : 3.34 tanks ( 2.34 10 L ) Ammonia is an important fertilizer and industrial chemical .
Suppose that a volume of 683 billion cubic feet of gaseous ammonia , measured at 25 °C and 1 atm , was manufactured .
What volume of H ( g ) , measured under the same conditions , was required to prepare this amount of ammonia by reaction with N ?
Because equal volumes of H and NH contain equal numbers of molecules and each three molecules of H that react produce two molecules of NH , the ratio of the volumes of H and NH will be equal to 3:2 .
Two volumes of NH , in this case in units of billion ft , will be formed from three volumes of H : The manufacture of 683 billion ft of NH required 1020 billion ft of H .
( At 25 °C and 1 atm , this is the volume of a cube with an edge length of approximately 1.9 miles . )
What volume of O ( g ) measured at 25 °C and 760 torr is required to react with 17.0 L of ethylene , C H ( g ) , measured under the same conditions of temperature and pressure ?
The products are CO and water vapor .
Answer : 51.0 L What volume of hydrogen at 27 °C and 723 torr may be prepared by the reaction of 8.88 g of gallium with an excess of hydrochloric acid ?
What volume of SO at 343 °C and 1.21 atm is produced by burning l.00 kg of sulfur in excess oxygen ?
Although gaseous molecules travel at tremendous speeds ( hundreds of meters per second ) , they collide with other gaseous molecules and travel in many different directions before reaching the desired target .
At room temperature , a gaseous molecule will experience billions of collisions per second .
The mean free path is the average distance a molecule travels between collisions .
The gaseous atoms or molecules are , of course , unaware of any concentration gradient , they simply move randomly—regions of higher concentration have more particles than regions of lower concentrations , and so a net movement of species from high to low concentration areas takes place .
In a closed environment , diffusion will ultimately result in equal concentrations of gas throughout , as depicted in .
The gaseous atoms and molecules continue to move , but since their concentrations are the same in both bulbs , the rates of transfer between the bulbs are equal ( no net transfer of molecules occurs ) .
Note also that the time required for diffusion to occur is inversely proportional to the rate of diffusion , as shown in the rate of diffusion equation .
A process involving movement of gaseous species similar to diffusion is effusion , the escape of gas molecules through a tiny hole such as a pinhole in a balloon into a vacuum .
Although diffusion and effusion rates both depend on the molar mass of the gas involved , their rates are not equal ; however , the ratios of their rates are the same .
If a mixture of gases is placed in a container with porous walls , the gases effuse through the small openings in the walls .
The lighter gases pass through the small openings more rapidly ( at a higher rate ) than the heavier ones .
From Graham ’ s law , we have : Hydrogen effuses four times as rapidly as oxygen .
At a particular pressure and temperature , nitrogen gas effuses at the rate of 79 mL/s .
Under the same conditions , at what rate will sulfur dioxide effuse ?
Answer : 52 mL/s It takes 243 s for 4.46 10 mol Xe to effuse through a tiny hole .
Under the same conditions , how long will it take 4.46 10 mol Ne to effuse ?
It is important to resist the temptation to use the times directly , and to remember how rate relates to time as well as how it relates to mass .
A party balloon filled with helium deflates to an identical balloon filled with the same number of moles of air ( = 28.2 g/mol ) to deflate to original volume ?
of its original volume in 8.0 hours .
How long will it take of its Answer : 32 h An unknown gas effuses 1.66 times more rapidly than CO .
What is the molar mass of the unknown gas ?
Can you make a reasonable guess as to its identity ?
From Graham ’ s law , we have : Plug in known data : Solve : The gas could well be CH , the only gas with this molar mass .
Hydrogen gas effuses through a porous container 8.97-times faster than an unknown gas .
Estimate the molar mass of the unknown gas .
The mathematical forms of these laws closely describe the macroscopic behavior of most gases at pressures less than about 1 or 2 atm .
Although the gas laws describe relationships that have been verified by many experiments , they do not tell us why gases follow these relationships .
The kinetic molecular theory ( KMT ) is a simple microscopic model that effectively explains the gas laws described in previous modules of this chapter .
This theory is based on the following five postulates described here .
( Note : The term “ molecule ” will be used to refer to the individual chemical species that compose the gas , although some gases are composed of atomic species , for example , the noble gases . )
Gases are composed of molecules that are in continuous motion , travelling in straight lines and changing direction only when they collide with other molecules or with the walls of a container .
The molecules composing the gas are negligibly small compared to the distances between them .
The pressure exerted by a gas in a container results from collisions between the gas molecules and the container walls .
Gas molecules exert no attractive or repulsive forces on each other or the container walls ; therefore , their collisions are elastic ( do not involve a loss of energy ) .
The average kinetic energy of the gas molecules is proportional to the kelvin temperature of the gas .
The test of the KMT and its postulates is its ability to explain and describe the behavior of a gas .
The various gas laws can be derived from the assumptions of the KMT , which have led chemists to believe that the assumptions of the theory accurately represent the properties of gas molecules .
We will first look at the individual gas laws ( Boyle ’ s , Charles ’ s , Amontons ’ s , Avogadro ’ s , and Dalton ’ s laws ) conceptually to see how the KMT explains them .
Then , we will more carefully consider the relationships between molecular masses , speeds , and kinetic energies with temperature , and explain Graham ’ s law .
If the temperature is increased , the average speed and kinetic energy of the gas molecules increase .
If the volume is held constant , the increased speed of the gas molecules results in more frequent and more forceful collisions with the walls of the container , therefore increasing the pressure .
Charles ’ s law .
If the temperature of a gas is increased , a constant pressure may be maintained only if the volume occupied by the gas increases .
This will result in greater average distances traveled by the molecules to reach the container walls , as well as increased wall surface area .
These conditions will decrease the both the frequency of molecule-wall collisions and the number of collisions per unit area , the combined effects of which balance the effect of increased collision forces due to the greater kinetic energy at the higher temperature .
Boyle ’ s law .
If the gas volume is decreased , the container wall area decreases and the molecule-wall collision frequency increases , both of which increase the pressure exerted by the gas .
Avogadro ’ s law .
At constant pressure and temperature , the frequency and force of molecule-wall collisions are constant .
Under such conditions , increasing the number of gaseous molecules will require a proportional increase in the container volume in order to yield a decrease in the number of collisions per unit area to compensate for the increased frequency of collisions .
Dalton ’ s Law .
The previous discussion showed that the KMT qualitatively explains the behaviors described by the various gas laws .
The postulates of this theory may be applied in a more quantitative fashion to derive these individual laws .
To do this , we must first look at velocities and kinetic energies of gas molecules , and the temperature of a gas sample .
In a gas sample , individual molecules have widely varying speeds ; however , because of the vast number of molecules and collisions involved , the molecular speed distribution and average speed are constant .
This molecular speed distribution is known as a Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution , and it depicts the relative numbers of molecules in a bulk sample of gas that possesses a given speed .
The kinetic energy ( KE ) of a particle of mass ( m ) and speed ( u ) is given by : Expressing mass in kilograms and speed in meters per second will yield energy values in units of joules ( J = kg m s ) .
To deal with a large number of gas molecules , we use averages for both speed and kinetic energy .
The KE of a mole of gas molecules is also directly proportional to the temperature of the gas and may be described by the equation : where R is the gas constant and T is the kelvin temperature .
When used in this equation , the appropriate form of the gas constant is 8.314 J/mol K ( 8.314 kg m s mol K ) .
These two separate equations for KE may be combined and rearranged to yield a relation between molecular speed and temperature : Calculate the root-mean-square velocity for a nitrogen molecule at 30 °C .
Convert the temperature into Kelvin : Determine the molar mass of nitrogen in kilograms : Replace the variables and constants in the root-mean-square velocity equation , replacing Joules with the equivalent kg m s : Calculate the root-mean-square velocity for a mole of oxygen molecules at –23 °C .
Answer : 441 m/s If the temperature of a gas increases , its KE increases , more molecules have higher speeds and fewer molecules have lower speeds , and the distribution shifts toward higher speeds overall , that is , to the right .
If temperature decreases , KE decreases , more molecules have lower speeds and fewer molecules have higher speeds , and the distribution shifts toward lower speeds overall , that is , to the left .
This behavior is illustrated for nitrogen gas in .
At a given temperature , all gases have the same KE for their molecules .
Gases composed of lighter molecules have more high-speed particles and a higher u , with a speed distribution that peaks at relatively higher velocities .
Gases consisting of heavier molecules have more low-speed particles , a lower u , and a speed distribution that peaks at relatively lower velocities .
This trend is demonstrated by the data for a series of noble gases shown in .
According to Graham ’ s law , the molecules of a gas are in rapid motion and the molecules themselves are small .
The average distance between the molecules of a gas is large compared to the size of the molecules .
As a consequence , gas molecules can move past each other easily and diffuse at relatively fast rates .
This is the same relation observed experimentally and expressed as Graham ’ s law .
As mentioned in the previous modules of this chapter , however , the behavior of a gas is often non-ideal , meaning that the observed relationships between its pressure , volume , and temperature are not accurately described by the gas laws .
In this section , the reasons for these deviations from ideal gas behavior are considered .
One way in which the accuracy of PV = nRT can be judged is by comparing the actual volume of 1 mole of gas ( its molar volume , V ) to the molar volume of an ideal gas at the same temperature and pressure .
This ratio is called the compressibility factor ( Z ) with : Ideal gas behavior is therefore indicated when this ratio is equal to 1 , and any deviation from 1 is an indication of non-ideal behavior .
shows plots of Z over a large pressure range for several common gases .
As is apparent from , the ideal gas law does not describe gas behavior well at relatively high pressures .
To determine why this is , consider the differences between real gas properties and what is expected of a hypothetical ideal gas .
Particles of a hypothetical ideal gas have no significant volume and do not attract or repel each other .
In general , real gases approximate this behavior at relatively low pressures and high temperatures .
However , at high pressures , the molecules of a gas are crowded closer together , and the amount of empty space between the molecules is reduced .
At these higher pressures , the volume of the gas molecules themselves becomes appreciable relative to the total volume occupied by the gas .
The gas therefore becomes less compressible at these high pressures , and although its volume continues to decrease with increasing pressure , this decrease is not proportional as predicted by Boyle ’ s law .
At relatively low pressures , gas molecules have practically no attraction for one another because they are ( on average ) so far apart , and they behave almost like particles of an ideal gas .
At higher pressures , however , the force of attraction is also no longer insignificant .
This force pulls the molecules a little closer together , slightly decreasing the pressure ( if the volume is constant ) or decreasing the volume ( at constant pressure ) .
This change is more pronounced at low temperatures because the molecules have lower KE relative to the attractive forces , and so they are less effective in overcoming these attractions after colliding with one another .
There are several different equations that better approximate gas behavior than does the ideal gas law .
The first , and simplest , of these was developed by the Dutch scientist Johannes van der Waals in 1879 .
The van der Waals equation improves upon the ideal gas law by adding two terms : one to account for the volume of the gas molecules and another for the attractive forces between them .
The constant a corresponds to the strength of the attraction between molecules of a particular gas , and the constant b corresponds to the size of the molecules of a particular gas .
The “ correction ” to the pressure term in the ideal gas law is and the “ correction ” to the volume is nb .
Note that when V is relatively large and n is relatively small , both of these correction terms become negligible , and the van der Waals equation reduces to the ideal gas law , PV = nRT .
Such a condition corresponds to a gas in which a relatively low number of molecules is occupying a relatively large volume , that is , a gas at a relatively low pressure .
Experimental values for the van der Waals constants of some common gases are given in .
At low pressures , the correction for intermolecular attraction , a , is more important than the one for molecular volume , b .
At high pressures and small volumes , the correction for the volume of the molecules becomes important because the molecules themselves are incompressible and constitute an appreciable fraction of the total volume .
At some intermediate pressure , the two corrections have opposing influences and the gas appears to follow the relationship given by PV = nRT over a small range of pressures .
This behavior is reflected by the “ dips ” in several of the compressibility curves shown in .
The attractive force between molecules initially makes the gas more compressible than an ideal gas , as pressure is raised ( Z decreases with increasing P ) .
At very high pressures , the gas becomes less compressible ( Z increases with P ) , as the gas molecules begin to occupy an increasingly significant fraction of the total gas volume .
Strictly speaking , the ideal gas equation functions well when intermolecular attractions between gas molecules are negligible and the gas molecules themselves do not occupy an appreciable part of the whole volume .
These criteria are satisfied under conditions of low pressure and high temperature .
Under such conditions , the gas is said to behave ideally , and deviations from the gas laws are small enough that they may be disregarded—this is , however , very often not the case .
A 4.25-L flask contains 3.46 mol CO at 229 °C .
Calculate the pressure of this sample of CO : ( a ) from the ideal gas law ( b ) from the van der Waals equation ( c ) Explain the reason ( s ) for the difference .
( a ) From the ideal gas law : ( b ) From the van der Waals equation : This finally yields P = 32.4 atm .
( c ) This is not very different from the value from the ideal gas law because the pressure is not very high and the temperature is not very low .
The value is somewhat different because CO molecules do have some volume and attractions between molecules , and the ideal gas law assumes they do not have volume or attractions .
A 560-mL flask contains 21.3 g N at 145 °C .
Calculate the pressure of N : ( a ) from the ideal gas law ( b ) from the van der Waals equation ( c ) Explain the reason ( s ) for the difference .
Answer : ( a ) 46.562 atm ; ( b ) 46.594 atm ; ( c ) The van der Waals equation takes into account the volume of the gas molecules themselves as well as intermolecular attractions .
The great distances between atoms and molecules in a gaseous phase , and the corresponding absence of any significant interactions between them , allows for simple descriptions of many physical properties that are the same for all gases , regardless of their chemical identities .
As described in the final module of the chapter on gases , this situation changes at high pressures and low temperatures—conditions that permit the atoms and molecules to interact to a much greater extent .
In the liquid and solid states , these interactions are of considerable strength and play an important role in determining a number of physical properties that do depend on the chemical identity of the substance .
In this chapter , the nature of these interactions and their effects on various physical properties of liquid and solid phases will be examined .
In the following description , the term particle will be used to refer to an atom , molecule , or ion .
Note that we will use the popular phrase “ intermolecular attraction ” to refer to attractive forces between the particles of a substance , regardless of whether these particles are molecules , atoms , or ions .
The differences in the properties of a solid , liquid , or gas reflect the strengths of the attractive forces between the atoms , molecules , or ions that make up each phase .
The phase in which a substance exists depends on the relative extents of its intermolecular forces ( IMFs ) and the kinetic energies ( KE ) of its molecules .
IMFs are the various forces of attraction that may exist between the atoms and molecules of a substance due to electrostatic phenomena , as will be detailed in this module .
These forces serve to hold particles close together , whereas the particles ’ KE provides the energy required to overcome the attractive forces and thus increase the distance between particles .
illustrates how changes in physical state may be induced by changing the temperature , hence , the average KE , of a given substance .
As an example of the processes depicted in this figure , consider a sample of water .
When gaseous water is cooled sufficiently , the attractions between H O molecules will be capable of holding them together when they come into contact with each other ; the gas condenses , forming liquid H O .
For example , liquid water forms on the outside of a cold glass as the water vapor in the air is cooled by the cold glass , as seen in .
We can also liquefy many gases by compressing them , if the temperature is not too high .
The increased pressure brings the molecules of a gas closer together , such that the attractions between the molecules become strong relative to their KE .
Consequently , they form liquids .
Butane , C H , is the fuel used in disposable lighters and is a gas at standard temperature and pressure .
Inside the lighter ’ s fuel compartment , the butane is compressed to a pressure that results in its condensation to the liquid state , as shown in .
Finally , if the temperature of a liquid becomes sufficiently low , or the pressure on the liquid becomes sufficiently high , the molecules of the liquid no longer have enough KE to overcome the IMF between them , and a solid forms .
A more thorough discussion of these and other changes of state , or phase transitions , is provided in a later module of this chapter .
Under appropriate conditions , the attractions between all gas molecules will cause them to form liquids or solids .
This is due to intermolecular forces , not intra molecular forces .
Intra molecular forces are those within the molecule that keep the molecule together , for example , the bonds between the atoms .
Inter molecular forces are the attractions between molecules , which determine many of the physical properties of a substance .
illustrates these different molecular forces .
The strengths of these attractive forces vary widely , though usually the IMFs between small molecules are weak compared to the intramolecular forces that bond atoms together within a molecule .
For example , to overcome the IMFs in one mole of liquid HCl and convert it into gaseous HCl requires only about 17 kilojoules .
However , to break the covalent bonds between the hydrogen and chlorine atoms in one mole of HCl requires about 25 times more energy—430 kilojoules .
All of the attractive forces between neutral atoms and molecules are known as van der Waals forces , although they are usually referred to more informally as intermolecular attraction .
We will consider the various types of IMFs in the next three sections of this module .
One of the three van der Waals forces is present in all condensed phases , regardless of the nature of the atoms or molecules composing the substance .
This attractive force is called the London dispersion force in honor of Germanborn American physicist Fritz London who , in 1928 , first explained it .
This force is often referred to as simply the dispersion force .
The presence of this dipole can , in turn , distort the electrons of a neighboring atom or molecule , producing an induced dipole .
These two rapidly fluctuating , temporary dipoles thus result in a relatively weak electrostatic attraction between the species—a so-called dispersion force like that illustrated in .
Dispersion forces that develop between atoms in different molecules can attract the two molecules to each other .
The forces are relatively weak , however , and become significant only when the molecules are very close .
Larger and heavier atoms and molecules exhibit stronger dispersion forces than do smaller and lighter atoms and molecules .
F and Cl are gases at room temperature ( reflecting weaker attractive forces ) ; Br is a liquid , and I is a solid ( reflecting stronger attractive forces ) .
Trends in observed melting and boiling points for the halogens clearly demonstrate this effect , as seen in .
The increase in melting and boiling points with increasing atomic/molecular size may be rationalized by considering how the strength of dispersion forces is affected by the electronic structure of the atoms or molecules in the substance .
In a larger atom , the valence electrons are , on average , farther from the nuclei than in a smaller atom .
Thus , they are less tightly held and can more easily form the temporary dipoles that produce the attraction .
The measure of how easy or difficult it is for another electrostatic charge ( for example , a nearby ion or polar molecule ) to distort a molecule ’ s charge distribution ( its electron cloud ) is known as polarizability .
A molecule that has a charge cloud that is easily distorted is said to be very polarizable and will have large dispersion forces ; one with a charge cloud that is difficult to distort is not very polarizable and will have small dispersion forces .
Order the following compounds of a group 14 element and hydrogen from lowest to highest boiling point : CH , SiH , GeH , and SnH .
Explain your reasoning .
The molar masses of CH , SiH , GeH , and SnH are approximately 16 g/mol , 32 g/mol , 77 g/mol , and 123 g/mol , respectively .
Therefore , CH is expected to have the lowest boiling point and SnH the highest boiling point .
The ordering from lowest to highest boiling point is expected to be CH < SiH < GeH < SnH .
A graph of the actual boiling points of these compounds versus the period of the group 14 element shows this prediction to be correct : Order the following hydrocarbons from lowest to highest boiling point : C H , C H , and C H .
Answer : C H < C H < C H .
All of these compounds are nonpolar and only have London dispersion forces : the larger the molecule , the larger the dispersion forces and the higher the boiling point .
The ordering from lowest to highest boiling point is therefore C H < C H < C H .
The shapes of molecules also affect the magnitudes of the dispersion forces between them .
For example , boiling points for the isomers n -pentane , isopentane , and neopentane ( shown in ) are 36 °C , 27 °C , and 9.5 °C , respectively .
Even though these compounds are composed of molecules with the same chemical formula , C H , the difference in boiling points suggests that dispersion forces in the liquid phase are different , being greatest for n -pentane and least for neopentane .
The elongated shape of n -pentane provides a greater surface area available for contact between molecules , resulting in correspondingly stronger dispersion forces .
The more compact shape of isopentane offers a smaller surface area available for intermolecular contact and , therefore , weaker dispersion forces .
Neopentane molecules are the most compact of the three , offering the least available surface area for intermolecular contact and , hence , the weakest dispersion forces .
This behavior is analogous to the connections that may be formed between strips of VELCRO brand fasteners : the greater the area of the strip ’ s contact , the stronger the connection .
Recall from the chapter on chemical bonding and molecular geometry that polar molecules have a partial positive charge on one side and a partial negative charge on the other side of the molecule—a separation of charge called a dipole .
Consider a polar molecule such as hydrogen chloride , HCl .
In the HCl molecule , the more electronegative Cl atom bears the partial negative charge , whereas the less electronegative H atom bears the partial positive charge .
An attractive force between HCl molecules results from the attraction between the positive end of one HCl molecule and the negative end of another .
This attractive force is called a dipole-dipole attraction —the electrostatic force between the partially positive end of one polar molecule and the partially negative end of another , as illustrated in .
The effect of a dipole-dipole attraction is apparent when we compare the properties of HCl molecules to nonpolar F molecules .
Both HCl and F consist of the same number of atoms and have approximately the same molecular mass .
At a temperature of 150 K , molecules of both substances would have the same average KE .
However , the dipoledipole attractions between HCl molecules are sufficient to cause them to “ stick together ” to form a liquid , whereas the relatively weaker dispersion forces between nonpolar F molecules are not , and so this substance is gaseous at this temperature .
The higher normal boiling point of HCl ( 188 K ) compared to F ( 85 K ) is a reflection of the greater strength of dipole-dipole attractions between HCl molecules , compared to the attractions between nonpolar F molecules .
We will often use values such as boiling or freezing points , or enthalpies of vaporization or fusion , as indicators of the relative strengths of IMFs of attraction present within different substances .
Predict which will have the higher boiling point : N or CO .
Explain your reasoning .
CO and N are both diatomic molecules with masses of about 28 amu , so they experience similar London dispersion forces .
Because CO is a polar molecule , it experiences dipole-dipole attractions .
Because N is nonpolar , its molecules can not exhibit dipole-dipole attractions .
The dipole-dipole attractions between CO molecules are comparably stronger than the dispersion forces between nonpolar N molecules , so CO is expected to have the higher boiling point .
Predict which will have the higher boiling point : ICl or Br .
Explain your reasoning .
Answer : ICl .
ICl and Br have similar masses ( ~160 amu ) and therefore experience similar London dispersion forces .
ICl is polar and thus also exhibits dipole-dipole attractions ; Br is nonpolar and does not .
The relatively stronger dipole-dipole attractions require more energy to overcome , so ICl will have the higher boiling point .
Nitrosyl fluoride ( ONF , molecular mass 49 amu ) is a gas at room temperature .
Water ( H O , molecular mass 18 amu ) is a liquid , even though it has a lower molecular mass .
We clearly can not attribute this difference between the two compounds to dispersion forces .
Both molecules have about the same shape and ONF is the heavier and larger molecule .
It is , therefore , expected to experience more significant dispersion forces .
Additionally , we can not attribute this difference in boiling points to differences in the dipole moments of the molecules .
Both molecules are polar and exhibit comparable dipole moments .
The large difference between the boiling points is due to a particularly strong dipole-dipole attraction that may occur when a molecule contains a hydrogen atom bonded to a fluorine , oxygen , or nitrogen atom ( the three most electronegative elements ) .
Molecules with F-H , O-H , or N-H moieties are very strongly attracted to similar moieties in nearby molecules , a particularly strong type of dipole-dipole attraction called hydrogen bonding .
Examples of hydrogen bonds include HF HF , H O HOH , and H N HNH , in which the hydrogen bonds are denoted by dots .
illustrates hydrogen bonding between water molecules .
Despite use of the word “ bond , ” keep in mind that hydrogen bonds are intermolecular attractive forces , not intramolecular attractive forces ( covalent bonds ) .
Hydrogen bonds are much weaker than covalent bonds , only about 5 to 10 % as strong , but are generally much stronger than other dipole-dipole attractions and dispersion forces .
Hydrogen bonds have a pronounced effect on the properties of condensed phases ( liquids and solids ) .
The boiling points of the heaviest three hydrides for each group are plotted in .
As we progress down any of these groups , the polarities of the molecules decrease slightly , whereas the sizes of the molecules increase substantially .
The effect of increasingly stronger dispersion forces dominates that of increasingly weaker dipole-dipole attractions , and the boiling points are observed to increase steadily .
If we use this trend to predict the boiling points for the lightest hydride for each group , we would expect NH to boil at about −120 °C , H O to boil at about −80 °C , and HF to boil at about −110 °C .
However , when we measure the boiling points for these compounds , we find that they are dramatically higher than the trends would predict , as shown in .
The stark contrast between our naïve predictions and reality provides compelling evidence for the strength of hydrogen bonding .
Consider the compounds dimethylether ( CH OCH ) , ethanol ( CH CH OH ) , and propane ( CH CH CH ) .
Their boiling points , not necessarily in order , are −42.1 °C , −24.8 °C , and 78.4 °C .
Match each compound with its boiling point .
Explain your reasoning .
The VSEPR-predicted shapes of CH OCH , CH CH OH , and CH CH CH are similar , as are their molar masses ( 46 g/mol , 46 g/mol , and 44 g/mol , respectively ) , so they will exhibit similar dispersion forces .
Since CH CH CH is nonpolar , it may exhibit only dispersion forces .
Because CH OCH is polar , it will also experience dipole-dipole attractions .
Finally , CH CH OH has an −OH group , and so it will experience the uniquely strong dipole-dipole attraction known as hydrogen bonding .
So the ordering in terms of strength of IMFs , and thus boiling points , is CH CH CH < CH OCH < CH CH OH .
The boiling point of propane is −42.1 °C , the boiling point of dimethylether is −24.8 °C , and the boiling point of ethanol is 78.5 °C .
Ethane ( CH CH ) has a melting point of −183 °C and a boiling point of −89 °C .
Predict the melting and boiling points for methylamine ( CH NH ) .
Explain your reasoning .
Answer : The melting point and boiling point for methylamine are predicted to be significantly greater than those of ethane .
CH CH and CH NH are similar in size and mass , but methylamine possesses an −NH group and therefore may exhibit hydrogen bonding .
This greatly increases its IMFs , and therefore its melting and boiling points .
It is difficult to predict values , but the known values are a melting point of −93 °C and a boiling point of −6 °C .
But when you pour syrup on pancakes or add oil to a car engine , you note that syrup and motor oil do not flow as readily .
The viscosity of a liquid is a measure of its resistance to flow .
Water , gasoline , and other liquids that flow freely have a low viscosity .
Honey , syrup , motor oil , and other liquids that do not flow freely , like those shown in , have higher viscosities .
The IMFs between the molecules of a liquid , the size and shape of the molecules , and the temperature determine how easily a liquid flows .
As shows , the more structurally complex are the molecules in a liquid and the stronger the IMFs between them , the more difficult it is for them to move past each other and the greater is the viscosity of the liquid .
As the temperature increases , the molecules move more rapidly and their kinetic energies are better able to overcome the forces that hold them together ; thus , the viscosity of the liquid decreases .
The various IMFs between identical molecules of a substance are examples of cohesive forces .
The molecules within a liquid are surrounded by other molecules and are attracted equally in all directions by the cohesive forces within the liquid .
However , the molecules on the surface of a liquid are attracted only by about one-half as many molecules .
Because of the unbalanced molecular attractions on the surface molecules , liquids contract to form a shape that minimizes the number of molecules on the surface—that is , the shape with the minimum surface area .
A small drop of liquid tends to assume a spherical shape , as shown in , because in a sphere , the ratio of surface area to volume is at a minimum .
Larger drops are more greatly affected by gravity , air resistance , surface interactions , and so on , and as a result , are less spherical .
Surface tension is defined as the energy required to increase the surface area of a liquid , or the force required to increase the length of a liquid surface by a given amount .
This property results from the cohesive forces between molecules at the surface of a liquid , and it causes the surface of a liquid to behave like a stretched rubber membrane .
Surface tensions of several liquids are presented in .
Among common liquids , water exhibits a distinctly high surface tension due to strong hydrogen bonding between its molecules .
As a result of this high surface tension , the surface of water represents a relatively “ tough skin ” that can withstand considerable force without breaking .
A steel needle carefully placed on water will float .
Some insects , like the one shown in , even though they are denser than water , move on its surface because they are supported by the surface tension .
The IMFs of attraction between two different molecules are called adhesive forces .
Consider what happens when water comes into contact with some surface .
If the adhesive forces between water molecules and the molecules of the surface are weak compared to the cohesive forces between the water molecules , the water does not “ wet ” the surface .
For example , water does not wet waxed surfaces or many plastics such as polyethylene .
Water forms drops on these surfaces because the cohesive forces within the drops are greater than the adhesive forces between the water and the plastic .
Water spreads out on glass because the adhesive force between water and glass is greater than the cohesive forces within the water .
When water is confined in a glass tube , its meniscus ( surface ) has a concave shape because the water wets the glass and creeps up the side of the tube .
On the other hand , the cohesive forces between mercury atoms are much greater than the adhesive forces between mercury and glass .
Mercury therefore does not wet glass , and it forms a convex meniscus when confined in a tube because the cohesive forces within the mercury tend to draw it into a drop .
If you place one end of a paper towel in spilled wine , as shown in , the liquid wicks up the paper towel .
A similar process occurs in a cloth towel when you use it to dry off after a shower .
These are examples of capillary action —when a liquid flows within a porous material due to the attraction of the liquid molecules to the surface of the material and to other liquid molecules .
The adhesive forces between the liquid and the porous material , combined with the cohesive forces within the liquid , may be strong enough to move the liquid upward against gravity .
Towels soak up liquids like water because the fibers of a towel are made of molecules that are attracted to water molecules .
Most cloth towels are made of cotton , and paper towels are generally made from paper pulp .
Both consist of long molecules of cellulose that contain many −OH groups .
Water molecules are attracted to these −OH groups and form hydrogen bonds with them , which draws the H O molecules up the cellulose molecules .
The water molecules are also attracted to each other , so large amounts of water are drawn up the cellulose fibers .
Capillary action can also occur when one end of a small diameter tube is immersed in a liquid , as illustrated in .
If the liquid molecules are strongly attracted to the tube molecules , the liquid creeps up the inside of the tube until the weight of the liquid and the adhesive forces are in balance .
The smaller the diameter of the tube is , the higher the liquid climbs .
It is partly by capillary action occurring in plant cells called xylem that water and dissolved nutrients are brought from the soil up through the roots and into a plant .
Capillary action is the basis for thin layer chromatography , a laboratory technique commonly used to separate small quantities of mixtures .
You depend on a constant supply of tears to keep your eyes lubricated and on capillary action to pump tear fluid away .
When the tube is made of a material to which the liquid molecules are strongly attracted , they will spread out completely on the surface , which corresponds to a contact angle of 0° .
This is the situation for water rising in a glass tube .
At 25 °C , how high will water rise in a glass capillary tube with an inner diameter of 0.25 mm ?
For water , T = 71.99 mN/m and ρ = 1.0 g/cm .
The liquid will rise to a height h given by : The Newton is defined as a kg m/s , and so the provided surface tension is equivalent to 0.07199 kg/s .
The provided density must be converted into units that will cancel appropriately : ρ = 1000 kg/m .
The diameter of the tube in meters is 0.00025 m , so the radius is 0.000125 m. For a glass tube immersed in water , the contact angle is θ = 0° , so cos θ = 1 .
Finally , acceleration due to gravity on the earth is g = 9.8 m/s .
Substituting these values into the equation , and cancelling units , we have : Water rises in a glass capillary tube to a height of 8.4 cm .
What is the diameter of the capillary tube ?
As one example of global significance , consider the evaporation , condensation , freezing , and melting of water .
These changes of state are essential aspects of our earth ’ s water cycle as well as many other natural phenomena and technological processes of central importance to our lives .
In this module , the essential aspects of phase transitions are explored .
When a liquid vaporizes in a closed container , gas molecules can not escape .
As these gas phase molecules move randomly about , they will occasionally collide with the surface of the condensed phase , and in some cases , these collisions will result in the molecules re-entering the condensed phase .
The change from the gas phase to the liquid is called condensation .
When the rate of condensation becomes equal to the rate of vaporization , neither the amount of the liquid nor the amount of the vapor in the container changes .
The vapor in the container is then said to be in equilibrium with the liquid .
Keep in mind that this is not a static situation , as molecules are continually exchanged between the condensed and gaseous phases .
Such is an example of a dynamic equilibrium , the status of a system in which reciprocal processes ( for example , vaporization and condensation ) occur at equal rates .
The pressure exerted by the vapor in equilibrium with a liquid in a closed container at a given temperature is called the liquid ’ s vapor pressure ( or equilibrium vapor pressure ) .
The area of the surface of the liquid in contact with a vapor and the size of the vessel have no effect on the vapor pressure , although they do affect the time required for the equilibrium to be reached .
We can measure the vapor pressure of a liquid by placing a sample in a closed container , like that illustrated in , and using a manometer to measure the increase in pressure that is due to the vapor in equilibrium with the condensed phase .
The chemical identities of the molecules in a liquid determine the types ( and strengths ) of intermolecular attractions possible ; consequently , different substances will exhibit different equilibrium vapor pressures .
Relatively strong intermolecular attractive forces will serve to impede vaporization as well as favoring “ recapture ” of gas-phase molecules when they collide with the liquid surface , resulting in a relatively low vapor pressure .
Weak intermolecular attractions present less of a barrier to vaporization , and a reduced likelihood of gas recapture , yielding relatively high vapor pressures .
The following example illustrates this dependence of vapor pressure on intermolecular attractive forces .
Given the shown structural formulas for these four compounds , explain their relative vapor pressures in terms of types and extents of IMFs : Diethyl ether has a very small dipole and most of its intermolecular attractions are London forces .
Although this molecule is the largest of the four under consideration , its IMFs are the weakest and , as a result , its molecules most readily escape from the liquid .
It also has the highest vapor pressure .
Due to its smaller size , ethanol exhibits weaker dispersion forces than diethyl ether .
However , ethanol is capable of hydrogen bonding and , therefore , exhibits stronger overall IMFs , which means that fewer molecules escape from the liquid at any given temperature , and so ethanol has a lower vapor pressure than diethyl ether .
Water is much smaller than either of the previous substances and exhibits weaker dispersion forces , but its extensive hydrogen bonding provides stronger intermolecular attractions , fewer molecules escaping the liquid , and a lower vapor pressure than for either diethyl ether or ethanol .
Ethylene glycol has two −OH groups , so , like water , it exhibits extensive hydrogen bonding .
It is much larger than water and thus experiences larger London forces .
Its overall IMFs are the largest of these four substances , which means its vaporization rate will be the slowest and , consequently , its vapor pressure the lowest .
At 20 °C , the vapor pressures of several alcohols are given in this table .
Explain these vapor pressures in terms of types and extents of IMFs for these alcohols : Answer : All these compounds exhibit hydrogen bonding ; these strong IMFs are difficult for the molecules to overcome , so the vapor pressures are relatively low .
As the size of molecule increases from methanol to butanol , dispersion forces increase , which means that the vapor pressures decrease as observed : P > P > P > P .
As temperature increases , the vapor pressure of a liquid also increases due to the increased average KE of its molecules .
Recall that at any given temperature , the molecules of a substance experience a range of kinetic energies , with a certain fraction of molecules having a sufficient energy to overcome IMF and escape the liquid ( vaporize ) .
At a higher temperature , a greater fraction of molecules have enough energy to escape from the liquid , as shown in .
The escape of more molecules per unit of time and the greater average speed of the molecules that escape both contribute to the higher vapor pressure .
When the vapor pressure increases enough to equal the external atmospheric pressure , the liquid reaches its boiling point .
The boiling point of a liquid is the temperature at which its equilibrium vapor pressure is equal to the pressure exerted on the liquid by its gaseous surroundings .
For liquids in open containers , this pressure is that due to the earth ’ s atmosphere .
The normal boiling point of a liquid is defined as its boiling point when surrounding pressure is equal to 1 atm ( 101.3 kPa ) .
shows the variation in vapor pressure with temperature for several different substances .
Considering the definition of boiling point , these curves may be seen as depicting the dependence of a liquid ’ s boiling point on surrounding pressure .
A typical atmospheric pressure in Leadville , Colorado ( elevation 10,200 feet ) is 68 kPa .
Use the graph in to determine the boiling point of water at this elevation .
The graph of the vapor pressure of water versus temperature in indicates that the vapor pressure of water is 68 kPa at about 90 °C .
Thus , at about 90 °C , the vapor pressure of water will equal the atmospheric pressure in Leadville , and water will boil .
The boiling point of ethyl ether was measured to be 10 °C at a base camp on the slopes of Mount Everest .
Use to determine the approximate atmospheric pressure at the camp .
Temperature T must be in Kelvin in this equation .
This equation is often rearranged into logarithmic form to yield the linear equation : This linear equation may be expressed in a two-point format that is convenient for use in various computations , as demonstrated in the example exercises that follow .
It is used as one of the standards for the octane-rating system for gasoline .
At 34.0 °C , the vapor pressure of isooctane is 10.0 kPa , and at 98.8 °C , its vapor pressure is 100.0 kPa .
Use this information to estimate the enthalpy of vaporization for isooctane .
Rearranging the Clausius-Clapeyron equation and solving for Δ H yields : Note that the pressure can be in any units , so long as they agree for both P values , but the temperature must be in kelvin for the Clausius-Clapeyron equation to be valid .
At 20.0 °C , the vapor pressure of ethanol is 5.95 kPa , and at 63.5 °C , its vapor pressure is 53.3 kPa .
Use this information to estimate the enthalpy of vaporization for ethanol .
Answer : 41,360 J/mol or 41.4 kJ/mol For benzene ( C H ) , the normal boiling point is 80.1 °C and the enthalpy of vaporization is 30.8 kJ/mol .
What is the boiling point of benzene in Denver , where atmospheric pressure = 83.4 kPa ?
We can substitute these values into the Clausius-Clapeyron equation and then solve for T .
Rearranging the Clausius-Clapeyron equation and solving for T yields : For acetone ( CH ) CO , the normal boiling point is 56.5 °C and the enthalpy of vaporization is 31.3 kJ/mol .
What is the vapor pressure of acetone at 25.0 °C ?
Answer : 30.1 kPa Vaporization is an endothermic process .
The cooling effect can be evident when you leave a swimming pool or a shower .
When the water on your skin evaporates , it removes heat from your skin and causes you to feel cold .
The energy change associated with the vaporization process is the enthalpy of vaporization , Δ H .
For example , the vaporization of water at standard temperature is represented by : As described in the chapter on thermochemistry , the reverse of an endothermic process is exothermic .
And so , the condensation of a gas releases heat : One way our body is cooled is by evaporation of the water in sweat .
In very hot climates , we can lose as much as 1.5 L of sweat per day .
Although sweat is not pure water , we can get an approximate value of the amount of heat removed by evaporation by assuming that it is .
How much heat is required to evaporate 1.5 L of water ( 1.5 kg ) at T = 37 °C ( normal body temperature ) ; Δ H = 43.46 kJ/mol at 37 °C .
We start with the known volume of sweat ( approximated as just water ) and use the given information to convert to the amount of heat needed : Thus , 3600 kJ of heat are removed by the evaporation of 1.5 L of water .
How much heat is required to evaporate 100.0 g of liquid ammonia , NH , at its boiling point if its enthalpy of vaporization is 4.8 kJ/mol ?
Answer : 28 kJ When we heat a crystalline solid , we increase the average energy of its atoms , molecules , or ions and the solid gets hotter .
At some point , the added energy becomes large enough to partially overcome the forces holding the molecules or ions of the solid in their fixed positions , and the solid begins the process of transitioning to the liquid state , or melting .
At this point , the temperature of the solid stops rising , despite the continual input of heat , and it remains constant until all of the solid is melted .
Only after all of the solid has melted will continued heating increase the temperature of the liquid .
If we stop heating during melting and place the mixture of solid and liquid in a perfectly insulated container so no heat can enter or escape , the solid and liquid phases remain in equilibrium .
This is almost the situation with a mixture of ice and water in a very good thermos bottle ; almost no heat gets in or out , and the mixture of solid ice and liquid water remains for hours .
In a mixture of solid and liquid at equilibrium , the reciprocal processes of melting and freezing occur at equal rates , and the quantities of solid and liquid therefore remain constant .
The temperature at which the solid and liquid phases of a given substance are in equilibrium is called the melting point of the solid or the freezing point of the liquid .
Use of one term or the other is normally dictated by the direction of the phase transition being considered , for example , solid to liquid ( melting ) or liquid to solid ( freezing ) .
The enthalpy of fusion and the melting point of a crystalline solid depend on the strength of the attractive forces between the units present in the crystal .
Molecules with weak attractive forces form crystals with low melting points .
Crystals consisting of particles with stronger attractive forces melt at higher temperatures .
The amount of heat required to change one mole of a substance from the solid state to the liquid state is the enthalpy of fusion , ΔH of the substance .
The enthalpy of fusion of ice is 6.0 kJ/mol at 0 °C .
At room temperature and standard pressure , a piece of dry ice ( solid CO ) sublimes , appearing to gradually disappear without ever forming any liquid .
Snow and ice sublime at temperatures below the melting point of water , a slow process that may be accelerated by winds and the reduced atmospheric pressures at high altitudes .
When solid iodine is warmed , the solid sublimes and a vivid purple vapor forms .
The reverse of sublimation is called deposition , a process in which gaseous substances condense directly into the solid state , bypassing the liquid state .
The formation of frost is an example of deposition .
Like vaporization , the process of sublimation requires an input of energy to overcome intermolecular attractions .
The enthalpy of sublimation , ΔH , is the energy required to convert one mole of a substance from the solid to the gaseous state .
Converting a solid into a liquid requires that these attractions be only partially overcome ; transition to the gaseous state requires that they be completely overcome .
As a result , the enthalpy of fusion for a substance is less than its enthalpy of vaporization .
This same logic can be used to derive an approximate relation between the enthalpies of all phase changes for a given substance .
Though not an entirely accurate description , sublimation may be conveniently modeled as a sequential two-step process of melting followed by vaporization in order to apply Hess ’ s Law .
Viewed in this manner , the enthalpy of sublimation for a substance may be estimated as the sum of its enthalpies of fusion and vaporization , as illustrated in .
The relation applies to matter being heated or cooled , but not undergoing a change in state .
When a substance being heated or cooled reaches a temperature corresponding to one of its phase transitions , further gain or loss of heat is a result of diminishing or enhancing intermolecular attractions , instead of increasing or decreasing molecular kinetic energies .
While a substance is undergoing a change in state , its temperature remains constant .
shows a typical heating curve .
Consider the example of heating a pot of water to boiling .
A stove burner will supply heat at a roughly constant rate ; initially , this heat serves to increase the water ’ s temperature .
When the water reaches its boiling point , the temperature remains constant despite the continued input of heat from the stove burner .
This same temperature is maintained by the water as long as it is boiling .
If the burner setting is increased to provide heat at a greater rate , the water temperature does not rise , but instead the boiling becomes more vigorous ( rapid ) .
This behavior is observed for other phase transitions as well : For example , temperature remains constant while the change of state is in progress .
How much heat is required to convert 135 g of ice at −15 °C into water vapor at 120 °C ?
The heat needed to induce a given change in phase is given by q = n Δ H .
Considering the definition of boiling point , plots of vapor pressure versus temperature represent how the boiling point of the liquid varies with pressure .
Also described was the use of heating and cooling curves to determine a substance ’ s melting ( or freezing ) point .
Making such measurements over a wide range of pressures yields data that may be presented graphically as a phase diagram .
A phase diagram combines plots of pressure versus temperature for the liquid-gas , solid-liquid , and solid-gas phase-transition equilibria of a substance .
These diagrams indicate the physical states that exist under specific conditions of pressure and temperature , and also provide the pressure dependence of the phase-transition temperatures ( melting points , sublimation points , boiling points ) .
A typical phase diagram for a pure substance is shown in .
To illustrate the utility of these plots , consider the phase diagram for water shown in .
We can use the phase diagram to identify the physical state of a sample of water under specified conditions of pressure and temperature .
For example , a pressure of 50 kPa and a temperature of −10 °C correspond to the region of the diagram labeled “ ice. ” Under these conditions , water exists only as a solid ( ice ) .
A pressure of 50 kPa and a temperature of 50 °C correspond to the “ water ” region—here , water exists only as a liquid .
At 25 kPa and 200 °C , water exists only in the gaseous state .
Note that on the H O phase diagram , the pressure and temperature axes are not drawn to a constant scale in order to permit the illustration of several important features as described here .
The curve BC in is the plot of vapor pressure versus temperature as described in the previous module of this chapter .
This “ liquid-vapor ” curve separates the liquid and gaseous regions of the phase diagram and provides the boiling point for water at any pressure .
For example , at 1 atm , the boiling point is 100 °C .
Notice that the liquidvapor curve terminates at a temperature of 374 °C and a pressure of 218 atm , indicating that water can not exist as a liquid above this temperature , regardless of the pressure .
The physical properties of water under these conditions are intermediate between those of its liquid and gaseous phases .
This unique state of matter is called a supercritical fluid , a topic that will be described in the next section of this module .
The solid-vapor curve , labeled AB in , indicates the temperatures and pressures at which ice and water vapor are in equilibrium .
These temperature-pressure data pairs correspond to the sublimation , or deposition , points for water .
If we could zoom in on the solid-gas line in , we would see that ice has a vapor pressure of about 0.20 kPa at −10 °C .
Thus , if we place a frozen sample in a vacuum with a pressure less than 0.20 kPa , ice will sublime .
This is the basis for the “ freeze-drying ” process often used to preserve foods , such as the ice cream shown in .
The solid-liquid curve labeled BD shows the temperatures and pressures at which ice and liquid water are in equilibrium , representing the melting/freezing points for water .
Note that this curve exhibits a slight negative slope ( greatly exaggerated for clarity ) , indicating that the melting point for water decreases slightly as pressure increases .
Water is an unusual substance in this regard , as most substances exhibit an increase in melting point with increasing pressure .
This behavior is partly responsible for the movement of glaciers , like the one shown in .
The bottom of a glacier experiences an immense pressure due to its weight that can melt some of the ice , forming a layer of liquid water on which the glacier may more easily slide .
The point of intersection of all three curves is labeled B in .
At the pressure and temperature represented by this point , all three phases of water coexist in equilibrium .
This temperature-pressure data pair is called the triple point .
At pressures lower than the triple point , water can not exist as a liquid , regardless of the temperature .
What phase changes can water undergo as the temperature changes if the pressure is held at 0.3 kPa ?
If the pressure is held at 50 kPa ?
Answer : At 0.3 kPa : at −58 °C .
At 50 kPa : at 0 °C , l g at 78 °C Consider the phase diagram for carbon dioxide shown in as another example .
The solid-liquid curve exhibits a positive slope , indicating that the melting point for CO increases with pressure as it does for most substances ( water being a notable exception as described previously ) .
Notice that the triple point is well above 1 atm , indicating that carbon dioxide can not exist as a liquid under ambient pressure conditions .
Instead , cooling gaseous carbon dioxide at 1 atm results in its deposition into the solid state .
Likewise , solid carbon dioxide does not melt at 1 atm pressure but instead sublimes to yield gaseous CO .
Finally , notice that the critical point for carbon dioxide is observed at a relatively modest temperature and pressure in comparison to water .
Identify the phase changes that carbon dioxide will undergo as its temperature is increased from −100 °C while holding its pressure constant at 1500 kPa .
At 50 kPa .
At what approximate temperatures do these phase changes occur ?
A distinct boundary between the more dense liquid and the less dense gas is clearly observed .
As we increase the temperature , the pressure of the water vapor increases , as described by the liquid-gas curve in the phase diagram for water , and a two-phase equilibrium of liquid and gaseous phases remains .
At a temperature of 374 °C , the vapor pressure has risen to 218 atm , and any further increase in temperature results in the disappearance of the boundary between liquid and vapor phases .
All of the water in the container is now present in a single phase whose physical properties are intermediate between those of the gaseous and liquid states .
This phase of matter is called a supercritical fluid , and the temperature and pressure above which this phase exists is the critical point .
Above its critical temperature , a gas can not be liquefied no matter how much pressure is applied .
The pressure required to liquefy a gas at its critical temperature is called the critical pressure .
The critical temperatures and critical pressures of some common substances are given in the following table .
Like a gas , a supercritical fluid will expand and fill a container , but its density is much greater than typical gas densities , typically being close to those for liquids .
Similar to liquids , these fluids are capable of dissolving nonvolatile solutes .
They exhibit essentially no surface tension and very low viscosities , however , so they can more effectively penetrate very small openings in a solid mixture and remove soluble components .
These properties make supercritical fluids extremely useful solvents for a wide range of applications .
For example , supercritical carbon dioxide has become a very popular solvent in the food industry , being used to decaffeinate coffee , remove fats from potato chips , and extract flavor and fragrance compounds from citrus oils .
It is nontoxic , relatively inexpensive , and not considered to be a pollutant .
After use , the CO can be easily recovered by reducing the pressure and collecting the resulting gas .
If we shake a carbon dioxide fire extinguisher on a cool day ( 18 °C ) , we can hear liquid CO sloshing around inside the cylinder .
However , the same cylinder appears to contain no liquid on a hot summer day ( 35 °C ) .
Explain these observations .
On the cool day , the temperature of the CO is below the critical temperature of CO , 304 K or 31 °C , so liquid CO is present in the cylinder .
On the hot day , the temperature of the CO is greater than its critical temperature of 31 °C .
Above this temperature no amount of pressure can liquefy CO so no liquid CO exists in the fire extinguisher .
Ammonia can be liquefied by compression at room temperature ; oxygen can not be liquefied under these conditions .
Why do the two gases exhibit different behavior ?
Answer : The critical temperature of ammonia is 405.5 K , which is higher than room temperature .
The critical temperature of oxygen is below room temperature ; thus oxygen can not be liquefied at room temperature .
It is also possible for a liquid to freeze before its molecules become arranged in an orderly pattern .
The resulting materials are called amorphous solids or noncrystalline solids ( or , sometimes , glasses ) .
The particles of such solids lack an ordered internal structure and are randomly arranged .
Metals and ionic compounds typically form ordered , crystalline solids .
Substances that consist of large molecules , or a mixture of molecules whose movements are more restricted , often form amorphous solids .
For examples , candle waxes are amorphous solids composed of large hydrocarbon molecules .
Some substances , such as silicon dioxide ( shown in ) , can form either crystalline or amorphous solids , depending on the conditions under which it is produced .
Also , amorphous solids may undergo a transition to the crystalline state under appropriate conditions .
Crystalline solids are generally classified according the nature of the forces that hold its particles together .
These forces are primarily responsible for the physical properties exhibited by the bulk solids .
The following sections provide descriptions of the major types of crystalline solids : ionic , metallic , covalent network , and molecular .
Ionic solids , such as sodium chloride and nickel oxide , are composed of positive and negative ions that are held together by electrostatic attractions , which can be quite strong .
Many ionic crystals also have high melting points .
This is due to the very strong attractions between the ions—in ionic compounds , the attractions between full charges are ( much ) larger than those between the partial charges in polar molecular compounds .
This will be looked at in more detail in a later discussion of lattice energies .
Although they are hard , they also tend to be brittle , and they shatter rather than bend .
Ionic solids do not conduct electricity ; however , they do conduct when molten or dissolved because their ions are free to move .
Many simple compounds formed by the reaction of a metallic element with a nonmetallic element are ionic .
Metallic solids such as crystals of copper , aluminum , and iron are formed by metal atoms .
The structure of metallic crystals is often described as a uniform distribution of atomic nuclei within a “ sea ” of delocalized electrons .
The atoms within such a metallic solid are held together by a unique force known as metallic bonding that gives rise to many useful and varied bulk properties .
All exhibit high thermal and electrical conductivity , metallic luster , and malleability .
Many are very hard and quite strong .
Because of their malleability ( the ability to deform under pressure or hammering ) , they do not shatter and , therefore , make useful construction materials .
The melting points of the metals vary widely .
Mercury is a liquid at room temperature , and the alkali metals melt below 200 °C .
Several post-transition metals also have low melting points , whereas the transition metals melt at temperatures above 1000 °C .
These differences reflect differences in strengths of metallic bonding among the metals .
Covalent network solids include crystals of diamond , silicon , some other nonmetals , and some covalent compounds such as silicon dioxide ( sand ) and silicon carbide ( carborundum , the abrasive on sandpaper ) .
Many minerals have networks of covalent bonds .
The atoms in these solids are held together by a network of covalent bonds , as shown in .
To break or to melt a covalent network solid , covalent bonds must be broken .
Because covalent bonds are relatively strong , covalent network solids are typically characterized by hardness , strength , and high melting points .
For example , diamond is one of the hardest substances known and melts above 3500 °C .
Molecular solids , such as ice , sucrose ( table sugar ) , and iodine , as shown in , are composed of neutral molecules .
The strengths of the attractive forces between the units present in different crystals vary widely , as indicated by the melting points of the crystals .
Small symmetrical molecules ( nonpolar molecules ) , such as H , N , O , and F , have weak attractive forces and form molecular solids with very low melting points ( below −200 °C ) .
Substances consisting of larger , nonpolar molecules have larger attractive forces and melt at higher temperatures .
Molecular solids composed of molecules with permanent dipole moments ( polar molecules ) melt at still higher temperatures .
Examples include ice ( melting point , 0 °C ) and table sugar ( melting point , 185 °C ) .
A crystalline solid , like those listed in , has a precise melting temperature because each atom or molecule of the same type is held in place with the same forces or energy .
Thus , the attractions between the units that make up the crystal all have the same strength and all require the same amount of energy to be broken .
The gradual softening of an amorphous material differs dramatically from the distinct melting of a crystalline solid .
This results from the structural nonequivalence of the molecules in the amorphous solid .
Some forces are weaker than others , and when an amorphous material is heated , the weakest intermolecular attractions break first .
As the temperature is increased further , the stronger attractions are broken .
Thus amorphous materials soften over a range of temperatures .
In a crystalline solid , the atoms , ions , or molecules are arranged in a definite repeating pattern , but occasional defects may occur in the pattern .
Several types of defects are known , as illustrated in .
Vacancies are defects that occur when positions that should contain atoms or ions are vacant .
Less commonly , some atoms or ions in a crystal may occupy positions , called interstitial sites , located between the regular positions for atoms .
Other distortions are found in impure crystals , as , for example , when the cations , anions , or molecules of the impurity are too large to fit into the regular positions without distorting the structure .
Trace amounts of impurities are sometimes added to a crystal ( a process known as doping ) in order to create defects in the structure that yield desirable changes in its properties .
For example , silicon crystals are doped with varying amounts of different elements to yield suitable electrical properties for their use in the manufacture of semiconductors and computer chips .
Most solids form with a regular arrangement of their particles because the overall attractive interactions between particles are maximized , and the total intermolecular energy is minimized , when the particles pack in the most efficient manner .
The regular arrangement at an atomic level is often reflected at a macroscopic level .
In this module , we will explore some of the details about the structures of metallic and ionic crystalline solids , and learn how these structures are determined experimentally .
We will begin our discussion of crystalline solids by considering elemental metals , which are relatively simple because each contains only one type of atom .
A pure metal is a crystalline solid with metal atoms packed closely together in a repeating pattern .
Some of the properties of metals in general , such as their malleability and ductility , are largely due to having identical atoms arranged in a regular pattern .
The different properties of one metal compared to another partially depend on the sizes of their atoms and the specifics of their spatial arrangements .
We will explore the similarities and differences of four of the most common metal crystal geometries in the sections that follow .
The structure of a crystalline solid , whether a metal or not , is best described by considering its simplest repeating unit , which is referred to as its unit cell .
The unit cell consists of lattice points that represent the locations of atoms or ions .
The entire structure then consists of this unit cell repeating in three dimensions , as illustrated in .
Let us begin our investigation of crystal lattice structure and unit cells with the most straightforward structure and the most basic unit cell .
To visualize this , imagine taking a large number of identical spheres , such as tennis balls , and arranging them uniformly in a container .
The simplest way to do this would be to make layers in which the spheres in one layer are directly above those in the layer below , as illustrated in .
This arrangement is called simple cubic structure , and the unit cell is called the simple cubic unit cell or primitive cubic unit cell .
In a simple cubic structure , the spheres are not packed as closely as they could be , and they only “ fill ” about 52 % of the volume of the container .
This is a relatively inefficient arrangement , and only one metal ( polonium , Po ) crystallizes in a simple cubic structure .
The number of other particles that each particle in a crystalline solid contacts is known as its coordination number .
For a polonium atom in a simple cubic array , the coordination number is , therefore , six .
In a simple cubic lattice , the unit cell that repeats in all directions is a cube defined by the centers of eight atoms , as shown in .
Atoms at adjacent corners of this unit cell contact each other , so the edge length of this cell is equal to two atomic radii , or one atomic diameter .
A cubic unit cell contains only the parts of these atoms that are within it .
Since an atom at a corner of a simple cubic unit cell is contained by a total of eight unit cells , only one-eighth of that atom is within a specific unit cell .
And since each simple cubic unit cell has one atom at each of its eight “ corners , ” there is atom within one simple cubic unit cell .
The edge length of the unit cell of alpha polonium is 336 pm .
( a ) Determine the radius of a polonium atom .
( b ) Determine the density of alpha polonium .
Alpha polonium crystallizes in a simple cubic unit cell : ( a ) Two adjacent Po atoms contact each other , so the edge length of this cell is equal to two Po atomic radii : l = 2 r .
Therefore , the radius of Po is ( b ) Density is given by The density of polonium can be found by determining the density of its unit cell ( the mass contained within a unit cell divided by the volume of the unit cell ) .
Since a Po unit cell contains one-eighth of a Po atom at each of its eight corners , a unit cell contains one Po atom .
The mass of a Po unit cell can be found by : The volume of a Po unit cell can be found by : ( Note that the edge length was converted from pm to cm to get the usual volume units for density . )
Therefore , the density of The edge length of the unit cell for nickel is 0.3524 nm .
The density of Ni is 8.90 g/cm .
Does nickel crystallize in a simple cubic structure ?
Answer : No .
If Ni was simple cubic , its density would be given by : Then the density of Ni would be Since the actual density of Ni is not close to this , Ni does not form a simple cubic structure .
Most metal crystals are one of the four major types of unit cells .
For now , we will focus on the three cubic unit cells : simple cubic ( which we have already seen ) , body-centered cubic unit cell , and face-centered cubic unit cell —all of which are illustrated in .
( Note that there are actually seven different lattice systems , some of which have more than one type of lattice , for a total of 14 different types of unit cells .
We leave the more complicated geometries for later in this module . )
Some metals crystallize in an arrangement that has a cubic unit cell with atoms at all of the corners and an atom in the center , as shown in .
This is called a body-centered cubic ( BCC ) solid .
Atoms in the corners of a BCC unit cell do not contact each other but contact the atom in the center .
A BCC unit cell contains two atoms : one-eighth of an atom at each of the eight corners atom from the corners ) plus one atom from the center .
Any atom in this structure touches four atoms in the layer above it and four atoms in the layer below it .
Thus , an atom in a BCC structure has a coordination number of eight .
Atoms in BCC arrangements are much more efficiently packed than in a simple cubic structure , occupying about 68 % of the total volume .
Isomorphous metals with a BCC structure include K , Ba , Cr , Mo , W , and Fe at room temperature .
( Elements or compounds that crystallize with the same structure are said to be isomorphous . )
Many other metals , such as aluminum , copper , and lead , crystallize in an arrangement that has a cubic unit cell with atoms at all of the corners and at the centers of each face , as illustrated in .
This arrangement is called a face-centered cubic ( FCC ) solid .
A FCC unit cell contains four atoms : one-eighth of an atom at each of the eight corners atoms from the faces ) .
The atoms at the corners touch the atoms in the centers of the adjacent faces along the face diagonals of the cube .
Because the atoms are on identical lattice points , they have identical environments .
atom from the corners ) and one-half of an atom on each of the six faces Atoms in an FCC arrangement are packed as closely together as possible , with atoms occupying 74 % of the volume .
This structure is also called cubic closest packing ( CCP ) .
In CCP , there are three repeating layers of hexagonally arranged atoms .
Each atom contacts six atoms in its own layer , three in the layer above , and three in the layer below .
In this arrangement , each atom touches 12 near neighbors , and therefore has a coordination number of 12 .
The fact that FCC and CCP arrangements are equivalent may not be immediately obvious , but why they are actually the same structure is illustrated in .
Because closer packing maximizes the overall attractions between atoms and minimizes the total intermolecular energy , the atoms in most metals pack in this manner .
We find two types of closest packing in simple metallic crystalline structures : CCP , which we have already encountered , and hexagonal closest packing ( HCP ) shown in .
Both consist of repeating layers of hexagonally arranged atoms .
In both types , a second layer ( B ) is placed on the first layer ( A ) so that each atom in the second layer is in contact with three atoms in the first layer .
The third layer is positioned in one of two ways .
In HCP , atoms in the third layer are directly above atoms in the first layer ( i.e. , the third layer is also type A ) , and the stacking consists of alternating type A and type B close-packed layers ( i.e. , ABABAB ) .
About two–thirds of all metals crystallize in closest-packed arrays with coordination numbers of 12 .
Metals that crystallize in an HCP structure include Cd , Co , Li , Mg , Na , and Zn , and metals that crystallize in a CCP structure include Ag , Al , Ca , Cu , Ni , Pb , and Pt .
Calcium crystallizes in a face-centered cubic structure .
The edge length of its unit cell is 558.8 pm .
( a ) What is the atomic radius of Ca in this structure ?
( b ) Calculate the density of Ca .
( a ) In an FCC structure , Ca atoms contact each other across the diagonal of the face , so the length of the diagonal is equal to four Ca atomic radii ( d = 4 r ) .
The volume of a Ca unit cell can be found by : ( Note that the edge length was converted from pm to cm to get the usual volume units for density . )
Then , the density of Silver crystallizes in an FCC structure .
The edge length of its unit cell is 409 pm .
( a ) What is the atomic radius of Ag in this structure ?
( b ) Calculate the density of Ag .
In general , a unit cell is defined by the lengths of three axes ( a , b , and c ) and the angles ( α , β , and γ ) between them , as illustrated in .
The axes are defined as being the lengths between points in the space lattice .
Consequently , unit cell axes join points with identical environments .
Answer : ( a ) 144 pm ; ( b ) 10.5 g/cm There are seven different lattice systems , some of which have more than one type of lattice , for a total of fourteen different unit cells , which have the shapes shown in .
Ionic crystals consist of two or more different kinds of ions that usually have different sizes .
The packing of these ions into a crystal structure is more complex than the packing of metal atoms that are the same size .
Most monatomic ions behave as charged spheres , and their attraction for ions of opposite charge is the same in every direction .
Consequently , stable structures for ionic compounds result ( 1 ) when ions of one charge are surrounded by as many ions as possible of the opposite charge and ( 2 ) when the cations and anions are in contact with each other .
Structures are determined by two principal factors : the relative sizes of the ions and the ratio of the numbers of positive and negative ions in the compound .
In simple ionic structures , we usually find the anions , which are normally larger than the cations , arranged in a closest-packed array .
( As seen previously , additional electrons attracted to the same nucleus make anions larger and fewer electrons attracted to the same nucleus make cations smaller when compared to the atoms from which they are formed . )
The smaller cations commonly occupy one of two types of holes ( or interstices ) remaining between the anions .
The smaller of the holes is found between three anions in one plane and one anion in an adjacent plane .
The four anions surrounding this hole are arranged at the corners of a tetrahedron , so the hole is called a tetrahedral hole .
The larger type of hole is found at the center of six anions ( three in one layer and three in an adjacent layer ) located at the corners of an octahedron ; this is called an octahedral hole .
illustrates both of these types of holes .
Depending on the relative sizes of the cations and anions , the cations of an ionic compound may occupy tetrahedral or octahedral holes , as illustrated in .
Relatively small cations occupy tetrahedral holes , and larger cations occupy octahedral holes .
If the cations are too large to fit into the octahedral holes , the anions may adopt a more open structure , such as a simple cubic array .
The larger cations can then occupy the larger cubic holes made possible by the more open spacing .
There are two tetrahedral holes for each anion in either an HCP or CCP array of anions .
A compound that crystallizes in a closest-packed array of anions with cations in the tetrahedral holes can have a maximum cation : anion ratio of 2:1 ; all of the tetrahedral holes are filled at this ratio .
Examples include Li O , Na O , Li S , and Na S. Compounds with a ratio of less than 2:1 may also crystallize in a closest-packed array of anions with cations in the tetrahedral holes , if the ionic sizes fit .
In these compounds , however , some of the tetrahedral holes remain vacant .
Zinc sulfide is an important industrial source of zinc and is also used as a white pigment in paint .
Zinc sulfide crystallizes with zinc ions occupying one-half of the tetrahedral holes in a closest-packed array of sulfide ions .
What is the formula of zinc sulfide ?
Because there are two tetrahedral holes per anion ( sulfide ion ) and one-half of these holes are occupied by zinc ions , there must be or 1 , zinc ion per sulfide ion .
Thus , the formula is ZnS .
Lithium selenide can be described as a closest-packed array of selenide ions with lithium ions in all of the tetrahedral holes .
What it the formula of lithium selenide ?
Answer : Li Se The ratio of octahedral holes to anions in either an HCP or CCP structure is 1:1 .
Thus , compounds with cations in octahedral holes in a closest-packed array of anions can have a maximum cation : anion ratio of 1:1 .
In NiO , MnS , NaCl , and KH , for example , all of the octahedral holes are filled .
Ratios of less than 1:1 are observed when some of the octahedral holes remain empty .
Sapphire is aluminum oxide .
Aluminum oxide crystallizes with aluminum ions in two-thirds of the octahedral holes in a closest-packed array of oxide ions .
What is the formula of aluminum oxide ?
Because there is one octahedral hole per anion ( oxide ion ) and only two-thirds of these holes are occupied , the ratio of aluminum to oxygen must be :1 , which would give The simplest whole number ratio is 2:3 , so the formula is Al O .
The white pigment titanium oxide crystallizes with titanium ions in one-half of the octahedral holes in a closest-packed array of oxide ions .
What is the formula of titanium oxide ?
Answer : TiO In a simple cubic array of anions , there is one cubic hole that can be occupied by a cation for each anion in the array .
In CsCl , and in other compounds with the same structure , all of the cubic holes are occupied .
Half of the cubic holes are occupied in SrH , UO , SrCl , and CaF .
Different types of ionic compounds often crystallize in the same structure when the relative sizes of their ions and their stoichiometries ( the two principal features that determine structure ) are similar .
Many ionic compounds crystallize with cubic unit cells , and we will use these compounds to describe the general features of ionic structures .
When an ionic compound is composed of cations and anions of similar size in a 1:1 ratio , it typically forms a simple cubic structure .
Cesium chloride , CsCl , ( illustrated in ) is an example of this , with Cs and Cl having radii of 174 pm and 181 pm , respectively .
Cesium ions and chloride ions touch along the body diagonals of the unit cells .
One cesium ion and one chloride ion are present per unit cell , giving the l : l stoichiometry required by the formula for cesium chloride .
Note that there is no lattice point in the center of the cell , and CsCl is not a BCC structure because a cesium ion is not identical to a chloride ion .
We have said that the location of lattice points is arbitrary .
This is illustrated by an alternate description of the CsCl structure in which the lattice points are located in the centers of the cesium ions .
In this description , the cesium ions are located on the lattice points at the corners of the cell , and the chloride ion is located at the center of the cell .
The two unit cells are different , but they describe identical structures .
When an ionic compound is composed of a 1:1 ratio of cations and anions that differ significantly in size , it typically crystallizes with an FCC unit cell , like that shown in .
Sodium chloride , NaCl , is an example of this , with Na and Cl having radii of 102 pm and 181 pm , respectively .
We can think of this as chloride ions forming an FCC cell , with sodium ions located in the octahedral holes in the middle of the cell edges and in the center of the cell .
The sodium and chloride ions touch each other along the cell edges .
The unit cell contains four sodium ions and four chloride ions , giving the 1:1 stoichiometry required by the formula , NaCl .
The cubic form of zinc sulfide , zinc blende , also crystallizes in an FCC unit cell , as illustrated in .
This structure contains sulfide ions on the lattice points of an FCC lattice .
( The arrangement of sulfide ions is identical to the arrangement of chloride ions in sodium chloride . )
The radius of a zinc ion is only about 40 % of the radius of a sulfide ion , so these small Zn ions are located in alternating tetrahedral holes , that is , in one half of the tetrahedral holes .
There are four zinc ions and four sulfide ions in the unit cell , giving the empirical formula ZnS .
A calcium fluoride unit cell , like that shown in , is also an FCC unit cell , but in this case , the cations are located on the lattice points ; equivalent calcium ions are located on the lattice points of an FCC lattice .
All of the tetrahedral sites in the FCC array of calcium ions are occupied by fluoride ions .
There are four calcium ions and eight fluoride ions in a unit cell , giving a calcium : fluorine ratio of 1:2 , as required by the chemical formula , CaF .
Close examination of will reveal a simple cubic array of fluoride ions with calcium ions in one half of the cubic holes .
The structure can not be described in terms of a space lattice of points on the fluoride ions because the fluoride ions do not all have identical environments .
The orientation of the four calcium ions about the fluoride ions differs .
If we know the edge length of a unit cell of an ionic compound and the position of the ions in the cell , we can calculate ionic radii for the ions in the compound if we make assumptions about individual ionic shapes and contacts .
The edge length of the unit cell of LiCl ( NaCl-like structure , FCC ) is 0.514 nm or 5.14 Å .
Assuming that the lithium ion is small enough so that the chloride ions are in contact , as in , calculate the ionic radius for the chloride ion .
From the Pythagorean theorem , we have : which yields : Solving this gives : The edge length of the unit cell of KCl ( NaCl-like structure , FCC ) is 6.28 Å .
Assuming anion-cation contact along the cell edge , calculate the radius of the potassium ion .
The radius of the chloride ion is 1.82 Å .
Answer : The radius of the potassium ion is 1.33 Å .
It is important to realize that values for ionic radii calculated from the edge lengths of unit cells depend on numerous assumptions , such as a perfect spherical shape for ions , which are approximations at best .
Hence , such calculated values are themselves approximate and comparisons can not be pushed too far .
Nevertheless , this method has proved useful for calculating ionic radii from experimental measurements such as X-ray crystallographic determinations .
The size of the unit cell and the arrangement of atoms in a crystal may be determined from measurements of the diffraction of X-rays by the crystal , termed X-ray crystallography .
Diffraction is the change in the direction of travel experienced by an electromagnetic wave when it encounters a physical barrier whose dimensions are comparable to those of the wavelength of the light .
X-rays are electromagnetic radiation with wavelengths about as long as the distance between neighboring atoms in crystals ( on the order of a few Å ) .
When a beam of monochromatic X-rays strikes a crystal , its rays are scattered in all directions by the atoms within the crystal .
illustrates two examples of diffracted waves from the same two crystal planes .
The figure on the left depicts waves diffracted at the Bragg angle , resulting in constructive interference , while that on the right shows diffraction and a different angle that does not satisfy the Bragg condition , resulting in destructive interference .
An X-ray diffractometer , such as the one illustrated in , may be used to measure the angles at which Xrays are diffracted when interacting with a crystal as described earlier .
From such measurements , the Bragg equation may be used to compute distances between atoms as demonstrated in the following example exercise .
In a diffractometer , X-rays with a wavelength of 0.1315 nm were used to produce a diffraction pattern for copper .
The first order diffraction ( n = 1 ) occurred at an angle θ = 25.25° .
Determine the spacing between the diffracting planes in copper .
The distance between the planes is found by solving the Bragg equation , nλ = 2 d sin θ , for d .
This gives : A crystal with spacing between planes equal to 0.394 nm diffracts X-rays with a wavelength of 0.147 nm .
What is the angle for the first order diffraction ?
Answer : 21.9° Coral reefs are home to about 25 % of all marine species .
They are being threatened by climate change , oceanic acidification , and water pollution , all of which change the composition of the solution known as seawater .
Dissolved oxygen in seawater is critical for sea creatures , but as the oceans warm , oxygen becomes less soluble .
As the concentration of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere increases , the concentration of carbon dioxide in the oceans increases , contributing to oceanic acidification .
Coral reefs are particularly sensitive to the acidification of the ocean , since the exoskeletons of the coral polyps are soluble in acidic solutions .
Humans contribute to the changing of seawater composition by allowing agricultural runoff and other forms of pollution to affect our oceans .
Solutions are crucial to the processes that sustain life and to many other processes involving chemical reactions .
This chapter considers the nature of solutions and examines factors that determine whether a solution will form and what properties it may have .
The properties of colloids—mixtures containing dispersed particles larger than the molecules and ions of typical solutions—are also discussed .
Often , one component of a solution is present at a significantly greater concentration , in which case it is called the solvent .
The other components of the solution present in relatively lesser concentrations are called solutes .
Sugar is a covalent solid composed of sucrose molecules , C H O .
When this compound dissolves in water , its molecules become uniformly distributed among the molecules of water : The subscript “ aq ” in the equation signifies that the sucrose molecules are solutes and are therefore individually dispersed throughout the aqueous solution ( water is the solvent ) .
Although sucrose molecules are heavier than water molecules , they remain dispersed throughout the solution ; gravity does not cause them to “ settle out ” over time .
Its solutes , potassium and dichromate ions , remain individually dispersed among the solvent ( water ) molecules .
Water is used so often as a solvent that the word solution has come to imply an aqueous solution to many people .
However , almost any gas , liquid , or solid can act as a solvent .
Many alloys are solid solutions of one metal dissolved in another ; for example , US five-cent coins contain nickel dissolved in copper .
Air is a gaseous solution , a homogeneous mixture of nitrogen , oxygen , and several other gases .
Oxygen ( a gas ) , alcohol ( a liquid ) , and sugar ( a solid ) all dissolve in water ( a liquid ) to form liquid solutions .
gives examples of several different solutions and the phases of the solutes and solvents .
Solutions exhibit these defining traits : They are homogeneous ; after a solution is mixed , it has the same composition at all points throughout ( its composition is uniform ) .
The physical state of a solution—solid , liquid , or gas—is typically the same as that of the solvent , as demonstrated by the examples in .
The components of a solution are dispersed on a molecular scale ; they consist of a mixture of separated solute particles ( molecules , atoms , and/or ions ) each closely surrounded by solvent species .
The dissolved solute in a solution will not settle out or separate from the solvent .
The composition of a solution , or the concentrations of its components , can be varied continuously ( within limits determined by the solubility of the components , discussed in detail later in this chapter ) .
The formation of a solution is an example of a spontaneous process , a process that occurs under specified conditions without the requirement of energy from some external source .
Sometimes a mixture is stirred to speed up the dissolution process , but this is not necessary ; a homogeneous solution will form eventually .
The topic of spontaneity is critically important to the study of chemical thermodynamics and is treated more thoroughly in a later chapter of this text .
An increase in matter dispersal always results when a solution forms from the uniform distribution of solute molecules throughout a solvent .
When the strengths of the intermolecular forces of attraction between solute and solvent species in a solution are no different than those present in the separated components , the solution is formed with no accompanying energy change .
Such a solution is called an ideal solution .
A mixture of ideal gases ( or gases such as helium and argon , which closely approach ideal behavior ) is an example of an ideal solution , since the entities comprising these gases experience no significant intermolecular attractions .
When containers of helium and argon are connected , the gases spontaneously mix due to diffusion and form a solution .
The formation of this solution clearly involves an increase in matter dispersal , since the helium and argon atoms occupy a volume twice as large as that which each occupied before mixing .
Ideal solutions may also form when structurally similar liquids are mixed .
For example , mixtures of the alcohols methanol ( CH OH ) and ethanol ( C H OH ) form ideal solutions , as do mixtures of the hydrocarbons pentane , C H , and hexane , C H .
Unlike a mixture of gases , however , the components of these liquid-liquid solutions do , indeed , experience intermolecular attractive forces .
But since the molecules of the two substances being mixed are structurally very similar , the intermolecular attractive forces between like and unlike molecules are essentially the same , and the dissolution process , therefore , does not entail any appreciable increase or decrease in energy .
These examples illustrate how increased matter dispersal alone can provide the driving force required to cause the spontaneous formation of a solution .
In some cases , however , the relative magnitudes of intermolecular forces of attraction between solute and solvent species may prevent dissolution .
Three types of intermolecular attractive forces are relevant to the dissolution process : solute-solute , solvent-solvent , and solute-solvent .
As illustrated in , the formation of a solution may be viewed as a stepwise process in which energy is consumed to overcome solute-solute and solvent-solvent attractions ( endothermic processes ) and released when solute-solvent attractions are established ( an exothermic process referred to as solvation ) .
The relative magnitudes of the energy changes associated with these stepwise processes determine whether the dissolution process overall will release or absorb energy .
In some cases , solutions do not form because the energy required to separate solute and solvent species is so much greater than the energy released by solvation .
Consider the example of an ionic compound dissolving in water .
Formation of the solution requires the electrostatic forces between the cations and anions of the compound ( solute–solute ) be overcome completely as attractive forces are established between these ions and water molecules ( solute–solvent ) .
Hydrogen bonding between a relatively small fraction of the water molecules must also be overcome to accommodate any dissolved solute .
If the solute ’ s electrostatic forces are significantly greater than the solvation forces , the dissolution process is significantly endothermic and the compound may not dissolve to an appreciable extent .
Calcium carbonate , the major component of coral reefs , is one example of such an “ insoluble ” ionic compound ( see ) .
On the other hand , if the solvation forces are much stronger than the compound ’ s electrostatic forces , the dissolution is significantly exothermic and the compound may be highly soluble .
A common example of this type of ionic compound is sodium chloride , commonly known as table salt .
As noted at the beginning of this module , spontaneous solution formation is favored , but not guaranteed , by exothermic dissolution processes .
While many soluble compounds do , indeed , dissolve with the release of heat , some dissolve endothermically .
Ammonium nitrate ( NH NO ) is one such example and is used to make instant cold packs for treating injuries like the one pictured in .
A thin-walled plastic bag of water is sealed inside a larger bag with solid NH NO .
When the smaller bag is broken , a solution of NH NO forms , absorbing heat from the surroundings ( the injured area to which the pack is applied ) and providing a cold compress that decreases swelling .
Endothermic dissolutions such as this one require a greater energy input to separate the solute species than is recovered when the solutes are solvated , but they are spontaneous nonetheless due to the increase in disorder that accompanies formation of the solution .
These substances constitute an important class of compounds called electrolytes .
Substances that do not yield ions when dissolved are called nonelectrolytes .
If the physical or chemical process that generates the ions is essentially 100 % efficient ( all of the dissolved compound yields ions ) , then the substance is known as a strong electrolyte .
If only a relatively small fraction of the dissolved substance undergoes the ion-producing process , it is called a weak electrolyte .
Substances may be identified as strong , weak , or nonelectrolytes by measuring the electrical conductance of an aqueous solution containing the substance .
To conduct electricity , a substance must contain freely mobile , charged species .
Most familiar is the conduction of electricity through metallic wires , in which case the mobile , charged entities are electrons .
Solutions may also conduct electricity if they contain dissolved ions , with conductivity increasing as ion concentration increases .
Applying a voltage to electrodes immersed in a solution permits assessment of the relative concentration of dissolved ions , either quantitatively , by measuring the electrical current flow , or qualitatively , by observing the brightness of a light bulb included in the circuit .
Water and other polar molecules are attracted to ions , as shown in .
The electrostatic attraction between an ion and a molecule with a dipole is called an ion-dipole attraction .
These attractions play an important role in the dissolution of ionic compounds in water .
When ionic compounds dissolve in water , the ions in the solid separate and disperse uniformly throughout the solution because water molecules surround and solvate the ions , reducing the strong electrostatic forces between them .
This process represents a physical change known as dissociation .
Under most conditions , ionic compounds will dissociate nearly completely when dissolved , and so they are classified as strong electrolytes .
Even sparingly , soluble ionic compounds are strong electrolytes , since the small amount that does dissolve will dissociate completely .
Consider what happens at the microscopic level when solid KCl is added to water .
Ion-dipole forces attract the positive ( hydrogen ) end of the polar water molecules to the negative chloride ions at the surface of the solid , and they attract the negative ( oxygen ) ends to the positive potassium ions .
The water molecules surround individual K and Cl ions , reducing the strong interionic forces that bind the ions together and letting them move off into solution as solvated ions , as shows .
Overcoming the electrostatic attraction permits the independent motion of each hydrated ion in a dilute solution as the ions transition from fixed positions in the undissolved compound to widely dispersed , solvated ions in solution .
Pure water is an extremely poor conductor of electricity because it is only very slightly ionized—only about two out of every 1 billion molecules ionize at 25 °C .
Water ionizes when one molecule of water gives up a proton ( H ion ) to another molecule of water , yielding hydronium and hydroxide ions .
In some cases , solutions prepared from covalent compounds conduct electricity because the solute molecules react chemically with the solvent to produce ions .
For example , pure hydrogen chloride is a gas consisting of covalent HCl molecules .
This gas contains no ions .
However , an aqueous solution of HCl is a very good conductor , indicating that an appreciable concentration of ions exists within the solution .
Likewise , weak acids and bases that only react partially generate relatively low concentrations of ions when dissolved in water and are classified as weak electrolytes .
The reader may wish to review the discussion of strong and weak acids provided in the earlier chapter of this text on reaction classes and stoichiometry .
You can repeat this process until the sugar concentration of the solution reaches its natural limit , a limit determined primarily by the relative strengths of the solute-solute , solute-solvent , and solvent-solvent attractive forces discussed in the previous two modules of this chapter .
You can be certain that you have reached this limit because , no matter how long you stir the solution , undissolved sugar remains .
The concentration of sugar in the solution at this point is known as its solubility .
The solubility of a solute in a particular solvent is the maximum concentration that may be achieved under given conditions when the dissolution process is at equilibrium .
When a solute ’ s concentration is equal to its solubility , the solution is said to be saturated with that solute .
If the solute ’ s concentration is less than its solubility , the solution is said to be unsaturated .
A solution that contains a relatively low concentration of solute is called dilute , and one with a relatively high concentration is called concentrated .
Solutions may be prepared in which a solute concentration exceeds its solubility .
Such solutions are said to be supersaturated , and they are interesting examples of nonequilibrium states ( a detailed treatment of this important concept is provided in the text chapters on equilibrium ) .
For example , the carbonated beverage in an open container that has not yet “ gone flat ” is supersaturated with carbon dioxide gas ; given time , the CO concentration will decrease until it reaches its solubility .
As for any solution , the solubility of a gas in a liquid is affected by the intermolecular attractive forces between solute and solvent species .
Unlike solid and liquid solutes , however , there is no solute-solute intermolecular attraction to overcome when a gaseous solute dissolves in a liquid solvent ( see ) since the atoms or molecules comprising a gas are far separated and experience negligible interactions .
Consequently , solute-solvent interactions are the sole energetic factor affecting solubility .
Likewise note the solubility of oxygen in hexane , C H , is approximately 20 times greater than it is in water because greater dispersion forces exist between oxygen and the larger hexane molecules .
Temperature is another factor affecting solubility , with gas solubility typically decreasing as temperature increases .
This inverse relation between temperature and dissolved gas concentration is responsible for one of the major impacts of thermal pollution in natural waters .
When the temperature of a river , lake , or stream is raised , the solubility of oxygen in the water is decreased .
Decreased levels of dissolved oxygen may have serious consequences for the health of the water ’ s ecosystems and , in severe cases , can result in large-scale fish kills .
The solubility of a gaseous solute is also affected by the partial pressure of solute in the gas to which the solution is exposed .
Gas solubility increases as the pressure of the gas increases .
Carbonated beverages provide a nice illustration of this relationship .
The carbonation process involves exposing the beverage to a relatively high pressure of carbon dioxide gas and then sealing the beverage container , thus saturating the beverage with CO at this pressure .
When the beverage container is opened , a familiar hiss is heard as the carbon dioxide gas pressure is released , and some of the dissolved carbon dioxide is typically seen leaving solution in the form of small bubbles .
This is a mathematical statement of Henry ’ s law : The quantity of an ideal gas that dissolves in a definite volume of liquid is directly proportional to the pressure of the gas .
At 20 °C , the concentration of dissolved oxygen in water exposed to gaseous oxygen at a partial pressure of 101.3 kPa is 1.38 10 mol L .
Use Henry ’ s law to determine the solubility of oxygen when its partial pressure is 20.7 kPa , the approximate pressure of oxygen in earth ’ s atmosphere .
Because both C and P are known , this relation can be rearragned and used to solve for k .
Now , use k to find the solubility at the lower pressure .
Note that various units may be used to express the quantities involved in these sorts of computations .
Any combination of units that yield to the constraints of dimensional analysis are acceptable .
Exposing a 100.0 mL sample of water at 0 °C to an atmosphere containing a gaseous solute at 152 torr resulted in the dissolution of 1.45 10 g of the solute .
Use Henry ’ s law to determine the solubility of this gaseous solute when its pressure is 760 torr .
Answer : 7.25 10 in 100.0 mL or 0.0725 g/L A certain species of freshwater trout requires a dissolved oxygen concentration of 7.5 mg/L .
Could these fish thrive in a thermally polluted mountain stream ( water temperature is 30.0 °C , partial pressure of atmospheric oxygen is 0.17 atm ) ?
First , compute the Henry ’ s law constant for oxygen in water at the specified temperature of 30.0 °C ( see ) .
Then , use this k value to compute the oxygen solubility at the specified oxygen partial pressure , 0.17 atm .
Finally , convert this dissolved oxygen concentration from mol/L to mg/L .
This concentration is lesser than the required minimum value of 7.5 mg/L , and so these trout would likely not thrive in the polluted stream .
What dissolved oxygen concentration is expected for the stream above when it returns to a normal summer time temperature of 15 °C ?
Answer : 8.2 mg/L Deviations from Henry ’ s law are observed when a chemical reaction takes place between the gaseous solute and the solvent .
Thus , for example , the solubility of ammonia in water increases more rapidly with increasing pressure than predicted by the law because ammonia , being a base , reacts to some extent with water to form ammonium ions and hydroxide ions .
Gases can form supersaturated solutions .
If a solution of a gas in a liquid is prepared either at low temperature or under pressure ( or both ) , then as the solution warms or as the gas pressure is reduced , the solution may become supersaturated .
In 1986 , more than 1700 people in Cameroon were killed when a cloud of gas , almost certainly carbon dioxide , bubbled from Lake Nyos , a deep lake in a volcanic crater .
The water at the bottom of Lake Nyos is saturated with carbon dioxide by volcanic activity beneath the lake .
It is believed that the lake underwent a turnover due to gradual heating from below the lake , and the warmer , less-dense water saturated with carbon dioxide reached the surface .
Consequently , tremendous quantities of dissolved CO were released , and the colorless gas , which is denser than air , flowed down the valley below the lake and suffocated humans and animals living in the valley .
Some liquids may be mixed in any proportions to yield solutions ; in other words , they have infinite mutual solubility and are said to be miscible .
Ethanol , sulfuric acid , and ethylene glycol ( popular for use as antifreeze , pictured in ) are examples of liquids that are completely miscible with water .
Two-cycle motor oil is miscible with gasoline , mixtures of which are used as lubricating fuels for various types of outdoor power equipment ( chainsaws , leaf blowers , and so on ) .
Miscible liquids are typically those with very similar polarities .
Consider , for example , liquids that are polar or capable of hydrogen bonding .
For such liquids , the dipole-dipole attractions ( or hydrogen bonding ) of the solute molecules with the solvent molecules are at least as strong as those between molecules in the pure solute or in the pure solvent .
Hence , the two kinds of molecules mix easily .
Likewise , nonpolar liquids are miscible with each other because there is no appreciable difference in the strengths of solute-solute , solvent-solvent , and solute-solvent intermolecular attractions .
The solubility of polar molecules in polar solvents and of nonpolar molecules in nonpolar solvents is , again , an illustration of the chemical axiom “ like dissolves like. ” Two liquids that do not mix to an appreciable extent are called immiscible .
Separate layers are formed when immiscible liquids are poured into the same container .
Gasoline , oil , benzene , carbon tetrachloride , some paints , and many other nonpolar liquids are immiscible with water .
Relatively weak attractive forces between the polar water molecules and the nonpolar liquid molecules are not adequate to overcome much stronger hydrogen bonding between water molecules .
The distinction between immiscibility and miscibility is really one of extent , so that miscible liquids are of infinite mutual solubility , while liquids said to be immiscible are of very low ( though not zero ) mutual solubility .
Two liquids , such as bromine and water , that are of moderate mutual solubility are said to be partially miscible .
Two partially miscible liquids usually form two layers when mixed .
In the case of the bromine and water mixture , the upper layer is water , saturated with bromine , and the lower layer is bromine saturated with water .
Since bromine is nonpolar , and , thus , not very soluble in water , the water layer is only slightly discolored by the bright orange bromine dissolved in it .
Since the solubility of water in bromine is very low , there is no noticeable effect on the dark color of the bromine layer .
The dependence of solubility on temperature for a number of solids in water is shown by the solubility curves in .
Reviewing these data indicates a general trend of increasing solubility with temperature , although there are exceptions , as illustrated by the ionic compound cerium sulfate .
The temperature dependence of solubility can be exploited to prepare supersaturated solutions of certain compounds .
A solution may be saturated with the compound at an elevated temperature ( where the solute is more soluble ) and subsequently cooled to a lower temperature without precipitating the solute .
The resultant solution contains solute at a concentration greater than its equilibrium solubility at the lower temperature ( i.e. , it is supersaturated ) and is relatively stable .
Precipitation of the excess solute can be initiated by adding a seed crystal ( see the video in the Link to Learning earlier in this module ) or by mechanically agitating the solution .
Some hand warmers , such as the one pictured in , take advantage of this behavior .
Many solution properties are dependent upon the chemical identity of the solute .
Compared to pure water , a solution of hydrogen chloride is more acidic , a solution of ammonia is more basic , a solution of sodium chloride is more dense , and a solution of sucrose is more viscous .
There are a few solution properties , however , that depend only upon the total concentration of solute species , regardless of their identities .
These colligative properties include vapor pressure lowering , boiling point elevation , freezing point depression , and osmotic pressure .
This small set of properties is of central importance to many natural phenomena and technological applications , as will be described in this module .
Several units commonly used to express the concentrations of solution components were introduced in an earlier chapter of this text , each providing certain benefits for use in different applications .
For example , molarity ( M ) is a convenient unit for use in stoichiometric calculations , since it is defined in terms of the molar amounts of solute species : Because solution volumes vary with temperature , molar concentrations will likewise vary .
When expressed as molarity , the concentration of a solution with identical numbers of solute and solvent species will be different at different temperatures , due to the contraction/expansion of the solution .
More appropriate for calculations involving many colligative properties are mole-based concentration units whose values are not dependent on temperature .
Two such units are mole fraction ( introduced in the previous chapter on gases ) and molality .
The antifreeze in most automobile radiators is a mixture of equal volumes of ethylene glycol and water , with minor amounts of other additives that prevent corrosion .
( a ) The mole fraction of ethylene glycol may be computed by first deriving molar amounts of both solution components and then substituting these amounts into the definition of mole fraction .
Notice that mole fraction is a dimensionless property , being the ratio of properties with identical units ( moles ) .
( b ) Derive moles of solute and mass of solvent ( in kg ) .
Answer : 7.14 10 ; 0.399 m Calculate the mole fraction of solute and solvent in a 3.0 m solution of sodium chloride .
Converting from one concentration unit to another is accomplished by first comparing the two unit definitions .
In this case , both units have the same numerator ( moles of solute ) but different denominators .
The provided molal concentration may be written as : The numerator for this solution ’ s mole fraction is , therefore , 3.0 mol NaCl .
The denominator may be computed by deriving the molar amount of water corresponding to 1.0 kg and then substituting these molar amounts into the definition for mole fraction .
The mole fraction of iodine , I , dissolved in dichloromethane , CH Cl , is 0.115 .
What is the molal concentration , m , of iodine in this solution ?
Answer : 1.50 m Intravenous infusion of a 0.556 M aqueous solution of glucose ( density of 1.04 g/mL ) is part of some postoperative recovery therapies .
What is the molal concentration of glucose in this solution ?
The provided molal concentration may be explicitly written as : Consider the definition of molality : The amount of glucose in 1-L of this solution is 0.556 mol , so the mass of water in this volume of solution is needed .
First , compute the mass of 1.00 L of the solution : This is the mass of both the water and its solute , glucose , and so the mass of glucose must be subtracted .
What is the molarity of this solution ?
This phenomenon can be rationalized by considering the effect of added solute molecules on the liquid 's vaporization and condensation processes .
To vaporize , solvent molecules must be present at the surface of the solution .
The presence of solute decreases the surface area available to solvent molecules and thereby reduces the rate of solvent vaporization .
Since the rate of condensation is unaffected by the presence of solute , the net result is that the vaporizationcondensation equilibrium is achieved with fewer solvent molecules in the vapor phase ( i.e. , at a lower vapor pressure ) .
While this interpretation is useful , it does not account for several important aspects of the colligative nature of vapor pressure lowering .
A more rigorous explanation involves the property of entropy , a topic of discussion in a later text chapter on thermodynamics .
For purposes of understanding the lowering of a liquid 's vapor pressure , it is adequate to note that the more dispersed nature of matter in a solution , compared to separate solvent and solute phases , serves to effectively stabilize the solvent molecules and hinder their vaporization .
A lower vapor pressure results , and a correspondingly higher boiling point as described in the next section of this module .
where P is the partial pressure exerted by component A in the solution , is the vapor pressure of pure A , and X is the mole fraction of A in the solution .
The vapor pressure of pure ethanol is 0.178 atm at 40 °C .
Glycerin is essentially nonvolatile at this temperature .
Since the solvent is the only volatile component of this solution , its vapor pressure may be computed per Raoult ’ s law as : First , calculate the molar amounts of each solution component using the provided mass data .
Next , calculate the mole fraction of the solvent ( ethanol ) and use Raoult ’ s law to compute the solution ’ s vapor pressure .
A solution contains 5.00 g of urea , CO ( NH ) ( a nonvolatile solute ) and 0.100 kg of water .
If the vapor pressure of pure water at 25 °C is 23.7 torr , what is the vapor pressure of the solution assuming ideal behavior ?
Answer : 23.4 torr Solutions whose components have significantly different vapor pressures may be separated by a selective vaporization process known as distillation .
Consider the simple case of a mixture of two volatile liquids , A and B , with A being the more volatile liquid .
By appropriately heating the mixture , component A may be vaporized , condensed , and collected—effectively separating it from component B. Distillation is widely applied in both laboratory and industrial settings , being used to refine petroleum , to isolate fermentation products , and to purify water .
A typical apparatus for laboratory-scale distillations is shown in .
Oil refineries use large-scale fractional distillation to separate the components of crude oil .
The crude oil is heated to high temperatures at the base of a tall fractionating column , vaporizing many of the components that rise within the column .
As vaporized components reach adequately cool zones during their ascent , they condense and are collected .
The collected liquids are simpler mixtures of hydrocarbons and other petroleum compounds that are of appropriate composition for various applications ( e.g. , diesel fuel , kerosene , gasoline ) , as depicted in .
As described in the chapter on liquids and solids , the boiling point of a liquid is the temperature at which its vapor pressure is equal to ambient atmospheric pressure .
Since the vapor pressure of a solution is lowered due to the presence of nonvolatile solutes , it stands to reason that the solution ’ s boiling point will subsequently be increased .
Vapor pressure increases with temperature , and so a solution will require a higher temperature than will pure solvent to achieve any given vapor pressure , including one equivalent to that of the surrounding atmosphere .
Boiling point elevation constants are characteristic properties that depend on the identity of the solvent .
Values of K for several solvents are listed in .
The extent to which the vapor pressure of a solvent is lowered and the boiling point is elevated depends on the total number of solute particles present in a given amount of solvent , not on the mass or size or chemical identities of the particles .
A 1 m aqueous solution of sucrose ( 342 g/mol ) and a 1 m aqueous solution of ethylene glycol ( 62 g/mol ) will exhibit the same boiling point because each solution has one mole of solute particles ( molecules ) per kilogram of solvent .
Assuming ideal solution behavior , what is the boiling point of a 0.33 m solution of a nonvolatile solute in benzene ?
Use the equation relating boiling point elevation to solute molality to solve this problem in two steps .
Calculate the change in boiling point .
Add the boiling point elevation to the pure solvent ’ s boiling point .
Assuming ideal solution behavior , what is the boiling point of the antifreeze described in ?
Answer : 109.2 °C Find the boiling point of a solution of 92.1 g of iodine , I , in 800.0 g of chloroform , CHCl , assuming that the iodine is nonvolatile and that the solution is ideal .
A four-step approach to solving this problem is outlined below .
Convert from grams to moles of I using the molar mass of I in the unit conversion factor .
Result : 0.363 mol Determine the molality of the solution from the number of moles of solute and the mass of solvent , in kilograms .
Result : 0.454 m Use the direct proportionality between the change in boiling point and molal concentration to determine how much the boiling point changes .
Result : 1.65 °C Determine the new boiling point from the boiling point of the pure solvent and the change .
Result : 62.91 °C Check each result as a self-assessment .
What is the boiling point of a solution of 1.0 g of glycerin , C H ( OH ) , in 47.8 g of water ?
Assume an ideal solution .
Answer : 100.12 °C Solutions freeze at lower temperatures than pure liquids .
This phenomenon is exploited in “ de-icing ” schemes that use salt , calcium chloride , or urea to melt ice on roads and sidewalks , and in the use of ethylene glycol as an “ antifreeze ” in automobile radiators .
Seawater freezes at a lower temperature than fresh water , and so the Arctic and Antarctic oceans remain unfrozen even at temperatures below 0 °C ( as do the body fluids of fish and other cold-blooded sea animals that live in these oceans ) .
Just as for boiling point elevation constants , these are characteristic properties whose values depend on the chemical identity of the solvent .
Values of K for several solvents are listed in .
Assuming ideal solution behavior , what is the freezing point of the 0.33 m solution of a nonvolatile nonelectrolyte solute in benzene described in ?
Use the equation relating freezing point depression to solute molality to solve this problem in two steps .
Calculate the change in freezing point .
Subtract the freezing point change observed from the pure solvent ’ s freezing point .
Assuming ideal solution behavior , what is the freezing point of a 1.85 m solution of a nonvolatile nonelectrolyte solute in nitrobenzene ?
Answer : −9.3 °C The colligative effects on vapor pressure , boiling point , and freezing point described in the previous section are conveniently summarized by comparing the phase diagrams for a pure liquid and a solution derived from that liquid .
The liquid-vapor curve for the solution is located beneath the corresponding curve for the solvent , depicting the vapor pressure lowering , Δ P , that results from the dissolution of nonvolatile solute .
Consequently , at any given pressure , the solution ’ s boiling point is observed at a higher temperature than that for the pure solvent , reflecting the boiling point elevation , Δ T , associated with the presence of nonvolatile solute .
The solid-liquid curve for the solution is displaced left of that for the pure solvent , representing the freezing point depression , Δ T , that accompanies solution formation .
Finally , notice that the solid-gas curves for the solvent and its solution are identical .
This is the case for many solutions comprising liquid solvents and nonvolatile solutes .
Just as for vaporization , when a solution of this sort is frozen , it is actually just the solvent molecules that undergo the liquid-to-solid transition , forming pure solid solvent that excludes solute species .
The solid and gaseous phases , therefore , are composed of solvent only , and so transitions between these phases are not subject to colligative effects .
A number of natural and synthetic materials exhibit selective permeation , meaning that only molecules or ions of a certain size , shape , polarity , charge , and so forth , are capable of passing through ( permeating ) the material .
Biological cell membranes provide elegant examples of selective permeation in nature , while dialysis tubing used to remove metabolic wastes from blood is a more simplistic technological example .
Regardless of how they may be fabricated , these materials are generally referred to as semipermeable membranes .
Consider the apparatus illustrated in , in which samples of pure solvent and a solution are separated by a membrane that only solvent molecules may permeate .
Solvent molecules will diffuse across the membrane in both directions .
Since the concentration of solvent is greater in the pure solvent than the solution , these molecules will diffuse from the solvent side of the membrane to the solution side at a faster rate than they will in the reverse direction .
The result is a net transfer of solvent molecules from the pure solvent to the solution .
Diffusion-driven transfer of solvent molecules through a semipermeable membrane is a process known as osmosis .
When osmosis is carried out in an apparatus like that shown in , the volume of the solution increases as it becomes diluted by accumulation of solvent .
This causes the level of the solution to rise , increasing its hydrostatic pressure ( due to the weight of the column of solution in the tube ) and resulting in a faster transfer of solvent molecules back to the pure solvent side .
When the pressure reaches a value that yields a reverse solvent transfer rate equal to the osmosis rate , bulk transfer of solvent ceases .
This pressure is called the osmotic pressure ( Π ) of the solution .
The osmotic pressure of a dilute solution is related to its solute molarity , M , and absolute temperature , T , according to the equation where R is the universal gas constant .
Assuming ideal solution behavior , what is the osmotic pressure ( atm ) of a 0.30 M solution of glucose in water that is used for intravenous infusion at body temperature , 37 °C ?
Find the osmotic pressure , Π , using the formula Π = MRT , where T is on the Kelvin scale ( 310 K ) and the value of R is expressed in appropriate units ( 0.08206 L atm/mol K ) .
Assuming ideal solution behavior , what is the osmotic pressure ( atm ) a solution with a volume of 0.750 L that contains 5.0 g of methanol , CH OH , in water at 37 °C ?
Answer : 5.3 atm If a solution is placed in an apparatus like the one shown in , applying pressure greater than the osmotic pressure of the solution reverses the osmosis and pushes solvent molecules from the solution into the pure solvent .
This technique of reverse osmosis is used for large-scale desalination of seawater and on smaller scales to produce high-purity tap water for drinking .
Examples of osmosis are evident in many biological systems because cells are surrounded by semipermeable membranes .
Carrots and celery that have become limp because they have lost water can be made crisp again by placing them in water .
Water moves into the carrot or celery cells by osmosis .
A cucumber placed in a concentrated salt solution loses water by osmosis and absorbs some salt to become a pickle .
Osmosis can also affect animal cells .
Solute concentrations are particularly important when solutions are injected into the body .
Solutes in body cell fluids and blood serum give these solutions an osmotic pressure of approximately 7.7 atm .
Solutions injected into the body must have the same osmotic pressure as blood serum ; that is , they should be isotonic with blood serum .
If a less concentrated solution , a hypotonic solution , is injected in sufficient quantity to dilute the blood serum , water from the diluted serum passes into the blood cells by osmosis , causing the cells to expand and rupture .
This process is called hemolysis .
When a more concentrated solution , a hypertonic solution , is injected , the cells lose water to the more concentrated solution , shrivel , and possibly die in a process called crenation .
These effects are illustrated in .
Osmotic pressure and changes in freezing point , boiling point , and vapor pressure are directly proportional to the number of solute species present in a given amount of solution .
Consequently , measuring one of these properties for a solution prepared using a known mass of solute permits determination of the solute ’ s molar mass .
A solution of 4.00 g of a nonelectrolyte dissolved in 55.0 g of benzene is found to freeze at 2.32 °C .
Assuming ideal solution behavior , what is the molar mass of this compound ?
Solve this problem using the following steps .
Determine the change in freezing point from the observed freezing point and the freezing point of pure benzene .
Determine the molal concentration from K , the freezing point depression constant for benzene , and Δ T .
Determine the number of moles of compound in the solution from the molal concentration and the mass of solvent used to make the solution .
Determine the molar mass from the mass of the solute and the number of moles in that mass .
A solution of 35.7 g of a nonelectrolyte in 220.0 g of chloroform has a boiling point of 64.5 °C .
Assuming ideal solution behavior , what is the molar mass of this compound ?
Answer : 1.8 10 g/mol A 0.500 L sample of an aqueous solution containing 10.0 g of hemoglobin has an osmotic pressure of 5.9 torr at 22 °C .
Assuming ideal solution behavior , what is the molar mass of hemoglobin ?
Here is one set of steps that can be used to solve the problem : Convert the osmotic pressure to atmospheres , then determine the molar concentration from the osmotic pressure .
Determine the number of moles of hemoglobin in the solution from the concentration and the volume of the solution .
Determine the molar mass from the mass of hemoglobin and the number of moles in that mass .
Assuming ideal solution behavior , what is the molar mass of a protein if a solution of 0.02 g of the protein in 25.0 mL of solution has an osmotic pressure of 0.56 torr at 25 °C ?
Answer : 3 10 g/mol As noted previously in this module , the colligative properties of a solution depend only on the number , not on the identity , of solute species dissolved .
The concentration terms in the equations for various colligative properties ( freezing point depression , boiling point elevation , osmotic pressure ) pertain to all solute species present in the solution .
For the solutions considered thus far in this chapter , the solutes have been nonelectrolytes that dissolve physically without dissociation or any other accompanying process .
Each molecule that dissolves yields one dissolved solute molecule .
Similar discrepancies are observed for other ionic compounds , and the differences between the measured and expected colligative property values typically become more significant as solute concentrations increase .
These observations suggest that the ions of sodium chloride ( and other strong electrolytes ) are not completely dissociated in solution .
To account for this and avoid the errors accompanying the assumption of total dissociation , an experimentally measured parameter named in honor of Nobel Prize-winning German chemist Jacobus Henricus van ’ t Hoff is used .
In 1923 , the chemists Peter Debye and Erich Hückel proposed a theory to explain the apparent incomplete ionization of strong electrolytes .
They suggested that although interionic attraction in an aqueous solution is very greatly reduced by solvation of the ions and the insulating action of the polar solvent , it is not completely nullified .
The residual attractions prevent the ions from behaving as totally independent particles .
In some cases , a positive and negative ion may actually touch , giving a solvated unit called an ion pair .
Thus , the activity , or the effective concentration , of any particular kind of ion is less than that indicated by the actual concentration .
Ions become more and more widely separated the more dilute the solution , and the residual interionic attractions become less and less .
Thus , in extremely dilute solutions , the effective concentrations of the ions ( their activities ) are essentially equal to the actual concentrations .
Note that the van ’ t Hoff factors for the electrolytes in are for 0.05 m solutions , at which concentration the value of i for NaCl is 1.9 , as opposed to an ideal value of 2 .
The concentration of ions in seawater is approximately the same as that in a solution containing 4.2 g of NaCl dissolved in 125 g of water .
Use this information and a predicted value for the van ’ t Hoff factor to determine the freezing temperature the solution ( assume ideal solution behavior ) .
Solve this problem using the following series of steps .
Convert from grams to moles of NaCl using the molar mass of NaCl in the unit conversion factor .
Result : 0.072 mol NaCl Determine the number of moles of ions present in the solution using the number of moles of ions in 1 mole of NaCl as the conversion factor ( 2 mol ions/1 mol NaCl ) .
Result : 0.14 mol ions Determine the molality of the ions in the solution from the number of moles of ions and the mass of solvent , in kilograms .
Result : 1.2 m Use the direct proportionality between the change in freezing point and molal concentration to determine how much the freezing point changes .
Result : 2.1 °C Determine the new freezing point from the freezing point of the pure solvent and the change .
Result : −2.1 °C Check each result as a self-assessment , taking care to avoid rounding errors by retaining guard digits in each step ’ s result for computing the next step ’ s result .
Assuming complete dissociation and ideal solution behavior , calculate the freezing point of a solution of 0.724 g of CaCl in 175 g of water .
These suspensions are heterogeneous mixtures composed of relatively large particles that are visible ( or that can be seen with a magnifying glass ) .
They are cloudy , and the suspended particles settle out after mixing .
On the other hand , a solution is a homogeneous mixture in which no settling occurs and in which the dissolved species are molecules or ions .
Solutions exhibit completely different behavior from suspensions .
A solution may be colored , but it is transparent , the molecules or ions are invisible , and they do not settle out on standing .
Another class of mixtures called colloids ( or colloidal dispersions ) exhibit properties intermediate between those of suspensions and solutions .
The particles in a colloid are larger than most simple molecules ; however , colloidal particles are small enough that they do not settle out upon standing .
The particles in a colloid are large enough to scatter light , a phenomenon called the Tyndall effect .
This can make colloidal mixtures appear cloudy or opaque , such as the searchlight beams shown in .
Clouds are colloidal mixtures .
They are composed of water droplets that are much larger than molecules , but that are small enough that they do not settle out .
The term “ colloid ” —from the Greek words kolla , meaning “ glue , ” and eidos , meaning “ like ” —was first used in 1861 by Thomas Graham to classify mixtures such as starch in water and gelatin .
Many colloidal particles are aggregates of hundreds or thousands of molecules , but others ( such as proteins and polymer molecules ) consist of a single extremely large molecule .
The protein and synthetic polymer molecules that form colloids may have molecular masses ranging from a few thousand to many million atomic mass units .
Analogous to the identification of solution components as “ solute ” and “ solvent , ” the components of a colloid are likewise classified according to their relative amounts .
The particulate component typically present in a relatively minor amount is called the dispersed phase and the substance or solution throughout which the particulate is dispersed is called the dispersion medium .
Colloids may involve virtually any combination of physical states ( gas in liquid , liquid in solid , solid in gas , etc .
) , as illustrated by the examples of colloidal systems given in .
Colloids are prepared by producing particles of colloidal dimensions and distributing these particles throughout a dispersion medium .
Particles of colloidal size are formed by two methods : Dispersion methods : breaking down larger particles .
For example , paint pigments are produced by dispersing large particles by grinding in special mills .
Condensation methods : growth from smaller units , such as molecules or ions .
For example , clouds form when water molecules condense and form very small droplets .
A few solid substances , when brought into contact with water , disperse spontaneously and form colloidal systems .
Gelatin , glue , starch , and dehydrated milk powder behave in this manner .
The particles are already of colloidal size ; the water simply disperses them .
Powdered milk particles of colloidal size are produced by dehydrating milk spray .
Some atomizers produce colloidal dispersions of a liquid in air .
An emulsion may be prepared by shaking together or blending two immiscible liquids .
This breaks one liquid into droplets of colloidal size , which then disperse throughout the other liquid .
Oil spills in the ocean may be difficult to clean up , partly because wave action can cause the oil and water to form an emulsion .
In many emulsions , however , the dispersed phase tends to coalesce , form large drops , and separate .
Therefore , emulsions are usually stabilized by an emulsifying agent , a substance that inhibits the coalescence of the dispersed liquid .
For example , a little soap will stabilize an emulsion of kerosene in water .
Milk is an emulsion of butterfat in water , with the protein casein serving as the emulsifying agent .
Mayonnaise is an emulsion of oil in vinegar , with egg yolk components as the emulsifying agents .
Condensation methods form colloidal particles by aggregation of molecules or ions .
If the particles grow beyond the colloidal size range , drops or precipitates form , and no colloidal system results .
Clouds form when water molecules aggregate and form colloid-sized particles .
If these water particles coalesce to form adequately large water drops of liquid water or crystals of solid water , they settle from the sky as rain , sleet , or snow .
Many condensation methods involve chemical reactions .
Pioneers made soap by boiling fats with a strongly basic solution made by leaching potassium carbonate , K CO , from wood ashes with hot water .
Animal fats contain polyesters of fatty acids ( long-chain carboxylic acids ) .
When animal fats are treated with a base like potassium carbonate or sodium hydroxide , glycerol and salts of fatty acids such as palmitic , oleic , and stearic acid are formed .
The salts of fatty acids are called soaps .
The sodium salt of stearic acid , sodium stearate , has the formula C H CO Na and contains an uncharged nonpolar hydrocarbon chain , the C H — unit , and an ionic carboxylate group , the — unit .
Detergents ( soap substitutes ) also contain nonpolar hydrocarbon chains , such as C H — , and an ionic group , such .
Soaps form insoluble calcium and magnesium as a sulfate— compounds in hard water ; detergents form water-soluble products—a definite advantage for detergents .
or a sulfonate— The cleaning action of soaps and detergents can be explained in terms of the structures of the molecules involved .
The hydrocarbon ( nonpolar ) end of a soap or detergent molecule dissolves in , or is attracted to , nonpolar substances such as oil , grease , or dirt particles .
The ionic end is attracted by water ( polar ) , illustrated in .
As a result , the soap or detergent molecules become oriented at the interface between the dirt particles and the water so they act as a kind of bridge between two different kinds of matter , nonpolar and polar .
Molecules such as this are termed amphiphilic since they have both a hydrophobic ( “ water-fearing ” ) part and a hydrophilic ( “ water-loving ” ) part .
As a consequence , dirt particles become suspended as colloidal particles and are readily washed away .
Dispersed colloidal particles are often electrically charged .
A colloidal particle of iron ( III ) hydroxide , for example , does not contain enough hydroxide ions to compensate exactly for the positive charges on the iron ( III ) ions .
Thus , each individual colloidal particle bears a positive charge , and the colloidal dispersion consists of charged colloidal particles and some free hydroxide ions , which keep the dispersion electrically neutral .
Most metal hydroxide colloids have positive charges , whereas most metals and metal sulfides form negatively charged dispersions .
All colloidal particles in any one system have charges of the same sign .
This helps keep them dispersed because particles containing like charges repel each other .
The charged nature of some colloidal particles may be exploited to remove them from a variety of mixtures .
For example , the particles comprising smoke are often colloidally dispersed and electrically charged .
Frederick Cottrell , an American chemist , developed a process to remove these particles .
The charged particles are attracted to highly charged electrodes , where they are neutralized and deposited as dust .
This is one of the important methods used to clean up the smoke from a variety of industrial processes .
The process is also important in the recovery of valuable products from the smoke and flue dust of smelters , furnaces , and kilns .
There are also similar electrostatic air filters designed for home use to improve indoor air quality .
Gelatin desserts , such as Jell-O , are a type of colloid .
Gelatin sets on cooling because the hot aqueous mixture of gelatin coagulates as it cools , yielding an extremely viscous body known as a gel .
A gel is a colloidal dispersion of a liquid phase throughout a solid phase .
It appears that the fibers of the dispersing medium form a complex three-dimensional network , the interstices being filled with the liquid medium or a dilute solution of the dispersing medium .
Pectin , a carbohydrate from fruit juices , is a gel-forming substance important in jelly making .
Silica gel , a colloidal dispersion of hydrated silicon dioxide , is formed when dilute hydrochloric acid is added to a dilute solution of sodium silicate .
Canned Heat is a flammable gel made by mixing alcohol and a saturated aqueous solution of calcium acetate .
The lizard in the photograph is not simply enjoying the sunshine or working on its tan .
The heat from the sun ’ s rays is critical to the lizard ’ s survival .
A warm lizard can move faster than a cold one because the chemical reactions that allow its muscles to move occur more rapidly at higher temperatures .
A cold lizard is a slower lizard and an easier meal for predators .
From baking a cake to determining the useful lifespan of a bridge , rates of chemical reactions play important roles in our understanding of processes that involve chemical changes .
Two questions are typically posed when planning to carry out a chemical reaction .
The study of chemical kinetics concerns the second and third questions—that is , the rate at which a reaction yields products and the molecular-scale means by which a reaction occurs .
This chapter examines the factors that influence the rates of chemical reactions , the mechanisms by which reactions proceed , and the quantitative techniques used to describe the rates at which reactions occur .
By the end of this section , you will be able to : Define chemical reaction rate Derive rate expressions from the balanced equation for a given chemical reaction Calculate reaction rates from experimental data A rate is a measure of how some property varies with time .
Speed is a familiar rate that expresses the distance traveled by an object in a given amount of time .
Wage is a rate that represents the amount of money earned by a person working for a given amount of time .
Likewise , the rate of a chemical reaction is a measure of how much reactant is consumed , or how much product is produced , by the reaction in a given amount of time .
The rate of reaction is the change in the amount of a reactant or product per unit time .
Reaction rates are therefore determined by measuring the time dependence of some property that can be related to reactant or product amounts .
Rates of reactions that consume or produce gaseous substances , for example , are conveniently determined by measuring changes in volume or pressure .
For reactions involving one or more colored substances , rates may be monitored via measurements of light absorption .
For reactions involving aqueous electrolytes , rates may be measured via changes in a solution ’ s conductivity .
For reactants and products in solution , their relative amounts ( concentrations ) are conveniently used for purposes of expressing reaction rates .
Since the reactant concentration decreases as the reaction proceeds , Δ [ H O ] is a negative quantity .
Reaction rates are , by convention , positive quantities , and so this negative change in concentration is multiplied by −1 .
provides an example of data collected during the decomposition of H O .
To obtain the tabulated results for this decomposition , the concentration of hydrogen peroxide was measured every 6 hours over the course of a day at a constant temperature of 40 °C .
Reaction rates were computed for each time interval by dividing the change in concentration by the corresponding time increment , as shown here for the first 6-hour period : Notice that the reaction rates vary with time , decreasing as the reaction proceeds .
Results for the last 6-hour period yield a reaction rate of : This behavior indicates the reaction continually slows with time .
Using the concentrations at the beginning and end of a time period over which the reaction rate is changing results in the calculation of an average rate for the reaction over this time interval .
At any specific time , the rate at which a reaction is proceeding is known as its instantaneous rate .
The instantaneous rate of a reaction at “ time zero , ” when the reaction commences , is its initial rate .
Consider the analogy of a car slowing down as it approaches a stop sign .
The vehicle ’ s initial rate—analogous to the beginning of a chemical reaction—would be the speedometer reading at the moment the driver begins pressing the brakes ( t ) .
A few moments later , the instantaneous rate at a specific moment—call it t —would be somewhat slower , as indicated by the speedometer reading at that point in time .
As time passes , the instantaneous rate will continue to fall until it reaches zero , when the car ( or reaction ) stops .
Unlike instantaneous speed , the car ’ s average speed is not indicated by the speedometer ; but it can be calculated as the ratio of the distance traveled to the time required to bring the vehicle to a complete stop ( Δ t ) .
Like the decelerating car , the average rate of a chemical reaction will fall somewhere between its initial and final rates .
The instantaneous rate of a reaction may be determined one of two ways .
If experimental conditions permit the measurement of concentration changes over very short time intervals , then average rates computed as described earlier provide reasonably good approximations of instantaneous rates .
Alternatively , a graphical procedure may be used that , in effect , yields the results that would be obtained if short time interval measurements were possible .
In a plot of the concentration of hydrogen peroxide against time , the instantaneous rate of decomposition of H O at any time t is given by the slope of a straight line that is tangent to the curve at that time .
These tangent line slopes may be evaluated using calculus , but the procedure for doing so is beyond the scope of this chapter .
The rate of a reaction may be expressed as the change in concentration of any reactant or product .
For any given reaction , these rate expressions are all related simply to one another according to the reaction stoichiometry .
The rate of the general reaction can be expressed in terms of the decrease in the concentration of A or the increase in the concentration of B .
illustrates the change in concentrations over time for the decomposition of ammonia into nitrogen and hydrogen at 1100 °C .
Slopes of the tangent lines at t = 500 s show that the instantaneous rates derived from all three species involved in the reaction are related by their stoichiometric factors .
The reaction stoichiometry shows that Therefore : and If the rate of decomposition of ammonia , NH , at 1150 K is 2.10 10 mol/L/s , what is the rate of production of nitrogen and hydrogen ?
Answer : 1.05 10 mol/L/s , N and 3.15 10 mol/L/s , H .
By the end of this section , you will be able to : Describe the effects of chemical nature , physical state , temperature , concentration , and catalysis on reaction rates The rates at which reactants are consumed and products are formed during chemical reactions vary greatly .
The rate of a reaction depends on the nature of the participating substances .
Reactions that appear similar may have different rates under the same conditions , depending on the identity of the reactants .
For example , when small pieces of the metals iron and sodium are exposed to air , the sodium reacts completely with air overnight , whereas the iron is barely affected .
The active metals calcium and sodium both react with water to form hydrogen gas and a base .
Yet calcium reacts at a moderate rate , whereas sodium reacts so rapidly that the reaction is almost explosive .
A chemical reaction between two or more substances requires intimate contact between the reactants .
When reactants are in different physical states , or phases ( solid , liquid , gaseous , dissolved ) , the reaction takes place only at the interface between the phases .
Consider the heterogeneous reaction between a solid phase and either a liquid or gaseous phase .
Compared with the reaction rate for large solid particles , the rate for smaller particles will be greater because the surface area in contact with the other reactant phase is greater .
For example , large pieces of iron react more slowly with acids than they do with finely divided iron powder .
Large pieces of wood smolder , smaller pieces burn rapidly , and saw dust burns explosively .
Chemical reactions typically occur faster at higher temperatures .
Food can spoil quickly when left on the kitchen counter .
However , the lower temperature inside of a refrigerator slows that process so that the same food remains fresh for days .
Gas burners , hot plates , and ovens are often used in the laboratory to increase the speed of reactions that proceed slowly at ordinary temperatures .
For many chemical processes , reaction rates are approximately doubled when the temperature is raised by 10 °C .
The rates of many reactions depend on the concentrations of the reactants .
Rates usually increase when the concentration of one or more of the reactants increases .
For example , calcium carbonate ( CaCO ) deteriorates as a result of its reaction with the pollutant sulfur dioxide .
The rate of this reaction depends on the amount of sulfur dioxide in the air .
Similarly , phosphorus burns much more rapidly in an atmosphere of pure oxygen than in air , which is only about 20 % oxygen .
Relatively dilute aqueous solutions of hydrogen peroxide , H O , are commonly used as topical antiseptics .
Hydrogen peroxide decomposes to yield water and oxygen gas according to the equation : Under typical conditions , this decomposition occurs very slowly .
When dilute H O ( aq ) is poured onto an open wound , however , the reaction occurs rapidly and the solution foams because of the vigorous production of oxygen gas .
This dramatic difference is caused by the presence of substances within the wound ’ s exposed tissues that accelerate the decomposition process .
Substances that function to increase the rate of a reaction are called catalysts , a topic treated in greater detail later in this chapter .
Rate laws ( sometimes called differential rate laws ) or rate equations are mathematical expressions that describe the relationship between the rate of a chemical reaction and the concentration of its reactants .
As an example , consider the reaction described by the chemical equation where a and b are stoichiometric coefficients .
The rate law for this reaction is written as : in which [ A ] and [ B ] represent the molar concentrations of reactants , and k is the rate constant , which is specific for a particular reaction at a particular temperature .
The exponents m and n are the reaction orders and are typically positive integers , though they can be fractions , negative , or zero .
The rate constant k and the reaction orders m and n must be determined experimentally by observing how the rate of a reaction changes as the concentrations of the reactants are changed .
The rate constant k is independent of the reactant concentrations , but it does vary with temperature .
The reaction orders in a rate law describe the mathematical dependence of the rate on reactant concentrations .
Referring to the generic rate law above , the reaction is m order with respect to A and n order with respect to B .
For example , if m = 1 and n = 2 , the reaction is first order in A and second order in B .
The overall reaction order is simply the sum of orders for each reactant .
For the example rate law here , the reaction is third order overall ( 1 + 2 = 3 ) .
A few specific examples are shown below to further illustrate this concept .
The rate law : describes a reaction that is first order in hydrogen peroxide and first order overall .
The rate law : describes a reaction that is second order in C H and second order overall .
The rate law : describes a reaction that is first order in H , first order in OH , and second order overall .
An experiment shows that the reaction of nitrogen dioxide with carbon monoxide : is second order in NO and zero order in CO at 100 °C .
What is the rate law for the reaction ?
The reaction will have the form : The reaction is second order in NO ; thus m = 2 .
The reaction is zero order in CO ; thus n = 0 .
A later chapter section on reaction mechanisms will explain how a reactant ’ s concentration can have no effect on a reaction rate despite being involved in the reaction .
The rate law for the reaction : has been determined to be rate = k [ NO ] [ H ] .
What are the orders with respect to each reactant , and what is the overall order of the reaction ?
Answer : order in NO = 2 ; order in H = 1 ; overall order = 3 In a transesterification reaction , a triglyceride reacts with an alcohol to form an ester and glycerol .
Answer : order in CH OH = 1 ; order in CH CH OCOCH = 0 ; overall order = 1 A common experimental approach to the determination of rate laws is the method of initial rates .
This method involves measuring reaction rates for multiple experimental initial reactant concentrations .
Comparing the measured rates for these trials permits determination of the reaction orders and , subsequently , the rate constant , which together are used to formulate a rate law .
This approach is illustrated in the next two example exercises .
trials carried out using different Ozone in the upper atmosphere is depleted when it reacts with nitrogen oxides .
The rates of the reactions of nitrogen oxides with ozone are important factors in deciding how significant these reactions are in the formation of the ozone hole over Antarctica .
One such reaction is the combination of nitric oxide , NO , with ozone , O : This reaction has been studied in the laboratory , and the following rate data were determined at 25 °C .
Determine the rate law and the rate constant for the reaction at 25 °C .
The rate law will have the form : Determine the values of m , n , and k from the experimental data using the following three-part process : Determine the value of m from the data in which [ NO ] varies and [ O ] is constant .
In the last three experiments , [ NO ] varies while [ O ] remains constant .
When [ NO ] doubles from trial 3 to 4 , the rate doubles , and when [ NO ] triples from trial 3 to 5 , the rate also triples .
Thus , the rate is also directly proportional to [ NO ] , and m in the rate law is equal to 1 .
Determine the value of n from data in which [ O ] varies and [ NO ] is constant .
In the first three experiments , [ NO ] is constant and [ O ] varies .
The reaction rate changes in direct proportion to the change in [ O ] .
When [ O ] doubles from trial 1 to 2 , the rate doubles ; when [ O ] triples from trial 1 to 3 , the rate increases also triples .
Thus , the rate is directly proportional to [ O ] , and n is equal to 1.The rate law is thus : Determine the value of k from one set of concentrations and the corresponding rate .
Cancelation gives : which simplifies to : Thus n must be 1 , and the form of the rate law is : Determine the numerical value of the rate constant k with appropriate units .
The units for the rate of a reaction are mol/L/s .
The units for k are whatever is needed so that substituting into the rate law expression affords the appropriate units for the rate .
In this example , the concentration units are mol /L .
The units for k should be mol L /s so that the rate is in terms of mol/L/s .
This is merely a coincidence and very often not the case .
Rate laws may exhibit fractional orders for some reactants , and negative reaction orders are sometimes observed when an increase in the concentration of one reactant causes a decrease in reaction rate .
A few examples illustrating these points are provided : It is important to note that rate laws are determined by experiment only and are not reliably predicted by reaction stoichiometry .
The units for a rate constant will vary as appropriate to accommodate the overall order of the reaction .
Note that the units in this table were derived using specific units for concentration ( mol/L ) and time ( s ) , though any valid units for these two properties may be used .
We can also determine a second form of each rate law that relates the concentrations of reactants and time .
These are called integrated rate laws .
We can use an integrated rate law to determine the amount of reactant or product present after a period of time or to estimate the time required for a reaction to proceed to a certain extent .
For example , an integrated rate law is used to determine the length of time a radioactive material must be stored for its radioactivity to decay to a safe level .
Using calculus , the differential rate law for a chemical reaction can be integrated with respect to time to give an equation that relates the amount of reactant or product present in a reaction mixture to the elapsed time of the reaction .
This process can either be very straightforward or very complex , depending on the complexity of the differential rate law .
For purposes of discussion , we will focus on the resulting integrated rate laws for first- , second- , and zero-order reactions .
Let x be the initial concentration , in which case the concentration after 80.0 % decomposition is 20.0 % of x or 0.200 x .
Rearranging the rate law to isolate t and substituting the provided quantities yields : Iodine-131 is a radioactive isotope that is used to diagnose and treat some forms of thyroid cancer .
Iodine-131 decays to xenon-131 according to the equation : The decay is first-order with a rate constant of 0.138 d .
How many days will it take for 90 % of the iodine−131 in a 0.500 M solution of this substance to decay to Xe-131 ?
If a set of rate data are plotted in this fashion but do not result in a straight line , the reaction is not first order in A .
Show that the data in can be represented by a first-order rate law by graphing ln [ H O ] versus time .
Determine the rate constant for the decomposition of H O from these data .
The data from are tabulated below , and a plot of ln [ H O ] is shown in .
The plot of ln [ H O ] versus time is linear , indicating that the reaction may be described by a first-order rate law .
According to the linear format of the first-order integrated rate law , the rate constant is given by the negative of this plot ’ s slope .
The slope of this line may be derived from two values of ln [ H O ] at different values of t ( one near each end of the line is preferable ) .
For example , the value of ln [ H O ] when t is 0.00 h is 0.000 ; the value when t = 24.00 h is −2.772 Graph the following data to determine whether the reaction is first order .
Answer : The plot of ln [ A ] vs. t is not linear , indicating the reaction is not first order : The equations that relate the concentrations of reactants and the rate constant of second-order reactions can be fairly complicated .
To illustrate the point with minimal complexity , only the simplest second-order reactions will be described here , namely , those whose rates depend on the concentration of just one reactant .
For these types of reactions , the differential rate law is written as : For these second-order reactions , the integrated rate law is : where the terms in the equation have their usual meanings as defined earlier .
The reaction of butadiene gas ( C H ) to yield C H gas is described by the equation : This “ dimerization ” reaction is second order with a rate constant equal to 5.76 10 L mol min under certain conditions .
If the initial concentration of butadiene is 0.200 M , what is the concentration after 10.0 min ?
For a second-order reaction , the integrated rate law is written We know three variables in this equation : [ A ] = 0.200 mol/L , k = 5.76 10 L/mol/min , and t = 10.0 min .
Therefore , we can solve for [ A ] , the fourth variable : Therefore 0.179 mol/L of butadiene remain at the end of 10.0 min , compared to the 0.200 mol/L that was originally present .
If the initial concentration of butadiene is 0.0200 M , what is the concentration remaining after 20.0 min ?
If the The data below are for the same reaction described in .
Prepare and compare two appropriate data plots to identify the reaction as being either first or second order .
After identifying the reaction order , estimate a value for the rate constant .
In order to distinguish a first-order reaction from a second-order reaction , prepare a plot of ln [ C H ] versus t and compare it to a plot of versus t .
The values needed for these plots follow .
The plots are shown in , which clearly shows the plot of ln [ C H ] versus t is not linear , therefore the reaction is not first order .
The plot of versus t is linear , indicating that the reaction is second order .
According to the second-order integrated rate law , the rate constant is equal to the slope of the t plot .
Using the data for t = 0 s and t = 6200 s , the rate constant is estimated as follows : versus Do the following data fit a second-order rate law ?
Answer : Yes .
The plot of vs. t is linear : For zero-order reactions , the differential rate law is : A zero-order reaction thus exhibits a constant reaction rate , regardless of the concentration of its reactant ( s ) .
This may seem counterintuitive , since the reaction rate certainly can ’ t be finite when the reactant concentration is zero .
For purposes of this introductory text , it will suffice to note that zero-order kinetics are observed for some reactions only under certain specific conditions .
These same reactions exhibit different kinetic behaviors when the specific conditions aren ’ t met , and for this reason the more prudent term pseudo-zero-order is sometimes used .
The integrated rate law for a zero-order reaction is a linear function : A plot of [ A ] versus t for a zero-order reaction is a straight line with a slope of −k and a y -intercept of [ A ] .
shows a plot of [ NH ] versus t for the thermal decomposition of ammonia at the surface of two different heated solids .
The decomposition reaction exhibits first-order behavior at a quartz ( SiO ) surface , as suggested by the exponentially decaying plot of concentration versus time .
On a tungsten surface , however , the plot is linear , indicating zero-order kinetics .
Use the data plot in to graphically estimate the zero-order rate constant for ammonia decomposition at a tungsten surface .
The integrated rate law for zero-order kinetics describes a linear plot of reactant concentration , [ A ] , versus time , t , with a slope equal to the negative of the rate constant , − k .
Following the mathematical approach of previous examples , the slope of the linear data plot ( for decomposition on W ) is estimated from the graph .
Answer : 35 min The half-life of a reaction ( t ) is the time required for one-half of a given amount of reactant to be consumed .
In each succeeding half-life , half of the remaining concentration of the reactant is consumed .
Using the decomposition of hydrogen peroxide as an example , we find that during the first half-life ( from 0.00 hours to 6.00 hours ) , the concentration of H O decreases from 1.000 M to 0.500 M .
During the second half-life ( from 6.00 hours to 12.00 hours ) , it decreases from 0.500 M to 0.250 M ; during the third half-life , it decreases from 0.250 M to 0.125 M .
The concentration of H O decreases by half during each successive period of 6.00 hours .
The decomposition of hydrogen peroxide is a first-order reaction , and , as can be shown , the half-life of a first-order reaction is independent of the concentration of the reactant .
However , half-lives of reactions with other orders depend on the concentrations of the reactants .
Faster reactions exhibit larger rate constants and correspondingly shorter half-lives .
Slower reactions exhibit smaller rate constants and longer half-lives .
Calculate the rate constant for the first-order decomposition of hydrogen peroxide in water at 40 °C , using the data given in .
Inspecting the concentration/time data in shows the half-life for the decomposition of H O is 2.16 10 s : The first-order radioactive decay of iodine-131 exhibits a rate constant of 0.138 d .
What is the half-life for this decay ?
Unlike with first-order reactions , the rate constant of a second-order reaction can not be calculated directly from the half-life unless the initial concentration is known .
However , the half-life of a zero-order reaction increases as the initial concentration increases .
Equations for both differential and integrated rate laws and the corresponding half-lives for zero- , first- , and secondorder reactions are summarized in .
What is the half-life ( ms ) for the butadiene dimerization reaction described in ?
The reaction in question is second order , is initiated with a 0.200 mol L reactant solution , and exhibits a rate constant of 0.0576 L mol min .
Substituting these quantities into the second-order half-life equation : What is the half-life ( min ) for the thermal decomposition of ammonia on tungsten ( see ) ?
Atoms must be close together to form chemical bonds .
This simple premise is the basis for a very powerful theory that explains many observations regarding chemical kinetics , including factors affecting reaction rates .
Collision theory is based on the following postulates : The rate of a reaction is proportional to the rate of reactant collisions : The reacting species must collide in an orientation that allows contact between the atoms that will become bonded together in the product .
The collision must occur with adequate energy to permit mutual penetration of the reacting species ’ valence shells so that the electrons can rearrange and form new bonds ( and new chemical species ) .
We can see the importance of the two physical factors noted in postulates 2 and 3 , the orientation and energy of collisions , when we consider the reaction of carbon monoxide with oxygen : Carbon monoxide is a pollutant produced by the combustion of hydrocarbon fuels .
To reduce this pollutant , automobiles have catalytic converters that use a catalyst to carry out this reaction .
It is also a side reaction of the combustion of gunpowder that results in muzzle flash for many firearms .
If carbon monoxide and oxygen are present in sufficient amounts , the reaction will occur at high temperature and pressure .
The first step in the gas-phase reaction between carbon monoxide and oxygen is a collision between the two molecules : Although there are many different possible orientations the two molecules can have relative to each other , consider the two presented in .
In the first case , the oxygen side of the carbon monoxide molecule collides with the oxygen molecule .
In the second case , the carbon side of the carbon monoxide molecule collides with the oxygen molecule .
If the collision does take place with the correct orientation , there is still no guarantee that the reaction will proceed to form carbon dioxide .
In addition to a proper orientation , the collision must also occur with sufficient energy to result in product formation .
When reactant species collide with both proper orientation and adequate energy , they combine to form an unstable species called an activated complex or a transition state .
These species are very short lived and usually undetectable by most analytical instruments .
In some cases , sophisticated spectral measurements have been used to observe transition states .
Collision theory explains why most reaction rates increase as concentrations increase .
With an increase in the concentration of any reacting substance , the chances for collisions between molecules are increased because there are more molecules per unit of volume .
More collisions mean a faster reaction rate , assuming the energy of the collisions is adequate .
The minimum energy necessary to form a product during a collision between reactants is called the activation energy ( E ) .
How this energy compares to the kinetic energy provided by colliding reactant molecules is a primary factor affecting the rate of a chemical reaction .
If the activation energy is much larger than the average kinetic energy of the molecules , the reaction will occur slowly since only a few fast-moving molecules will have enough energy to react .
If the activation energy is much smaller than the average kinetic energy of the molecules , a large fraction of molecules will be adequately energetic and the reaction will proceed rapidly .
shows how the energy of a chemical system changes as it undergoes a reaction converting reactants to products according to the equation These reaction diagrams are widely used in chemical kinetics to illustrate various properties of the reaction of interest .
Viewing the diagram from left to right , the system initially comprises reactants only , A + B .
Reactant molecules with sufficient energy can collide to form a high-energy activated complex or transition state .
The unstable transition state can then subsequently decay to yield stable products , C + D .
The diagram depicts the reaction 's activation energy , E , as the energy difference between the reactants and the transition state .
Using a specific energy , the enthalpy ( see chapter on thermochemistry ) , the enthalpy change of the reaction , Δ H , is estimated as the energy difference between the reactants and products .
In this case , the reaction is exothermic ( Δ H < 0 ) since it yields a decrease in system enthalpy .
Postulates of collision theory are nicely accommodated by the Arrhenius equation .
The frequency factor , A , reflects how well the reaction conditions favor properly oriented collisions between reactant molecules .
An increased probability of effectively oriented collisions results in larger values for A and faster reaction rates .
The exponential term , e , describes the effect of activation energy on reaction rate .
According to kinetic molecular theory ( see chapter on gases ) , the temperature of matter is a measure of the average kinetic energy of its constituent atoms or molecules .
The distribution of energies among the molecules composing a sample of matter at any given temperature is described by the plot shown in ( a ) .
Two shaded areas under the curve represent the numbers of molecules possessing adequate energy ( RT ) to overcome the activation barriers ( E ) .
A lower activation energy results in a greater fraction of adequately energized molecules and a faster reaction .
The exponential term also describes the effect of temperature on reaction rate .
A higher temperature represents a correspondingly greater fraction of molecules possessing sufficient energy ( RT ) to overcome the activation barrier ( E ) , as shown in ( b ) .
This yields a greater value for the rate constant and a correspondingly faster reaction rate .
The variation of the rate constant with temperature for the decomposition of HI ( g ) to H ( g ) and I ( g ) is given here .
What is the activation energy for the reaction ?
This is helpful for most experimental data because a perfect fit of each data point with the line is rarely encountered .
For the data here , the fit is nearly perfect and the slope may be estimated using any two of the provided data pairs .
Using the first and last data points permits estimation of the slope .
Alternative approach : A more expedient approach involves deriving activation energy from measurements of the rate constant at just two temperatures .
In practice , the graphical approach typically provides more reliable results when working with actual experimental data .
A balanced equation indicates what is reacting and what is produced , but it reveals no details about how the reaction actually takes place .
The reaction mechanism ( or reaction path ) provides details regarding the precise , step-by-step process by which a reaction occurs .
The decomposition of ozone , for example , appears to follow a mechanism with two steps : Each of the steps in a reaction mechanism is an elementary reaction .
Species that are produced in one step and consumed in a subsequent step are called intermediates .
While the overall reaction equation for the decomposition of ozone indicates that two molecules of ozone react to give three molecules of oxygen , the mechanism of the reaction does not involve the direct collision and reaction of two ozone molecules .
Instead , one O decomposes to yield O and an oxygen atom , and a second O molecule subsequently reacts with the oxygen atom to yield two additional O molecules .
Unlike balanced equations representing an overall reaction , the equations for elementary reactions are explicit representations of the chemical change taking place .
The reactant ( s ) in an elementary reaction ’ s equation undergo only the bond-breaking and/or making events depicted to yield the product ( s ) .
For this reason , the rate law for an elementary reaction may be derived directly from the balanced chemical equation describing the reaction .
This is not the case for typical chemical reactions , for which rate laws may be reliably determined only via experimentation .
The molecularity of an elementary reaction is the number of reactant species ( atoms , molecules , or ions ) .
For example , a unimolecular reaction involves the reaction of a single reactant species to produce one or more molecules of product : The rate law for a unimolecular reaction is first order : A unimolecular reaction may be one of several elementary reactions in a complex mechanism .
For example , the reaction : illustrates a unimolecular elementary reaction that occurs as one part of a two-step reaction mechanism as described above .
However , some unimolecular reactions may be the only step of a single-step reaction mechanism .
( In other words , an “ overall ” reaction may also be an elementary reaction in some cases . )
For example , the gas-phase decomposition of cyclobutane , C H , to ethylene , C H , is represented by the following chemical equation : This equation represents the overall reaction observed , and it might also represent a legitimate unimolecular elementary reaction .
One example is the reaction of nitrogen dioxide with carbon monoxide : ( see ) Bimolecular elementary reactions may also be involved as steps in a multistep reaction mechanism .
The reaction of atomic oxygen with ozone is the second step of the two-step ozone decomposition mechanism discussed earlier in this section : An elementary termolecular reaction involves the simultaneous collision of three atoms , molecules , or ions .
Termolecular elementary reactions are uncommon because the probability of three particles colliding simultaneously is less than one one-thousandth of the probability of two particles colliding .
There are , however , a few established termolecular elementary reactions .
The reaction of nitric oxide with oxygen appears to involve termolecular steps : Likewise , the reaction of nitric oxide with chlorine appears to involve termolecular steps : It ’ s often the case that one step in a multistep reaction mechanism is significantly slower than the others .
Because a reaction can not proceed faster than its slowest step , this step will limit the rate at which the overall reaction occurs .
The slowest step is therefore called the rate-limiting step ( or rate-determining step ) of the reaction .
As described earlier , rate laws may be derived directly from the chemical equations for elementary reactions .
This is not the case , however , for ordinary chemical reactions .
The balanced equations most often encountered represent the overall change for some chemical system , and very often this is the result of some multistep reaction mechanisms .
In every case , the rate law must be determined from experimental data and the reaction mechanism subsequently deduced from the rate law ( and sometimes from other data ) .
The reaction of NO and CO provides an illustrative example : For temperatures above 225 °C , the rate law has been found to be : The reaction is first order with respect to NO and first-order with respect to CO .
This is consistent with a single-step bimolecular mechanism and it is possible that this is the mechanism for this reaction at high temperatures .
In general , when the rate-determining ( slower ) step is the first step in a mechanism , the rate law for the overall reaction is the same as the rate law for this step .
However , when the rate-determining step is preceded by a step involving a rapidly reversible reaction the rate law for the overall reaction may be more difficult to derive .
As discussed in several chapters of this text , a reversible reaction is at equilibrium when the rates of the forward and reverse processes are equal .
Consider the reversible elementary reaction in which NO dimerizes to yield an intermediate species N O .
The two-step mechanism below has been proposed for a reaction between nitrogen monoxide and molecular chlorine : Use this mechanism to derive the equation and predicted rate law for the overall reaction .
The equation for the overall reaction is obtained by adding the two elementary reactions : To derive a rate law from this mechanism , first write rates laws for each of the two steps .
Step 2 is the rate-determining step , and so the rate law for the overall reaction should be the same as for this step .
However , the step 2 rate law , as written , contains an intermediate species concentration , [ NOCl ] .
To remedy this , use the first step ’ s rate laws to derive an expression for the intermediate concentration in terms of the reactant concentrations .
Assuming step 1 is at equilibrium : Substituting this expression into the rate law for step 2 yields : The first step of a proposed multistep mechanism is : Derive the equation relating atomic fluorine concentration to molecular fluorine concentration .
The concepts introduced in the previous section on reaction mechanisms provide the basis for understanding how catalysts are able to accomplish this very important function .
shows reaction diagrams for a chemical process in the absence and presence of a catalyst .
Inspection of the diagrams reveals several traits of these reactions .
Consistent with the fact that the two diagrams represent the same overall reaction , both curves begin and end at the same energies ( in this case , because products are more energetic than reactants , the reaction is endothermic ) .
The reaction mechanisms , however , are clearly different .
The uncatalyzed reaction proceeds via a one-step mechanism ( one transition state observed ) , whereas the catalyzed reaction follows a two-step mechanism ( two transition states observed ) with a notably lesser activation energy .
This difference illustrates the means by which a catalyst functions to accelerate reactions , namely , by providing an alternative reaction mechanism with a lower activation energy .
Although the catalyzed reaction mechanism for a reaction needn ’ t necessarily involve a different number of steps than the uncatalyzed mechanism , it must provide a reaction path whose rate determining step is faster ( lower E ) .
The two reaction diagrams here represent the same reaction : one without a catalyst and one with a catalyst .
Estimate the activation energy for each process , and identify which one involves a catalyst .
Activation energies are calculated by subtracting the reactant energy from the transition state energy .
The catalyzed reaction is the one with lesser activation energy , in this case represented by diagram b .
Reaction diagrams for a chemical process with and without a catalyst are shown below .
Both reactions involve a two-step mechanism with a rate-determining first step .
Compute activation energies for the first step of each mechanism , and identify which corresponds to the catalyzed reaction .
How do the second steps of these two mechanisms compare ?
Answer : For the first step , E = 80 kJ for ( a ) and 70 kJ for ( b ) , so diagram ( b ) depicts the catalyzed reaction .
Activation energies for the second steps of both mechanisms are the same , 20 kJ .
A homogeneous catalyst is present in the same phase as the reactants .
It interacts with a reactant to form an intermediate substance , which then decomposes or reacts with another reactant in one or more steps to regenerate the original catalyst and form product .
As an important illustration of homogeneous catalysis , consider the earth ’ s ozone layer .
Ozone in the upper atmosphere , which protects the earth from ultraviolet radiation , is formed when oxygen molecules absorb ultraviolet light and undergo the reaction : Ozone is a relatively unstable molecule that decomposes to yield diatomic oxygen by the reverse of this equation .
This decomposition reaction is consistent with the following two-step mechanism : A number of substances can catalyze the decomposition of ozone .
This is another characteristic trait of a catalyst : Though it participates in the chemical reaction , it is not consumed by the reaction .
A heterogeneous catalyst is a catalyst that is present in a different phase ( usually a solid ) than the reactants .
Such catalysts generally function by furnishing an active surface upon which a reaction can occur .
Gas and liquid phase reactions catalyzed by heterogeneous catalysts occur on the surface of the catalyst rather than within the gas or liquid phase .
Nickel is the catalyst used in the hydrogenation of polyunsaturated fats and oils ( which contain several carbon–carbon double bonds ) to produce saturated fats and oils ( which contain only carbon–carbon single bonds ) .
Many important chemical products are prepared via industrial processes that use heterogeneous catalysts , including ammonia , nitric acid , sulfuric acid , and methanol .
Heterogeneous catalysts are also used in the catalytic converters found on most gasoline-powered automobiles .
Imagine a beach populated with sunbathers and swimmers .
As those basking in the sun get too hot , they enter the surf to swim and cool off .
As the swimmers tire , they return to the beach to rest .
If the rate at which sunbathers enter the surf were to equal the rate at which swimmers return to the sand , then the numbers ( though not the identities ) of sunbathers and swimmers would remain constant .
This scenario illustrates a dynamic phenomenon known as equilibrium , in which opposing processes occur at equal rates .
Chemical and physical processes are subject to this phenomenon ; these processes are at equilibrium when the forward and reverse reaction rates are equal .
Equilibrium systems are pervasive in nature ; the various reactions involving carbon dioxide dissolved in blood are examples ( see ) .
This chapter provides a thorough introduction to the essential aspects of chemical equilibria .
By this convention , and the definitions of “ reactant ” and “ product , ” a chemical equation represents the reaction in question as proceeding from left to right .
Reversible reactions , however , may proceed in both forward ( left to right ) and reverse ( right to left ) directions .
When the rates of the forward and reverse reactions are equal , the concentrations of the reactant and product species remain constant over time and the system is at equilibrium .
The relative concentrations of reactants and products in equilibrium systems vary greatly ; some systems contain mostly products at equilibrium , some contain mostly reactants , and some contain appreciable amounts of both .
illustrates fundamental equilibrium concepts using the reversible decomposition of colorless dinitrogen tetroxide to yield brown nitrogen dioxide , an elementary reaction described by the equation : Note that a special double arrow is used to emphasize the reversible nature of the reaction .
As time passes , N O is consumed and its concentration falls , while NO is produced and its concentration increases ( b ) .
The decreasing concentration of the reactant slows the forward reaction rate , and the increasing product concentration speeds the reverse reaction rate ( c ) .
This process continues until the forward and reverse reaction rates become equal , at which time the reaction has reached equilibrium , as characterized by constant concentrations of its reactants and products ( shaded areas of b and c ) .
It ’ s important to emphasize that chemical equilibria are dynamic ; a reaction at equilibrium has not “ stopped , ” but is proceeding in the forward and reverse directions at the same rate .
This dynamic nature is essential to understanding equilibrium behavior as discussed in this and subsequent chapters of the text .
Physical changes , such as phase transitions , are also reversible and may establish equilibria .
This concept was introduced in another chapter of this text through discussion of the vapor pressure of a condensed phase ( liquid or solid ) .
As increasing amounts of gaseous bromine are produced , the rate of the reverse process ( condensation ) will increase until it equals the rate of vaporization and equilibrium is established .
A photograph showing this phase transition equilibrium is provided in .
For a reversible reaction described by the reaction quotient is derived directly from the stoichiometry of the balanced equation as where the subscript c denotes the use of molar concentrations in the expression .
If the reactants and products are gaseous , a reaction quotient may be similarly derived using partial pressures : Note that the reaction quotient equations above are a simplification of more rigorous expressions that use relative values for concentrations and pressures rather than absolute values .
These relative concentration and pressure values are dimensionless ( they have no units ) ; consequently , so are the reaction quotients .
For purposes of this introductory text , it will suffice to use the simplified equations and to disregard units when computing Q .
In most cases , this will introduce only modest errors in calculations involving reaction quotients .
To illustrate this point , consider the oxidation of sulfur dioxide : Two different experimental scenarios are depicted in , one in which this reaction is initiated with a mixture of reactants only , SO and O , and another that begins with only product , SO .
When equilibrium is achieved , the concentrations of reactants and product remain constant , as does the value of Q .
If the reaction begins with only product present , the value of Q is initially undefined ( immeasurably large , or infinite ) : In this case , the reaction proceeds toward equilibrium in the reverse direction .
The product concentration and the numerator of Q decrease with time , the reactant concentrations and the denominator of Q increase , and the reaction quotient consequently decreases until it becomes constant at equilibrium .
The constant value of Q exhibited by a system at equilibrium is called the equilibrium constant , K : Comparison of the data plots in shows that both experimental scenarios resulted in the same value for the equilibrium constant .
This is a general observation for all equilibrium systems , known as the law of mass action : At a given temperature , the reaction quotient for a system at equilibrium is constant .
Gaseous nitrogen dioxide forms dinitrogen tetroxide according to this equation : When 0.10 mol NO is added to a 1.0-L flask at 25 °C , the concentration changes so that at equilibrium , [ NO ] = 0.016 M and [ N O ] = 0.042 M .
( a ) What is the value of the reaction quotient before any reaction occurs ?
( b ) What is the value of the equilibrium constant for the reaction ?
As for all equilibrium calculations in this text , use the simplified equations for Q and K and disregard any concentration or pressure units , as noted previously in this section .
( a ) Before any product is formed , and [ N O ] = 0 M .
Thus , The equilibrium constant is 1.6 10 .
( b ) At equilibrium , For the reaction = 0.35 M , and [ SO ] = 1.1 M .
What is the value of the equilibrium constant , K ?
A reaction exhibiting a large K will reach equilibrium when most of the reactant has been converted to product , whereas a small K indicates the reaction achieves equilibrium after very little reactant has been converted .
It ’ s important to keep in mind that the magnitude of K does not indicate how rapidly or slowly equilibrium will be reached .
Some equilibria are established so quickly as to be nearly instantaneous , and others so slowly that no perceptible change is observed over the course of days , years , or longer .
The equilibrium constant for a reaction can be used to predict the behavior of mixtures containing its reactants and/or products .
As demonstrated by the sulfur dioxide oxidation process described above , a chemical reaction will proceed in whatever direction is necessary to achieve equilibrium .
Comparing Q to K for an equilibrium system of interest allows prediction of what reaction ( forward or reverse ) , if any , will occur .
To further illustrate this important point , consider the reversible reaction shown below : The bar charts in represent changes in reactant and product concentrations for three different reaction mixtures .
The reaction quotients for mixtures 1 and 3 are initially lesser than the reaction ’ s equilibrium constant , so each of these mixtures will experience a net forward reaction to achieve equilibrium .
The reaction quotient for mixture 2 is initially greater than the equilibrium constant , so this mixture will proceed in the reverse direction until equilibrium is established .
Given here are the starting concentrations of reactants and products for three experiments involving this reaction : Determine in which direction the reaction proceeds as it goes to equilibrium in each of the three experiments shown .
Experiment 1 : Q < K ( 0.040 < 0.64 ) The reaction will proceed in the forward direction .
Experiment 2 : Q > K ( 140 > 0.64 ) The reaction will proceed in the reverse direction .
Experiment 3 : Q < K ( 0.48 < 0.64 ) The reaction will proceed in the forward direction .
Calculate the reaction quotient and determine the direction in which each of the following reactions will proceed to reach equilibrium .
( b ) Q = 0.23 , reverse .
( c ) Q = 0 , forward .
A homogeneous equilibrium is one in which all reactants and products ( and any catalysts , if applicable ) are present in the same phase .
By this definition , homogeneous equilibria take place in solutions .
These solutions are most commonly either liquid or gaseous phases , as shown by the examples below : These examples all involve aqueous solutions , those in which water functions as the solvent .
In the last two examples , water also functions as a reactant , but its concentration is not included in the reaction quotient .
The reason for this omission is related to the more rigorous form of the Q ( or K ) expression mentioned previously in this chapter , in which relative concentrations for liquids and solids are equal to 1 and needn ’ t be included .
Consequently , reaction quotients include concentration or pressure terms only for gaseous and solute species .
The equilibria below all involve gas-phase solutions : For gas-phase solutions , the equilibrium constant may be expressed in terms of either the molar concentrations ( K ) or partial pressures ( K ) of the reactants and products .
Two of the above examples include terms for gaseous species only in their equilibrium constants , and so K expressions may also be written : The equilibrium systems discussed so far have all been relatively simple , involving just single reversible reactions .
Many systems , however , involve two or more coupled equilibrium reactions , those which have in common one or more reactant or product species .
Since the law of mass action allows for a straightforward derivation of equilibrium constant expressions from balanced chemical equations , the K value for a system involving coupled equilibria can be related to the K values of the individual reactions .
Three basic manipulations are involved in this approach , as described below .
Changing the direction of a chemical equation essentially swaps the identities of “ reactants ” and “ products , ” and so the equilibrium constant for the reversed equation is simply the reciprocal of that for the forward equation .
Changing the stoichiometric coefficients in an equation by some factor x results in an exponential change in the equilibrium constant by that same factor : 3 .
A mixture containing nitrogen , hydrogen , and iodine established the following equilibrium at 400 °C : Use the information below to calculate Kc for this reaction .
The equilibrium equation of interest and its K value may be derived from the equations for the two coupled reactions as follows .
If an equilibrium system is subjected to a change in conditions that affects these reaction rates differently ( a stress ) , then the rates are no longer equal and the system is not at equilibrium .
The system will subsequently experience a net reaction in the direction of greater rate ( a shift ) that will re-establish the equilibrium .
This phenomenon is summarized by Le Châtelier ’ s principle : if an equilibrium system is stressed , the system will experience a shift in response to the stress that re-establishes equilibrium .
Reaction rates are affected primarily by concentrations , as described by the reaction ’ s rate law , and temperature , as described by the Arrhenius equation .
Consequently , changes in concentration and temperature are the two stresses that can shift an equilibrium .
If an equilibrium system is subjected to a change in the concentration of a reactant or product species , the rate of either the forward or the reverse reaction will change .
As an example , consider the equilibrium reaction The rate laws for the forward and reverse reactions are When this system is at equilibrium , the forward and reverse reaction rates are equal .
This same shift will result if some product HI is removed from the system , which decreases the rate of the reverse reaction , again resulting in the same imbalance in rates .
The same logic can be used to explain the left shift that results from either removing reactant or adding product to an equilibrium system .
These stresses both result in an increased rate for the reverse reaction and a temporary net reaction in the reverse direction to re-establish equilibrium .
As an alternative to this kinetic interpretation , the effect of changes in concentration on equilibria can be rationalized in terms of reaction quotients .
When the system is at equilibrium , If reactant is added ( increasing the denominator of the reaction quotient ) or product is removed ( decreasing the numerator ) , then Q < K and the equilibrium will shift right .
Note that the three different ways of inducing this stress result in three different changes in the composition of the equilibrium mixture .
If H is added , the right shift will consume I and produce HI as equilibrium is re-established , yielding a mixture with a greater concentrations of H and HI and a lesser concentration of I than was present before .
If I is added , the new equilibrium mixture will have greater concentrations of I and HI and a lesser concentration of H .
Finally , if HI is removed , the new equilibrium mixture will have greater concentrations of H and I and a lesser concentration of HI .
Despite these differences in composition , the value of the equilibrium constant will be the same after the stress as it was before ( per the law of mass action ) .
The same logic may be applied for stresses involving removing reactants or adding product , in which case Q > K and the equilibrium will shift left .
For gas-phase equilibria such as this one , some additional perspectives on changing the concentrations of reactants and products are worthy of mention .
The partial pressure P of an ideal gas is proportional to its molar concentration M , and so changes in the partial pressures of any reactant or product are essentially changes in concentrations and thus yield the same effects on equilibria .
Aside from adding or removing reactant or product , the pressures ( concentrations ) of species in a gas-phase equilibrium can also be changed by changing the volume occupied by the system .
Since all species of a gas-phase equilibrium occupy the same volume , a given change in volume will cause the same change in concentration for both reactants and products .
In order to discern what shift , if any , this type of stress will induce the stoichiometry of the reaction must be considered .
These results illustrate the relationship between the stoichiometry of a gas-phase equilibrium and the effect of a volume-induced pressure ( concentration ) change .
If the total molar amounts of reactants and products are equal , as in the first example , a change in volume does not shift the equilibrium .
If the molar amounts of reactants and products are different , a change in volume will shift the equilibrium in a direction that better “ accommodates ” the volume change .
Conversely , increasing the volume of this equilibrium system would result in a shift towards products .
Consistent with the law of mass action , an equilibrium stressed by a change in concentration will shift to re-establish equilibrium without any change in the value of the equilibrium constant , K .
When an equilibrium shifts in response to a temperature change , however , it is re-established with a different relative composition that exhibits a different value for the equilibrium constant .
Since the rate constants vary with temperature as described by the Arrhenius equation , is stands to reason that the equilibrium constant will likewise vary with temperature ( assuming the rate constants are affected to different extents by the temperature change ) .
For more complex reactions involving multistep reaction mechanisms , a similar but more complex mathematical relation exists between the equilibrium constant and the rate constants of the steps in the mechanism .
Regardless of how complex the reaction may be , the temperature-dependence of its equilibrium constant persists .
Predicting the shift an equilibrium will experience in response to a change in temperature is most conveniently accomplished by considering the enthalpy change of the reaction .
Lowering the system temperature will likewise cause the equilibrium to shift left .
For exothermic processes , heat is viewed as a product of the reaction and so the opposite temperature dependence is observed .
The kinetics chapter of this text identifies a catalyst as a substance that enables a reaction to proceed via a different mechanism with an accelerated rate .
The catalyzed reaction mechanism involves a lower energy transition state than the uncatalyzed reaction , resulting in a lower activation energy , E , and a correspondingly greater rate constant .
To discern the effect of catalysis on an equilibrium system , consider the reaction diagram for a simple one-step ( elementary ) reaction shown in .
The lowered transition state energy of the catalyzed reaction results in lowered activation energies for both the forward and the reverse reactions .
Consequently , both forward and reverse reactions are accelerated , and equilibrium is achieved more quickly but without a change in the equilibrium constant .
An interesting case study highlighting these equilibrium concepts is the industrial production of ammonia , NH .
This substance is among the “ top 10 ” industrial chemicals with regard to production , with roughly two billion pounds produced annually in the US .
Ammonia is used as a chemical feedstock to synthesize a wide range of commercially useful compounds , including fertilizers , plastics , dyes , and explosives .
Most industrial production of ammonia uses the Haber-Bosch process based on the following equilibrium reaction : The traits of this reaction present challenges to its use in an efficient industrial process .
The equilibrium constant is relatively small ( K on the order of 10 at 25 °C ) , meaning very little ammonia is present in an equilibrium mixture .
Also , the rate of this reaction is relatively slow at low temperatures .
To raise the yield of ammonia , the industrial process is designed to operate under conditions favoring product formation : High pressures ( concentrations ) of reactants are used , ~150−250 atm , to shift the equilibrium right , favoring product formation .
Ammonia is continually removed ( collected ) from the equilibrium mixture during the process , lowering its concentration and also shifting the equilibrium right .
Although low temperatures favor product formation for this exothermic process , the reaction rate at low temperatures is inefficiently slow .
A catalyst is used to accelerate the reaction to reasonable rates at relatively moderate temperatures ( 400−500 °C ) .
A diagram illustrating a typical industrial setup for production of ammonia via the Haber-Bosch process is shown in .
These types of computations are essential to many areas of science and technology—for example , in the formulation and dosing of pharmaceutical products .
After a drug is ingested or injected , it is typically involved in several chemical equilibria that affect its ultimate concentration in the body system of interest .
Knowledge of the quantitative aspects of these equilibria is required to compute a dosage amount that will solicit the desired therapeutic effect .
Many of the useful equilibrium calculations that will be demonstrated here require terms representing changes in reactant and product concentrations .
Regardless of its initial composition , a reaction mixture will show the same relationships between changes in the concentrations of the three species involved , as dictated by the reaction stoichiometry ( see also the related content on expressing reaction rates in the chapter on kinetics ) .
For example , if the nitrogen concentration increases by an amount x : the corresponding changes in the other species concentrations are where the negative sign indicates a decrease in concentration .
Derive the missing terms representing concentration changes for each of the following reactions .
If these concentrations are known , the calculation simply involves their substitution into the K expression , as was illustrated by .
A slightly more challenging example is provided next , in which the reaction stoichiometry is used to derive equilibrium concentrations from the information provided .
The acronym ICE is commonly used to refer to this mathematical approach , and the concentrations terms are usually gathered in a tabular format called an ICE table .
Iodine molecules react reversibly with iodide ions to produce triiodide ions .
If a solution with the concentrations of I and I both equal to 1.000 10 M before reaction gives an equilibrium concentration of I of 6.61 10 M , what is the equilibrium constant for the reaction ?
To calculate the equilibrium constants , equilibrium concentrations are needed for all the reactants and products : Provided are the initial concentrations of the reactants and the equilibrium concentration of the product .
Use this information to derive terms for the equilibrium concentrations of the reactants , presenting all the information in an ICE table .
When 1 mol each of C H OH and CH CO H are allowed to react in 1 L of the solvent dioxane , equilibrium is established when mol of each of the reactants remains .
Calculate the equilibrium constant for the reaction .
( Note : Water is a solute in this reaction . )
Answer : K = 4 When the equilibrium constant and all but one equilibrium concentration are provided , the other equilibrium concentration ( s ) may be calculated .
A computation of this sort is illustrated in the next example exercise .
Nitrogen oxides are air pollutants produced by the reaction of nitrogen and oxygen at high temperatures .
is 4.1 10 .
Calculate the At 2000 °C , the value of the K for the reaction , equilibrium concentration of NO ( g ) in air at 1 atm pressure and 2000 °C .
The equilibrium concentrations of N and O at this pressure and temperature are 0.036 M and 0.0089 M , respectively .
Substitute the provided quantities into the equilibrium constant expression and solve for [ NO ] : Thus [ NO ] is 3.6 10 mol/L at equilibrium under these conditions .
To confirm this result , it may be used along with the provided equilibrium concentrations to calculate a value for K : This result is consistent with the provided value for K within nominal uncertainty , differing by just 1 in the least significant digit ’ s place .
The equilibrium constant K for the reaction of nitrogen and hydrogen to produce ammonia at a certain temperature is 6.00 10 .
Calculate the equilibrium concentration of ammonia if the equilibrium concentrations of nitrogen and hydrogen are 4.26 M and 2.09 M , respectively .
Answer : 1.53 mol/L Perhaps the most challenging type of equilibrium calculation can be one in which equilibrium concentrations are derived from initial concentrations and an equilibrium constant .
For these calculations , a four-step approach is typically useful : Identify the direction in which the reaction will proceed to reach equilibrium .
Develop an ICE table .
Calculate the concentration changes and , subsequently , the equilibrium concentrations .
Confirm the calculated equilibrium concentrations .
The last two example exercises of this chapter demonstrate the application of this strategy .
Under certain conditions , the equilibrium constant K for the decomposition of PCl ( g ) into PCl ( g ) and Cl ( g ) is 0.0211 .
What are the equilibrium concentrations of PCl , PCl , and Cl in a mixture that initially contained only PCl at a concentration of 1.00 M ?
Use the stepwise process described earlier .
Determine the direction the reaction proceeds .
The balanced equation for the decomposition of PCl is Because only the reactant is present initially Q = 0 and the reaction will proceed to the right .
Develop an ICE table .
Substituting the equilibrium concentrations into the equilibrium constant equation gives Solve for the change and the equilibrium concentrations .
shows an equation of the form ax + bx + c = 0 can be rearranged to solve for x : In this case , a = 1 , b = 0.0211 , and c = −0.0211 .
The equilibrium concentrations are Confirm the calculated equilibrium concentrations .
Substitution into the expression for K ( to check the calculation ) gives The equilibrium constant calculated from the equilibrium concentrations is equal to the value of K given in the problem ( when rounded to the proper number of significant figures ) .
Acetic acid , CH CO H , reacts with ethanol , C H OH , to form water and ethyl acetate , CH CO C H .
The equilibrium constant for this reaction with dioxane as a solvent is 4.0 .
What are the equilibrium concentrations for a mixture that is initially 0.15 M in CH CO H , 0.15 M in C H OH , 0.40 M in CH CO C H , and 0.40 M in H O ?
The value of the equilibrium constant for the reaction of hydrogen and iodine reacting to form hydrogen iodide is 50.5 under the given conditions .
What are the equilibrium concentrations of H , I , and HI in moles/L ?
Answer : [ H ] = 0.06 M , [ I ] = 1.06 M , [ HI ] = 1.88 M What are the concentrations at equilibrium of a 0.15 M solution of HCN ?
Using “ x ” to represent the concentration of each product at equilibrium gives this ICE table .
Substitute the equilibrium concentration terms into the K expression rearrange to the quadratic form and solve for x Thus [ H ] = [ CN ] = x = 8.6 10 M and [ HCN ] = 0.15 – x = 0.15 M .
If this simplified approach were to yield a value for x that did not justify the approximation , the calculation would need to be repeated without making the approximation .
What are the equilibrium concentrations in a 0.25 M NH solution ?
Answer : [ NH ] = 0.25 M Liquid water is essential to life on our planet , and chemistry involving the characteristic ions of water , H and OH , is widely encountered in nature and society .
As introduced in another chapter of this text , acid-base chemistry involves the transfer of hydrogen ions from donors ( acids ) to acceptors ( bases ) .
These H+ transfer reactions are reversible , and the equilibria established by acid-base systems are essential aspects of phenomena ranging from sinkhole formation to oxygen transport in the human body .
This chapter will further explore acid-base chemistry with an emphasis on the equilibrium aspects of this important reaction class .
In 1680 , Robert Boyle reported traits of acid solutions that included their ability to dissolve many substances , to change the colors of certain natural dyes , and to lose these traits after coming in contact with alkali ( base ) solutions .
In the eighteenth century , it was recognized that acids have a sour taste , react with limestone to liberate a gaseous substance ( now known to be CO ) , and interact with alkalis to form neutral substances .
In 1815 , Humphry Davy contributed greatly to the development of the modern acid-base concept by demonstrating that hydrogen is the essential constituent of acids .
Around that same time , Joseph Louis Gay-Lussac concluded that acids are substances that can neutralize bases and that these two classes of substances can be defined only in terms of each other .
The significance of hydrogen was reemphasized in 1884 when Svante Arrhenius defined an acid as a compound that dissolves in water to yield hydrogen cations ( now recognized to be hydronium ions ) and a base as a compound that dissolves in water to yield hydroxide anions .
Johannes Brønsted and Thomas Lowry proposed a more general description in 1923 in which acids and bases were defined in terms of the transfer of hydrogen ions , H .
An acid-base reaction is , thus , the transfer of a proton from a donor ( acid ) to an acceptor ( base ) .
The concept of conjugate pairs is useful in describing Brønsted-Lowry acid-base reactions ( and other reversible reactions , as well ) .
When an acid donates H , the species that remains is called the conjugate base of the acid because it reacts as a proton acceptor in the reverse reaction .
Likewise , when a base accepts H , it is converted to its conjugate acid .
The reaction between water and ammonia illustrates this idea .
In the forward direction , water acts as an acid by donating a proton to ammonia and subsequently becoming a hydroxide ion , OH , the conjugate base of water .
the conjugate acid of The ammonia acts as a base in accepting this proton , becoming an ammonium ion , ammonia .
In the reverse direction , a hydroxide ion acts as a base in accepting a proton from ammonium ion , which acts as an acid .
The reaction between a Brønsted-Lowry acid and water is called acid ionization .
For example , when hydrogen fluoride dissolves in water and ionizes , protons are transferred from hydrogen fluoride molecules to water molecules , yielding hydronium ions and fluoride ions : Base ionization of a species occurs when it accepts protons from water molecules .
Species capable of either donating or accepting protons are called amphiprotric , or more generally , amphoteric , a term that may be used for acids and bases per definitions other than the Brønsted-Lowry one .
When bicarbonate is added to water , both these equilibria are established simultaneously and the composition of the resulting solution may be determined through appropriate equilibrium calculations , as described later in this chapter .
In the liquid state , molecules of an amphiprotic substance can react with one another as illustrated for water in the equations below : to yield ions is called autoionization .
Liquid water undergoes The process in which like molecules react autoionization to a very slight extent ; at 25 °C , approximately two out of every billion water molecules are ionized .
The process is endothermic , and so the extent of ionization and the resulting concentrations of hydronium ion and hydroxide ion increase with temperature .
For example , at 100 °C , the value for K is about 5.6 10 , roughly 50 times larger than the value at 25 °C .
What are the hydronium ion concentration and the hydroxide ion concentration in pure water at 25 °C ?
The autoionization of water yields the same number of hydronium and hydroxide ions .
Therefore , in pure water , [ H O ] = [ OH ] = x .
At 25 °C : So : The hydronium ion concentration and the hydroxide ion concentration are the same , 1.0 10 M .
The ion product of water at 80 °C is 2.4 10 .
What are the concentrations of hydronium and hydroxide ions in pure water at 80 °C ?
Answer : [ H O ] = [ OH ] = 4.9 10 M A solution of an acid in water has a hydronium ion concentration of 2.0 10 M .
What is the concentration of hydroxide ion at 25 °C ?
Use the value of the ion-product constant for water at 25 °C to calculate the missing equilibrium concentration .
This may be explained via Le Châtelier ’ s principle as a left shift in the water autoionization equilibrium resulting from the stress of increased hydronium ion concentration .
Substituting the ion concentrations into the K expression confirms this calculation , resulting in the expected value : What is the hydronium ion concentration in an aqueous solution with a hydroxide ion concentration of 0.001 M at 25 °C ?
The concentrations of these ions in a solution are often critical determinants of the solution ’ s properties and the chemical behaviors of its other solutes , and specific vocabulary has been developed to describe these concentrations in relative terms .
A solution is neutral if it contains equal concentrations of hydronium and hydroxide ions ; acidic if it contains a greater concentration of hydronium ions than hydroxide ions ; and basic if it contains a lesser concentration of hydronium ions than hydroxide ions .
A common means of expressing quantities that may span many orders of magnitude is to use a logarithmic scale .
Basic solutions are those with hydronium ion molarities less than 1.0 10 M and hydroxide ion molarities greater than 1.0 10 M ( corresponding to pH values greater than 7.00 and pOH values less than 7.00 ) .
Since the autoionization constant K is temperature dependent , these correlations between pH values and the acidic/ neutral/basic adjectives will be different at temperatures other than 25 °C .
This distinction can be important when studying certain processes that occur at other temperatures , such as enzyme reactions in warmblooded organisms at a temperature around 36–40 °C .
Unless otherwise noted , references to pH values are presumed to be those at 25 °C .
shows the relationships between [ H O ] , [ OH ] , pH , and pOH for solutions classified as acidic , basic , and neutral .
What is the pH of stomach acid , a solution of HCl with a hydronium ion concentration of 1.2 10 M ?
( The use of logarithms is explained in .
When taking the log of a value , keep as many decimal places in the result as there are significant figures in the value . )
Water exposed to air contains carbonic acid , H CO , due to the reaction between carbon dioxide and water : Air-saturated water has a hydronium ion concentration caused by the dissolved CO of 2.0 10 M , about 20-times larger than that of pure water .
Calculate the pH of the solution at 25 °C .
Answer : 5.70 Calculate the hydronium ion concentration of blood , the pH of which is 7.3 .
( On a calculator take the antilog , or the “ inverse ” log , of −7.3 , or calculate 10 . )
Calculate the hydronium ion concentration of a solution with a pH of −1.07 .
Answer : 12 M What are the pOH and the pH of a 0.0125M solution of potassium hydroxide , KOH ?
Potassium hydroxide is a highly soluble ionic compound and completely dissociates when dissolved in dilute solution , yielding [ OH ] = 0.0125 M : The pH can be found from the pOH : The hydronium ion concentration of vinegar is approximately 4 10 M .
What are the corresponding values of pOH and pH ?
Answer : pOH = 11.6 , pH = 2.4 The acidity of a solution is typically assessed experimentally by measurement of its pH .
The pOH of a solution is not usually measured , as it is easily calculated from an experimentally determined pH value .
The pH of a solution can be directly measured using a pH meter .
The pH of a solution may also be visually estimated using colored indicators .
The acid-base equilibria that enable use of these indicator dyes for pH measurements are described in a later section of this chapter .
If the ionization reaction is essentially complete , the acid or base is termed strong ; if relatively little ionization occurs , the acid or base is weak .
As will be evident throughout the remainder of this chapter , there are many more weak acids and bases than strong ones .
The most common strong acids and bases are listed in .
The relative strengths of acids may be quantified by measuring their equilibrium constants in aqueous solutions .
In solutions of the same concentration , stronger acids ionize to a greater extent , and so yield higher concentrations of hydronium ions than do weaker acids .
The equilibrium constant for an acid is called the acid-ionization constant , K .
For the reaction of an acid HA : the acid ionization constant is written where the concentrations are those at equilibrium .
Although water is a reactant in the reaction , it is the solvent as well , so we do not include [ H O ] in the equation .
The larger the K of an acid , the larger the concentration of and A relative to the concentration of the nonionized acid , HA , in an equilibrium mixture , and the stronger the acid .
An acid is classified as “ strong ” when it undergoes complete ionization , in which case the concentration of HA is zero and the acid ionization constant is immeasurably large ( K ≈ ∞ ) .
Acids that are partially ionized are called “ weak , ” and their acid ionization constants may be experimentally measured .
A table of ionization constants for weak acids is provided in , and a partial listing is given in Table 14.3 .
To illustrate this idea , three acid ionization equations and K values are shown below .
The ionization constants increase from first to last of the listed equations , indicating the relative acid strength increases in the order CH CO H < HNO < Another measure of the strength of an acid is its percent ionization .
The percent ionization of a weak acid is defined in terms of the composition of an equilibrium mixture : where the numerator is equivalent to the concentration of the acid 's conjugate base ( per stoichiometry , [ A ] = [ H O ] ) .
Unlike the K value , the percent ionization of a weak acid varies with the initial concentration of acid , typically decreasing as concentration increases .
Equilibrium calculations of the sort described later in this chapter can be used to confirm this behavior .
Calculate the percent ionization of a 0.125M solution of nitrous acid ( a weak acid ) , with a pH of 2.09 .
Calculate the percent ionization of a 0.10M solution of acetic acid with a pH of 2.89 .
Answer : 1.3 % ionized Just as for acids , the relative strength of a base is reflected in the magnitude of its base-ionization constant ( K ) in aqueous solutions .
In solutions of the same concentration , stronger bases ionize to a greater extent , and so yield higher hydroxide ion concentrations than do weaker bases .
A stronger base has a larger ionization constant than does a weaker base .
For the reaction of a base , B : the ionization constant is written as Inspection of the data for three weak bases presented below shows the base strength increases in the order A table of ionization constants for weak bases appears in .
As for acids , the relative strength of a base is also reflected in its percent ionization , computed as but will vary depending on the base ionization constant and the initial concentration of the solution .
Brønsted-Lowry acid-base chemistry is the transfer of protons ; thus , logic suggests a relation between the relative strengths of conjugate acid-base pairs .
The strength of an acid or base is quantified in its ionization constant , K or K , which represents the extent of the acid or base ionization reaction .
By rearranging this equation , a reciprocal relation between the strengths of a conjugate acid-base pair becomes evident : The inverse proportional relation between K and K means the stronger the acid or base , the weaker its conjugate partner .
illustrates this relation for several conjugate acid-base pairs .
The listing of conjugate acid–base pairs shown in is arranged to show the relative strength of each species as compared with water , whose entries are highlighted in each of the table ’ s columns .
In the acid column , those species listed below water are weaker acids than water .
These species do not undergo acid ionization in water ; they are not Bronsted-Lowry acids .
All the species listed above water are stronger acids , transferring protons to water to some extent when dissolved in an aqueous solution to generate hydronium ions .
Species above water but below hydronium ion are weak acids , undergoing partial acid ionization , wheres those above hydronium ion are strong acids that are completely ionized in aqueous solution .
If all these strong acids are completely ionized in water , why does the column indicate they vary in strength , with nitric acid being the weakest and perchloric acid the strongest ?
Notice that the sole acid species present in an aqueous solution of any strong acid is H O ( aq ) , meaning that hydronium ion is the strongest acid that may exist in water ; any stronger acid will react completely with water to generate hydronium ions .
This limit on the acid strength of solutes in a solution is called a leveling effect .
To measure the differences in acid strength for “ strong ” acids , the acids must be dissolved in a solvent that is less basic than water .
In such solvents , the acids will be “ weak , ” and so any differences in the extent of their ionization can be determined .
For example , the binary hydrogen halides HCl , HBr , and HI are strong acids in water but weak acids in ethanol ( strength increasing HCl < HBr < HI ) .
The right column of lists a number of substances in order of increasing base strength from top to bottom .
Following the same logic as for the left column , species listed above water are weaker bases and so they don ’ t undergo base ionization when dissolved in water .
Species listed between water and its conjugate base , hydroxide ion , are weak bases that partially ionize .
Species listed below hydroxide ion are strong bases that completely ionize in water to yield hydroxide ions ( i.e. , they are leveled to hydroxide ) .
A comparison of the acid and base columns in this table supports the reciprocal relation between the strengths of conjugate acid-base pairs .
For example , the conjugate bases of the strong acids ( top of table ) are all of negligible strength .
Use the K for the nitrite ion , K for HNO can be calculated using the relationship : is given in this section as 2.17 10 .
The conjugate acid of to calculate the K for its conjugate acid .
is HNO ; K for Solving for K yields This answer can be verified by finding the K for HNO in .
Determine the relative acid strengths of ionization constant of HCN is given in as 4.9 10 .
The ionization constant of not listed , but the ionization constant of its conjugate base , NH , is listed as 1.8 10 .
is the slightly stronger acid ( K for and HCN by comparing their ionization constants .
The is = 5.6 10 ) .
Answer : The chapter on chemical equilibria introduced several types of equilibrium calculations and the various mathematical strategies that are helpful in performing them .
These strategies are generally useful for equilibrium systems regardless of chemical reaction class , and so they may be effectively applied to acid-base equilibrium problems .
This section presents several example exercises involving equilibrium calculations for acid-base systems .
Acetic acid is the principal ingredient in vinegar that provides its sour taste .
At equilibrium , a solution contains [ CH CO H ] = 0.0787 M and What is the value of K for acetic acid ?
The relevant equilibrium equation and its equilibrium constant expression are shown below .
Substitution of the provided equilibrium concentrations permits a straightforward calculation of the K for acetic acid .
What is the value of K for caffeine if a solution at equilibrium has [ C H N O ] = 0.050 M , = 5.0 10 M , and [ OH ] = 2.5 10 M ?
The relevant equilibrium equation and its equilibrium constant expression are shown below .
Substitution of the provided equilibrium concentrations permits a straightforward calculation of the K for caffeine .
What is its K ?
The nitrous acid concentration provided is a formal concentration , one that does not account for any chemical equilibria that may be established in solution .
Such concentrations are treated as “ initial ” values for equilibrium calculations using the ICE table approach .
Notice the initial value of hydronium ion is listed as approximately zero because a small concentration of H O is present ( 1 × 10 M ) due to the autoprotolysis of water .
In many cases , such as all the ones presented in this chapter , this concentration is much less than that generated by ionization of the acid ( or base ) in question and may be neglected .
What is K for NH .
Answer : K = 1.8 10 Formic acid , HCO H , is one irritant that causes the body ’ s reaction to some ant bites and stings .
What is the concentration of hydronium ion and the pH of a 0.534M solution of formic acid ?
As defined in the ICE table , x is equal to the equilibrium concentration of hydronium ion : Finally , the pH is calculated to be Only a small fraction of a weak acid ionizes in aqueous solution .
What is the percent ionization of a 0.100M solution of acetic acid , CH CO H ?
Answer : 7.56 10 M , 2.33 % In some cases , the strength of the weak acid or base and its formal ( initial ) concentration result in an appreciable ionization .
Though the ICE strategy remains effective for these systems , the algebra is a bit more involved because the simplifying assumption that x is negligible can not be made .
Calculations of this sort are demonstrated in below .
Sodium bisulfate , NaHSO , is used in some household cleansers as a source of the acid .
As defined in the ICE table , x is equal to the hydronium concentration .
For group 17 , the order of increasing acidity is HF < HCl < HBr < HI .
Likewise , for group 16 , the order of increasing acid strength is H O < H S < H Se < H Te .
Across a row in the periodic table , the acid strength of binary hydrogen compounds increases with increasing electronegativity of the nonmetal atom because the polarity of the H-A bond increases .
Thus , the order of increasing acidity ( for removal of one proton ) across the second row is CH < NH < H O < HF ; across the third row , it is SiH < PH < H S < HCl ( see ) .
Ternary compounds composed of hydrogen , oxygen , and some third element ( “ E ” ) may be structured as depicted in the image below .
In these compounds , the central E atom is bonded to one or more O atoms , and at least one of the O atoms is also bonded to an H atom , corresponding to the general molecular formula O E ( OH ) .
These compounds may be acidic , basic , or amphoteric depending on the properties of the central E atom .
Little tendency exists for the central atom to form a strong covalent bond with the oxygen atom , and bond a between the element and oxygen is more readily broken than bond b between oxygen and hydrogen .
Hence bond a is ionic , hydroxide ions are released to the solution , and the material behaves as a base—this is the case with Ca ( OH ) and KOH .
Lower electronegativity is characteristic of the more metallic elements ; hence , the metallic elements form ionic hydroxides that are by definition basic compounds .
If , on the other hand , the atom E has a relatively high electronegativity , it strongly attracts the electrons it shares with the oxygen atom , making bond a relatively strongly covalent .
The oxygen-hydrogen bond , bond b , is thereby weakened because electrons are displaced toward E. Bond b is polar and readily releases hydrogen ions to the solution , so the material behaves as an acid .
High electronegativities are characteristic of the more nonmetallic elements .
Thus , nonmetallic elements form covalent compounds containing acidic −OH groups that are called oxyacids .
Increasing the oxidation number of the central atom E also increases the acidity of an oxyacid because this increases the attraction of E for the electrons it shares with oxygen and thereby weakens the O-H bond .
Sulfuric acid , H SO , or O S ( OH ) ( with a sulfur oxidation number of +6 ) , is more acidic than sulfurous acid , H SO , or OS ( OH ) ( with a sulfur oxidation number of +4 ) .
Likewise nitric acid , HNO , or O NOH ( N oxidation number = +5 ) , is more acidic than nitrous acid , HNO , or ONOH ( N oxidation number = +3 ) .
In each of these pairs , the oxidation number of the central atom is larger for the stronger acid .
Hydroxy compounds of elements with intermediate electronegativities and relatively high oxidation numbers ( for example , elements near the diagonal line separating the metals from the nonmetals in the periodic table ) are usually amphoteric .
This means that the hydroxy compounds act as acids when they react with strong bases and as bases when they react with strong acids .
The amphoterism of aluminum hydroxide , which commonly exists as the hydrate Al ( H O ) ( OH ) , is reflected in its solubility in both strong acids and strong bases .
The Al ( H O ) ( OH ) compound thus acts as an acid under these conditions .
Aqueous salt solutions , therefore , may be acidic , basic , or neutral , depending on the relative acid-base strengths of the salt 's constituent ions .
Aqueous salt solutions , therefore , may be acidic , basic , or neutral , depending on the relative acid-base strengths of the salt ’ s constituent ions .
and inert anions ( Cl ) , Thus , dissolving ammonium chloride in water yields a solution of weak acid cations ( resulting in an acidic solution .
Aniline is an amine that is used to manufacture dyes .
It is isolated as anilinium chloride , a salt prepared by the reaction of the weak base aniline and hydrochloric acid .
As another example , consider dissolving sodium acetate in water : The sodium ion does not undergo appreciable acid or base ionization and has no effect on the solution pH .
This may seem obvious from the ion 's formula , which indicates no hydrogen or oxygen atoms , but some dissolved metal ions function as weak acids , as addressed later in this section .
Dissolving sodium acetate in water yields a solution of inert cations ( Na ) and weak base anions resulting in a basic solution .
Determine the acetic acid concentration in a solution with 10 M at equilibrium .
The reaction is : and [ OH ] = 2.5 The provided equilibrium concentrations and a value for the equilibrium constant will permit calculation of the missing equilibrium concentration .
The process in question is the base ionization of acetate ion , for which Substituting the available values into the K expression gives Solving the above equation for the acetic acid molarity yields [ CH CO H ] = 1.1 10 M .
What is the pH of a 0.083M solution of NaCN ?
Answer : 11.11 Some salts are composed of both acidic and basic ions , and so the pH of their solutions will depend on the relative strengths of these two species .
Likewise , some salts contain a single ion that is amphiprotic , and so the relative strengths of this ion ’ s acid and base character will determine its effect on solution pH .
For both types of salts , a comparison of the K and K values allows prediction of the solution ’ s acid-base status , as illustrated in the following example exercise .
The bromide ion is the conjugate base of a strong acid , and so it is of negligible base strength ( no appreciable base ionization ) .
The solution is neutral .
( b ) The Na cation is inert and will not affect the pH of the solution ; while the amphiprotic .
The K of is 4.7 10 , and its K is anion is anion is Since K > > K , the solution is basic .
( c ) The Na cation is inert and will not affect the pH of the solution , while the amphiprotic .
The K of and its K is is 4.2 10 , Because K > > K , the solution is basic .
ion is acidic ( see above discussion ) and the F ion is basic ( conjugate base of the weak acid is 5.6 10 and the K of F is 1.4 10 , ( d ) The HF ) .
Comparing the two ionization constants : K of so the solution is acidic , since K > K .
) , some metal ions function as acids in aqueous solutions .
These ions are not just loosely solvated by water molecules when dissolved , instead they are covalently bonded to a fixed number of water molecules to yield a complex ion ( see chapter on coordination chemistry ) .
Aside from the alkali metals ( group 1 ) and some alkaline earth metals ( group 2 ) , most other metal ions will undergo acid ionization to some extent when dissolved in water .
The acid strength of these complex ions typically increases with increasing charge and decreasing size of the metal ions .
The first-step acid ionization equations for a few other acidic metal ions are shown below : Calculate the pH of a 0.10M solution of aluminum chloride , which dissolves completely to give the hydrated aluminum ion in solution .
Acids such as HCl , HNO , and HCN that contain one ionizable hydrogen atom in each molecule are called monoprotic acids .
Diprotic acids contain two ionizable hydrogen atoms per molecule ; ionization of such acids occurs in two steps .
The first ionization always takes place to a greater extent than the second ionization .
For example , sulfuric acid , a strong acid , ionizes as follows : This stepwise ionization process occurs for all polyprotic acids .
Carbonic acid , H CO , is an example of a weak diprotic acid .
The first ionization of carbonic acid yields hydronium ions and bicarbonate ions in small amounts .
The bicarbonate ion can also act as an acid .
It ionizes and forms hydronium ions and carbonate ions in even smaller quantities .
by a factor of 10 , so H CO is the dominant producer of hydronium ion in the formed by the ionization of H CO ionizes to give hydronium ions are practically equal in a pure aqueous solution is larger than solution .
This means that little of the ( and carbonate ions ) , and the concentrations of H O and of H CO .
If the first ionization constant of a weak diprotic acid is larger than the second by a factor of at least 20 , it is appropriate to treat the first ionization separately and calculate concentrations resulting from it before calculating concentrations of species resulting from subsequent ionization .
This approach is demonstrated in the following example exercise .
“ Carbonated water ” contains a palatable amount of dissolved carbon dioxide .
The solution is acidic because CO reacts with water to form carbonic acid , H CO .
What are in a saturated solution of CO with an initial [ H CO ] = 0.033 M ?
and As indicated by the ionization constants , H CO is a much stronger acid than ionization reactions may be treated separately .
Phosphoric acid is one example : As for the diprotic acid examples , each successive ionization reaction is less extensive than the former , reflected in decreasing values for the stepwise acid ionization constants .
This is a general characteristic of polyprotic acids and successive ionization constants often differ by a factor of about 10 to 10 .
This set of three dissociation reactions may appear to make calculations of equilibrium concentrations in a solution of H PO complicated .
However , because the successive ionization constants differ by a factor of 10 to 10 , large differences exist in the small changes in concentration accompanying the ionization reactions .
This allows the use of math-simplifying assumptions and processes , as demonstrated in the examples above .
Polyprotic bases are capable of accepting more than one hydrogen ion .
The carbonate ion is an example of a diprotic base , because it can accept two protons , as shown below .
Similar to the case for polyprotic acids , note the ionization constants decrease with ionization step .
Likewise , equilibrium calculations involving polyprotic bases follow the same approaches as those for polyprotic acids .
Buffer solutions resist a change in pH when small amounts of a strong acid or a strong base are added .
A solution of acetic acid and sodium acetate ( CH COOH + CH COONa ) is an example of a buffer that consists of a weak acid and its salt .
An example of a buffer that consists of a weak base and its salt is a solution of ammonia and ammonium chloride ( NH ( aq ) + NH Cl ( aq ) ) .
To illustrate the function of a buffer solution , consider a mixture of roughly equal amounts of acetic acid and sodium acetate .
The presence of a weak conjugate acid-base pair in the solution imparts the ability to neutralize modest amounts of added strong acid or base .
provides a graphical illustration of the changes in conjugate-partner concentration that occur in this buffer solution when strong acid and base are added .
The buffering action of the solution is essentially a result of the added strong acid and base being converted to the weak acid and base that make up the buffer 's conjugate pair .
The weaker acid and base undergo only slight ionization , as compared with the complete ionization of the strong acid and base , and the solution pH , therefore , changes much less drastically than it would in an unbuffered solution .
Acetate buffers are used in biochemical studies of enzymes and other chemical components of cells to prevent pH changes that might affect the biochemical activity of these compounds .
( a ) Calculate the pH of an acetate buffer that is a mixture with 0.10 M acetic acid and 0.10 M sodium acetate .
( b ) Calculate the pH after 1.0 mL of 0.10 NaOH is added to 100 mL of this buffer .
( c ) For comparison , calculate the pH after 1.0 mL of 0.10 M NaOH is added to 100 mL of a solution of an unbuffered solution with a pH of 4.74 .
Adding strong acid will neutralize some of the acetic acid , yielding the conjugate base acetate ion .
Compute the new concentrations of these two buffer components , then repeat the equilibrium calculation of part ( a ) using these new concentrations .
( c ) For comparison , calculate the pH after 1.0 mL of 0.10 M NaOH is added to 100 mL of a solution of an unbuffered solution with a pH of 4.74 .
Show that adding 1.0 mL of 0.10 M HCl changes the pH of 100 mL of a 1.8 10 M HCl solution from 4.74 to 3.00 .
Instead , the ability of a buffer solution to resist changes in pH relies on the presence of appreciable amounts of its conjugate weak acid-base pair .
When enough strong acid or base is added to substantially lower the concentration of either member of the buffer pair , the buffering action within the solution is compromised .
The buffer capacity is the amount of acid or base that can be added to a given volume of a buffer solution before the pH changes significantly , usually by one unit .
Buffer capacity depends on the amounts of the weak acid and its conjugate base that are in a buffer mixture .
The first solution has more buffer capacity because it contains more acetic acid and acetate ion .
There are two useful rules of thumb for selecting buffer mixtures : A good buffer mixture should have about equal concentrations of both of its components .
A buffer solution has generally lost its usefulness when one component of the buffer pair is less than about 10 % of the other .
shows how pH changes for an acetic acid-acetate ion buffer as base is added .
The initial pH is 4.74 .
A change of 1 pH unit occurs when the acetic acid concentration is reduced to 11 % of the acetate ion concentration .
Weak acids and their salts are better as buffers for pHs less than 7 ; weak bases and their salts are better as buffers for pHs greater than 7 .
The pH of human blood thus remains very near the value determined by the buffer pairs pKa , in this case , 7.35 .
Normal variations in blood pH are usually less than 0.1 , and pH changes of 0.4 or greater are likely to be fatal .
This equation relates the pH , the ionization constant of a weak acid , and the concentrations of the weak conjugate acid-base pair in a buffered solution .
Scientists often use this expression , called the Henderson-Hasselbalch equation , to calculate the pH of buffer solutions .
It is important to note that the “ x is small ” assumption must be valid to use this equation .
In this section , we will explore the underlying chemical equilibria that make acid-base titrimetry a useful analytical technique .
A titration curve is a plot of some solution property versus the amount of added titrant .
For acid-base titrations , solution pH is a useful property to monitor because it varies predictably with the solution composition and , therefore , may be used to monitor the titration ’ s progress and detect its end point .
The following example exercise demonstrates the computation of pH for a titration solution after additions of several specified titrant volumes .
The first example involves a strong acid titration that requires only stoichiometric calculations to derive the solution pH .
The second example addresses a weak acid titration requiring equilibrium calculations .
A titration is carried out for 25.00 mL of 0.100 M HCl ( strong acid ) with 0.100 M of a strong base NaOH ( the titration curve is shown in ) .
Calculate the pH at these volumes of added base solution : ( a ) 0.00 mL ( b ) 12.50 mL ( c ) 25.00 mL ( d ) 37.50 mL ( a ) Titrant volume = 0 mL .
The solution pH is due to the acid ionization of HCl .
Because this is a strong acid , the ionization is complete and the hydronium ion molarity is 0.100 M .
The pH of the solution is then ( b ) Titrant volume = 12.50 mL .
Since the acid sample and the base titrant are both monoprotic and equally concentrated , this titrant addition involves less than a stoichiometric amount of base , and so it is completely consumed by reaction with the excess acid in the sample .
The concentration of acid remaining is computed by subtracting the consumed amount from the intial amount and then dividing by the solution volume : ( c ) Titrant volume = 25.00 mL .
This titrant addition involves a stoichiometric amount of base ( the equivalence point ) , and so only products of the neutralization reaction are in solution ( water and NaCl ) .
Neither the cation nor the anion of this salt undergo acid-base ionization ; the only process generating hydronium ions is the autoprotolysis of water .
The solution is neutral , having a pH = 7.00 .
( d ) Titrant volume = 37.50 mL .
This involves the addition of titrant in excess of the equivalence point .
Answer : 0.00 : 1.000 ; 15.0 : 1.5111 ; 25.0 : 7 ; 40.0 : 12.523 Consider the titration of 25.00 mL of 0.100 M CH CO H with 0.100 M NaOH .
Unlike the strong-acid example above , however , the reaction mixture in this case contains a weak conjugate base ( acetate ion ) .
( c ) Titrant volume = 12.50 mL .
This volume represents one-half of the stoichiometric amount of titrant , and so one-half of the acetic acid has been neutralized to yield an equivalent amount of acetate ion .
The concentrations of these conjugate acid-base partners , therefore , are equal .
A convenient approach to computing the pH is use of the Henderson-Hasselbalch equation : ( pH = p K at the half-equivalence point in a titration of a weak acid ) ( d ) Titrant volume = 37.50 mL .
This volume represents a stoichiometric excess of titrant , and a reaction solution containing both the titration product , acetate ion , and the excess strong titrant .
Answer : 0.00 mL : 2.37 ; 15.0 mL : 3.92 ; 25.00 mL : 8.29 ; 30.0 mL : 12.097 Performing additional calculations similar to those in the preceding example permits a more full assessment of titration curves .
A summary of pH/volume data pairs for the strong and weak acid titrations is provided in and plotted as titration curves in .
Certain organic substances change color in dilute solution when the hydronium ion concentration reaches a particular value .
For example , phenolphthalein is a colorless substance in any aqueous solution with a hydronium ion concentration greater than 5.0 10 M ( pH < 8.3 ) .
In more basic solutions where the hydronium ion concentration is less than 5.0 10 M ( pH > 8.3 ) , it is red or pink .
Substances such as phenolphthalein , which can be used to determine the pH of a solution , are called acid-base indicators .
Acid-base indicators are either weak organic acids or weak organic bases .
When we add acid to a solution of methyl orange , the increased hydronium ion concentration shifts the equilibrium toward the nonionized red form , in accordance with Le Châtelier ’ s principle .
If we add base , we shift the equilibrium towards the yellow form .
This behavior is completely analogous to the action of buffers .
The perceived color of an indicator solution is determined by the ratio of the concentrations of the two species In and HIn .
If most of the indicator ( typically about 60−90 % or more ) is present as In , the perceived color of the solution is yellow .
If most is present as HIn , then the solution color appears red .
When pH > p K , the log term must be negative , indicating an excess of the conjugate acid ( red solution ) .
When the solution pH is close to the indicator pKa , appreciable amounts of both conjugate partners are present , and the solution color is that of an additive combination of each ( yellow and red , yielding orange ) .
The color change interval ( or pH interval ) for an acid-base indicator is defined as the range of pH values over which a change in color is observed , and for most indicators this range is approximately p K ± 1 .
There are many different acid-base indicators that cover a wide range of pH values and can be used to determine the approximate pH of an unknown solution by a process of elimination .
Universal indicators and pH paper contain a mixture of indicators and exhibit different colors at different pHs .
presents several indicators , their colors , and their color-change intervals .
The titration curves shown in illustrate the choice of a suitable indicator for specific titrations .
In the strong acid titration , use of any of the three indicators should yield reasonably sharp color changes and accurate end point determinations .
For this titration , the solution pH reaches the lower limit of the methyl orange color change interval after addition of ~24 mL of titrant , at which point the initially red solution would begin to appear orange .
When 25 mL of titrant has been added ( the equivalence point ) , the pH is well above the upper limit and the solution will appear yellow .
The titration 's end point may then be estimated as the volume of titrant that yields a distinct orange-to-yellow color change .
This color change would be challenging for most human eyes to precisely discern .
More-accurate estimates of the titration end point are possible using either litmus or phenolphthalein , both of which exhibit color change intervals that are encompassed by the steep rise in pH that occurs around the 25.00 mL equivalence point .
The weak acid titration curve in shows that only one of the three indicators is suitable for end point detection .
If methyl orange is used in this titration , the solution will undergo a gradual red-to-orange-to-yellow color change over a relatively large volume interval ( 0–6 mL ) , completing the color change well before the equivalence point ( 25 mL ) has been reached .
Use of litmus would show a color change that begins after adding 7–8 mL of titrant and ends just before the equivalence point .
Phenolphthalein , on the other hand , exhibits a color change interval that nicely brackets the abrupt change in pH occurring at the titration 's equivalence point .
A sharp color change from colorless to pink will be observed within a very small volume interval around the equivalence point .
The mineral fluorite , CaF , is commonly used as a semiprecious stone in many types of jewelry because of its striking appearance .
Deposits of fluorite are formed through a process called hydrothermal precipitation in which calcium and fluoride ions dissolved in groundwater combine to produce insoluble CaF in response to some change in solution conditions .
For example , a decrease in temperature may trigger fluorite precipitation if its solubility is exceeded at the lower temperature .
Because fluoride ion is a weak base , its solubility is also affected by solution pH , and so geologic or other processes that change groundwater pH will also affect the precipitation of fluorite .
This chapter extends the equilibrium discussion of other chapters by addressing some additional reaction classes ( including precipitation ) and systems involving coupled equilibrium reactions .
These equilibria underlie many natural and technological processes , ranging from tooth decay to water purification .
An understanding of the factors affecting compound solubility is , therefore , essential to the effective management of these processes .
This section applies previously introduced equilibrium concepts and tools to systems involving dissolution and precipitation .
Recall from the chapter on solutions that the solubility of a substance can vary from essentially zero ( insoluble or sparingly soluble ) to infinity ( miscible ) .
A solute with finite solubility can yield a saturated solution when it is added to a solvent in an amount exceeding its solubility , resulting in a heterogeneous mixture of the saturated solution and the excess , undissolved solute .
For example , a saturated solution of silver chloride is one in which the equilibrium shown below has been established .
In this solution , an excess of solid AgCl dissolves and dissociates to produce aqueous Ag and Cl ions at the same rate that these aqueous ions combine and precipitate to form solid AgCl .
Because silver chloride is a sparingly soluble salt , the equilibrium concentration of its dissolved ions in the solution is relatively low .
The equilibrium constant for solubility equilibria such as this one is called the solubility product constant , K , in this case Recall that only gases and solutes are represented in equilibrium constant expressions , so the K does not include a term for the undissolved AgCl .
A listing of solubility product constants for several sparingly soluble compounds is provided in .
Calculations of this sort are most conveniently performed using a compound ’ s molar solubility , measured as moles of dissolved solute per liter of saturated solution .
Fluorite , CaF , is a slightly soluble solid that dissolves according to the equation : The concentration of Ca in a saturated solution of CaF is 2.15 10 M .
What is the solubility product of fluorite ?
What is the solubility product for Mg ( OH ) ?
Answer : 8.99 10 The K of copper ( I ) bromide , CuBr , is 6.3 10 .
Calculate the molar solubility of copper bromide .
The K of AgI is 1.5 10 .
Calculate the molar solubility of silver iodide .
Answer : 1.2 10 M The K of calcium hydroxide , Ca ( OH ) , is 1.3 10 .
Calculate the molar solubility of calcium hydroxide .
The dissolution stoichiometry shows a 1:1 relation between moles of calcium ion in solution and moles of compound dissolved , and so , the molar solubility of Ca ( OH ) is 6.9 10 M .
The K of PbI is 1.4 10 .
Calculate the molar solubility of lead ( II ) iodide .
Answer : 1.5 10 M Many of the pigments used by artists in oil-based paints are sparingly soluble in water .
For example , the solubility of the artist ’ s pigment chrome yellow , PbCrO , is 4.6 10 g/L .
Determine the solubility product for PbCrO .
What is its solubility product ?
Answer : 2.08 10 and chloride ions , Calomel , Hg Cl , is a compound composed of the diatomic ion of mercury ( I ) , Cl .
Although most mercury compounds are now known to be poisonous , eighteenth-century physicians used calomel as a medication .
Their patients rarely suffered any mercury poisoning from the treatments because calomel has a very low solubility , as suggested by its very small K : Calculate the molar solubility of Hg Cl .
Determine the molar solubility of MgF from its solubility product : K = 6.4 10 .
Consider , for example , mixing aqueous solutions of the soluble compounds sodium carbonate and calcium nitrate .
If the concentrations of calcium and carbonate ions in the mixture do not yield a reaction quotient , Q , that exceeds the solubility product , K , then no precipitation will occur .
If the ion concentrations yield a reaction quotient greater than the solubility product , then precipitation will occur , lowering those concentrations until equilibrium is established ( Q = K ) .
The comparison of Q to K to predict precipitation is an example of the general approach to predicting the direction of a reaction first introduced in the chapter on equilibrium .
Will Mg ( OH ) precipitate when enough Ca ( OH ) is added to give a [ OH ] of 0.0010 M ?
Predict whether CaHPO will precipitate from a solution with [ Ca ] = 0.0001 M and M .
The equation for the equilibrium between solid silver chloride , silver ion , and chloride ion is : The solubility product is 1.6 10 ( see ) .
AgCl will precipitate if the reaction quotient calculated from the concentrations in the mixture of AgNO and NaCl is greater than K .
Will KClO precipitate when 20 mL of a 0.050M solution of K is added to 80 mL of a 0.50M solution of ( Hint : Use the dilution equation to calculate the concentrations of potassium and perchlorate ions in the mixture . )
Answer : No , Q = 4.0 10 , which is less than K = 1.05 10 Blood will not clot if calcium ions are removed from its plasma .
Some blood collection tubes contain salts of for this purpose .
At sufficiently high concentrations , the calcium the oxalate ion , and oxalate ions form solid , CaC O ·H O ( calcium oxalate monohydrate ) .
The concentration of Ca in a sample of blood serum is 2.2 10 M .
What concentration of ion must be established before CaC O ·H O begins to precipitate ?
The equilibrium expression is : For this reaction : ( see ) Substitute the provided calcium ion concentration into the solubility product expression and solve for oxalate concentration : = 8.9 10 M is necessary to initiate the precipitation of CaC O under A concentration of these conditions .
per liter , what concentration of Ag ion must be reached by If a solution contains 0.0020 mol of adding solid AgNO before Ag CrO begins to precipitate ?
Neglect any increase in volume upon adding the solid silver nitrate .
What pH is required to keep [ Mn ] equal to 1.8 10 M ?
The concentration of Mg ( aq ) in sea water is 5.37 10 M .
By increasing the counter ion concentration in a controlled manner , ions in solution may be precipitated individually , assuming their compound solubilities are adequately different .
In solutions with equal concentrations of target ions , the ion forming the least soluble compound will precipitate first ( at the lowest concentration of counter ion ) , with the other ions subsequently precipitating as their compound ’ s solubilities are reached .
As an illustration of this technique , the next example exercise describes separation of a two halide ions via precipitation of one as a silver salt .
A solution contains 0.00010 mol of KBr and 0.10 mol of KCl per liter .
AgNO is gradually added to this solution .
Which forms first , solid AgBr or solid AgCl ?
The two equilibria involved are : If the solution contained about equal concentrations of Cl and Br , then the silver salt with the smaller K ( AgBr ) would precipitate first .
The concentrations are not equal , however , so the [ Ag ] at which AgCl begins to precipitate and the [ Ag ] at which AgBr begins to precipitate must be calculated .
The salt that forms at the lower [ Ag ] precipitates first .
AgBr precipitates when Q equals K for AgBr AgI begins to precipitate when [ Ag ] is 5.0 10 M .
For AgCl : AgCl precipitates when Q equals K for AgCl ( 1.6 10 ) .
When [ Cl ] = 0.10 M : AgCl begins to precipitate when [ Ag ] is 1.6 10 M .
AgCl begins to precipitate at a lower [ Ag ] than AgBr , so AgCl begins to precipitate first .
Note the chloride ion concentration of the initial mixture was significantly greater than the bromide ion concentration , and so silver chloride precipitated first despite having a K greater than that of silver bromide .
If silver nitrate solution is added to a solution which is 0.050 M in both Cl and Br ions , at what [ Ag ] would precipitation begin , and what would be the formula of the precipitate ?
Answer : [ Ag ] = 1.0 10 M ; AgBr precipitates first Compared with pure water , the solubility of an ionic compound is less in aqueous solutions containing a common ion ( one also produced by dissolution of the ionic compound ) .
This is an example of a phenomenon known as the common ion effect , which is a consequence of the law of mass action that may be explained using Le ChÂtelier ’ s principle .
Consider the dissolution of silver iodide : This solubility equilibrium may be shifted left by the addition of either silver ( I ) or iodide ions , resulting in the precipitation of AgI and lowered concentrations of dissolved Ag and I .
In solutions that already contain either of these ions , less AgI may be dissolved than in solutions without these ions .
What is the effect on the amount of solid Mg ( OH ) and the concentrations of Mg and OH when each of the following are added to a saturated solution of Mg ( OH ) ?
In quantitative terms , the added Mg causes the reaction quotient to be larger than the solubility product ( Q > K ) , and Mg ( OH ) forms until the reaction quotient again equals K .
At the new equilibrium , [ OH ] is less and [ Mg ] is greater than in the solution of Mg ( OH ) in pure water .
More solid Mg ( OH ) is present .
( b ) The reaction shifts to the left to relieve the stress of the additional OH ion .
Mg ( OH ) forms until the reaction quotient again equals K .
At the new equilibrium , [ OH ] is greater and [ Mg ] is less than in the solution of Mg ( OH ) in pure water .
More solid Mg ( OH ) is present .
( c ) The concentration of OH is reduced as the OH reacts with the acid .
The reaction shifts to the right to ( a ) Adding a common ion , Mg , will increase the concentration of this ion and shift the solubility equilibrium to the left , decreasing the concentration of hydroxide ion and increasing the amount of undissolved magnesium hydroxide .
( b ) Adding a common ion , OH , will increase the concentration of this ion and shift the solubility equilibrium to the left , decreasing the concentration of magnesium ion and increasing the amount of undissolved magnesium hydroxide .
( c ) The added compound does not contain a common ion , and no effect on the magnesium hydroxide solubility equilibrium is expected .
( d ) Adding more solid magnesium hydroxide will increase the amount of undissolved compound in the mixture .
The solution is already saturated , though , so the concentrations of dissolved magnesium and hydroxide ions will remain the same .
Thus , changing the amount of solid magnesium hydroxide in the mixture has no effect on the value of Q , and no shift is required to restore Q to the value of the equilibrium constant .
The K of CdS is 1.0 10 .
This calculation can be performed using the ICE approach : Because K is very small , assume x < < 0.010 and solve the simplified equation for x : The molar solubility of CdS in this solution is 1.0 10 M .
Calculate the molar solubility of aluminum hydroxide , Al ( OH ) , in a 0.015M solution of aluminum nitrate , Al ( NO ) .
The K of Al ( OH ) is 2 10 .
A coordinate covalent bond ( or dative bond ) occurs when one of the atoms in the bond provides both bonding electrons .
For example , a coordinate covalent bond occurs when a water molecule combines with a hydrogen ion to form a hydronium ion .
A coordinate covalent bond also results when an ammonia molecule combines with a hydrogen ion to form an ammonium ion .
Both of these equations are shown here .
Reactions involving the formation of coordinate covalent bonds are classified as Lewis acid-base chemistry .
The species donating the electron pair that compose the bond is a Lewis base , the species accepting the electron pair is a Lewis acid , and the product of the reaction is a Lewis acid-base adduct .
As the two examples above illustrate , Brønsted-Lowry acid-base reactions represent a subcategory of Lewis acid reactions , specifically , those in which the acid species is H .
A few examples involving other Lewis acids and bases are described below .
The boron atom in boron trifluoride , BF , has only six electrons in its valence shell .
These ligands can be neutral molecules like H O or NH , or ions such as CN or OH .
Often , the ligands act as Lewis bases , donating a pair of electrons to the central atom .
These types of Lewis acid-base reactions are examples of a broad subdiscipline called coordination chemistry —the topic of another chapter in this text .
The equilibrium constant for the reaction of a metal ion with one or more ligands to form a coordination complex is called a formation constant ( K ) ( sometimes called a stability constant ) .
For example , the complex ion is produced by the reaction The formation constant for this reaction is Alternatively , the reverse reaction ( decomposition of the complex ion ) can be considered , in which case the equilibrium constant is a dissociation constant ( K ) .
Per the relation between equilibrium constants for reciprocal reactions described , the dissociation constant is the mathematical inverse of the formation constant , K = K tabulation of formation constants is provided in .
As an example of dissolution by complex ion formation , let us consider what happens when we add aqueous ammonia to a mixture of silver chloride and water .
Silver chloride dissolves slightly in water , giving a small concentration of Ag ( [ Ag ] = 1.3 10 M ) : .
Assuming x < < 0.1 permits simplifying the above equation : dissociates into Ag and NH , the assumption that x is small is Because only 1.1 % of the justified .
Using this value of x and the relations in the above ICE table allows calculation of all species ’ equilibrium concentrations : The concentration of free silver ion in the solution is 0.0011 M .
Calculate the silver ion concentration , [ Ag ] , of a solution prepared by dissolving 1.00 g of AgNO and 10.0 g of KCN in sufficient water to make 1.00 L of solution .
( Hint : Because K is very large , assume the reaction goes to completion then calculate the [ Ag ] produced by dissociation of the complex . )
This section of this chapter will address solubility equilibria coupled with acid-base and complex-formation reactions .
An environmentally relevant example illustrating the coupling of solubility and acid-base equilibria is the impact of ocean acidification on the health of the ocean ’ s coral reefs .
These reefs are built upon skeletons of sparingly soluble calcium carbonate excreted by colonies of corals ( small marine invertebrates ) .
Combining the dissolution equation with the reverse of the acid hydrolysis equation yields The equilibrium constant for this net reaction is much greater than the K for calcium carbonate , indicating its solubility is markedly increased in acidic solutions .
As rising carbon dioxide levels in the atmosphere increase the acidity of ocean waters , the calcium carbonate skeletons of coral reefs become more prone to dissolution and subsequently less healthy .
The dramatic increase in solubility with increasing acidity described above for calcium carbonate is typical of salts containing basic anions ( e.g. , carbonate , fluoride , hydroxide , sulfide ) .
Another familiar example is the formation of dental cavities in tooth enamel .
Dental cavities form when the acid waste of bacteria growing on the surface of teeth hastens the dissolution of tooth enamel by reacting completely with the strong base hydroxide , shifting the hydroxyapatite solubility equilibrium to the right .
See the Chemistry in Everyday Life feature on the role of fluoride in preventing tooth decay for more information .
The solubility of ionic compounds may also be increased when dissolution is coupled to the formation of a complex ion .
As indicated by the relatively large value of K for the net reaction , coupling complex formation with dissolution drastically increases the solubility of Al ( OH ) .
Compute and compare the molar solublities for aluminum hydroxide , Ca ( OH ) , dissolved in ( a ) pure water and ( b ) a buffer containing 0.100 M acetic acid and 0.100 M sodium acetate .
What is the solubility of aluminum hydroxide in a buffer comprised of 0.100 M formic acid and 0.100 M sodium formate ?
Answer : 0.1 M Unexposed silver halides are removed from photographic film when they react with sodium thiosulfate ( Na S O , called hypo ) to form the complex ion ( K = 4.7 10 ) .
Finally , use this molar concentration to derive the required mass of sodium thiosulfate : Thus , 1.00 L of a solution prepared from 1.7 g Na S O dissolves 1.0 g of AgBr .
AgCl ( s ) , silver chloride , has a very low solubility : K = 1.6 10 .
Adding ammonia significantly increases the solubility of AgCl because a complex ion is formed : K = 1.7 10 .
What mass of NH is required to prepare 1.00 L of solution that will dissolve 2.00 g of AgCl by formation of Answer : 1.00 L of a solution prepared with 4.81 g NH dissolves 2.0 g of AgCl .
Among the many capabilities of chemistry is its ability to predict if a process will occur under specified conditions .
Thermodynamics , the study of relationships between the energy and work associated with chemical and physical processes , provides this predictive ability .
Previous chapters in this text have described various applications of thermochemistry , an important aspect of thermodynamics concerned with the heat flow accompanying chemical reactions and phase transitions .
This chapter will introduce additional thermodynamic concepts , including those that enable the prediction of any chemical or physical changes under a given set of conditions .
By the end of this section , you will be able to : Distinguish between spontaneous and nonspontaneous processes Describe the dispersal of matter and energy that accompanies certain spontaneous processes Processes have a natural tendency to occur in one direction under a given set of conditions .
Water will naturally flow downhill , but uphill flow requires outside intervention such as the use of a pump .
Iron exposed to the earth ’ s atmosphere will corrode , but rust is not converted to iron without intentional chemical treatment .
A spontaneous process is one that occurs naturally under certain conditions .
A nonspontaneous process , on the other hand , will not take place unless it is “ driven ” by the continual input of energy from an external source .
A process that is spontaneous in one direction under a particular set of conditions is nonspontaneous in the reverse direction .
At room temperature and typical atmospheric pressure , for example , ice will spontaneously melt , but water will not spontaneously freeze .
The spontaneity of a process is not correlated to the speed of the process .
A spontaneous change may be so rapid that it is essentially instantaneous or so slow that it can not be observed over any practical period of time .
To illustrate this concept , consider the decay of radioactive isotopes , a topic more thoroughly treated in the chapter on nuclear chemistry .
Radioactive decay is by definition a spontaneous process in which the nuclei of unstable isotopes emit radiation as they are converted to more stable nuclei .
All the decay processes occur spontaneously , but the rates at which different isotopes decay vary widely .
Technetium-99m is a popular radioisotope for medical imaging studies that undergoes relatively rapid decay and exhibits a half-life of about six hours .
Uranium-238 is the most abundant isotope of uranium , and its decay occurs much more slowly , exhibiting a half-life of more than four billion years .
As another example , consider the conversion of diamond into graphite .
The phase diagram for carbon indicates that graphite is the stable form of this element under ambient atmospheric pressure , while diamond is the stable allotrope at very high pressures , such as those present during its geologic formation .
Thermodynamic calculations of the sort described in the last section of this chapter indicate that the conversion of diamond to graphite at ambient pressure occurs spontaneously , yet diamonds are observed to exist , and persist , under these conditions .
Though the process is spontaneous under typical ambient conditions , its rate is extremely slow ; so , for all practical purposes diamonds are indeed “ forever. ” Situations such as these emphasize the important distinction between the thermodynamic and the kinetic aspects of a process .
In this particular case , diamonds are said to be thermodynamically unstable but kinetically stable under ambient conditions .
Extending the discussion of thermodynamic concepts toward the objective of predicting spontaneity , consider now an isolated system consisting of two flasks connected with a closed valve .
Initially there is an ideal gas in one flask and the other flask is empty ( P = 0 ) .
When the valve is opened , the gas spontaneously expands to fill both flasks equally .
Recalling the definition of pressure-volume work from the chapter on thermochemistry , note that no work has been done because the pressure in a vacuum is zero .
Note as well that since the system is isolated , no heat has been exchanged with the surroundings ( q = 0 ) .
The first law of thermodynamics confirms that there has been no change in the system ’ s internal energy as a result of this process .
The spontaneity of this process is therefore not a consequence of any change in energy that accompanies the process .
Instead , the driving force appears to be related to the greater , more uniform dispersal of matter that results when the gas is allowed to expand .
Initially , the system was comprised of one flask containing matter and another flask containing nothing .
After the spontaneous expansion took place , the matter was distributed both more widely ( occupying twice its original volume ) and more uniformly ( present in equal amounts in each flask ) .
Now consider two objects at different temperatures : object X at temperature T and object Y at temperature T , with T > T .
When these objects come into contact , heat spontaneously flows from the hotter object ( X ) to the colder one ( Y ) .
This corresponds to a loss of thermal energy by X and a gain of thermal energy by Y .
From the perspective of this two-object system , there was no net gain or loss of thermal energy , rather the available thermal energy was redistributed among the two objects .
This spontaneous process resulted in a more uniform dispersal of energy .
As illustrated by the two processes described , an important factor in determining the spontaneity of a process is the extent to which it changes the dispersal or distribution of matter and/or energy .
In each case , a spontaneous process took place that resulted in a more uniform distribution of matter or energy .
Describe how matter is redistributed when the following spontaneous processes take place : ( a ) A solid sublimes .
( b ) A gas condenses .
( c ) A drop of food coloring added to a glass of water forms a solution with uniform color .
( a ) Sublimation is the conversion of a solid ( relatively high density ) to a gas ( much lesser density ) .
This process yields a much greater dispersal of matter , since the molecules will occupy a much greater volume after the solid-to-gas transition .
( b ) Condensation is the conversion of a gas ( relatively low density ) to a liquid ( much greater density ) .
This process yields a much lesser dispersal of matter , since the molecules will occupy a much lesser volume after the gas-to-liquid transition .
( c ) The process in question is diffusion .
Describe how energy is redistributed when a spoon at room temperature is placed in a cup of hot coffee .
Answer : Heat will spontaneously flow from the hotter object ( coffee ) to the colder object ( spoon ) , resulting in a more uniform distribution of thermal energy as the spoon warms and the coffee cools .
A later review of Carnot ’ s findings by Rudolf Clausius introduced a new thermodynamic property that relates the spontaneous heat flow accompanying a process to the temperature at which the process takes place .
This new property was expressed as the ratio of the reversible heat ( q ) and the kelvin temperature ( T ) .
In thermodynamics , a reversible process is one that takes place at such a slow rate that it is always at equilibrium and its direction can be changed ( it can be “ reversed ” ) by an infinitesimally small change in some condition .
Note that the idea of a reversible process is a formalism required to support the development of various thermodynamic concepts ; no real processes are truly reversible , rather they are classified as irreversible .
Similar to other thermodynamic properties , this new quantity is a state function , so its change depends only upon the initial and final states of a system .
Following the work of Carnot and Clausius , Ludwig Boltzmann developed a molecular-scale statistical model that related the entropy of a system to the number of microstates ( W ) possible for the system .
A microstate is a specific configuration of all the locations and energies of the atoms or molecules that make up a system .
The relation between a system ’ s entropy and the number of possible microstates is where k is the Boltzmann constant , 1.38 10 J/K .
Conversely , processes that reduce the number of microstates , W < W , yield a decrease in system entropy , Δ S < 0 .
This molecular-scale interpretation of entropy provides a link to the probability that a process will occur as illustrated in the next paragraphs .
Consider the general case of a system comprised of N particles distributed among n boxes .
The number of microstates possible for such a system is n .
For example , distributing four particles among two boxes will result in 2 = 16 different microstates as illustrated in .
Microstates with equivalent particle arrangements ( not considering individual particle identities ) are grouped together and are called distributions .
The probability that a system will exist with its components in a given distribution is proportional to the number of microstates within the distribution .
Since entropy increases logarithmically with the number of microstates , the most probable distribution is therefore the one of greatest entropy .
or For this system , the most probable configuration is one of the six microstates associated with distribution ( c ) where the particles are evenly distributed between the boxes , that is , a configuration of two particles in each box .
A macroscopic ( laboratory-sized ) system would typically consist of moles of particles ( N ~ 10 ) , and the corresponding number of microstates would be staggeringly huge .
Regardless of the number of particles in the system , however , the distributions in which roughly equal numbers of particles are found in each box are always the most probable configurations .
This matter dispersal model of entropy is often described qualitatively in terms of the disorder of the system .
By this description , microstates in which all the particles are in a single box are the most ordered , thus possessing the least entropy .
Microstates in which the particles are more evenly distributed among the boxes are more disordered , possessing greater entropy .
The previous description of an ideal gas expanding into a vacuum is a macroscopic example of this particle-in-a-box model .
For this system , the most probable distribution is confirmed to be the one in which the matter is most uniformly dispersed or distributed between the two flasks .
Initially , the gas molecules are confined to just one of the two flasks .
Opening the valve between the flasks increases the volume available to the gas molecules and , correspondingly , the number of microstates possible for the system .
Since W > W , the expansion process involves an increase in entropy ( Δ S > 0 ) and is spontaneous .
A similar approach may be used to describe the spontaneous flow of heat .
Consider a system consisting of two objects , each containing two particles , and two units of thermal energy ( represented as “ * ” ) in .
The hot object is comprised of particles A and B and initially contains both energy units .
The cold object is comprised of particles C and D , which initially has no energy units .
Distribution ( a ) shows the three microstates possible for the initial state of the system , with both units of energy contained within the hot object .
If one of the two energy units is transferred , the result is distribution ( b ) consisting of four microstates .
If both energy units are transferred , the result is distribution ( c ) consisting of three microstates .
Thus , we may describe this system by a total of ten microstates .
And , again , this spontaneous process is also characterized by an increase in system entropy .
Calculate the change in entropy for the process depicted below .
The initial number of microstates is one , the final six : The sign of this result is consistent with expectation ; since there are more microstates possible for the final state than for the initial state , the change in entropy should be positive .
Consider the system shown in .
What is the change in entropy for the process where all the energy is transferred from the hot object ( AB ) to the cold object ( CD ) ?
Answer : 0 J/K The relationships between entropy , microstates , and matter/energy dispersal described previously allow us to make generalizations regarding the relative entropies of substances and to predict the sign of entropy changes for chemical and physical processes .
Consider the phase changes illustrated in .
In the solid phase , the atoms or molecules are restricted to nearly fixed positions with respect to each other and are capable of only modest oscillations about these positions .
With essentially fixed locations for the system ’ s component particles , the number of microstates is relatively small .
In the liquid phase , the atoms or molecules are free to move over and around each other , though they remain in relatively close proximity to one another .
This increased freedom of motion results in a greater variation in possible particle locations , so the number of microstates is correspondingly greater than for the solid .
As a result , S > S and the process of converting a substance from solid to liquid ( melting ) is characterized by an increase in entropy , Δ S > 0 .
By the same logic , the reciprocal process ( freezing ) exhibits a decrease in entropy , Δ S < 0 .
Now consider the gaseous phase , in which a given number of atoms or molecules occupy a much greater volume than in the liquid phase .
Each atom or molecule can be found in many more locations , corresponding to a much greater number of microstates .
Consequently , for any substance , S > S > S , and the processes of vaporization and sublimation likewise involve increases in entropy , Δ S > 0 .
Likewise , the reciprocal phase transitions , condensation and deposition , involve decreases in entropy , Δ S < 0 .
According to kinetic-molecular theory , the temperature of a substance is proportional to the average kinetic energy of its particles .
Raising the temperature of a substance will result in more extensive vibrations of the particles in solids and more rapid translations of the particles in liquids and gases .
At higher temperatures , the distribution of kinetic energies among the atoms or molecules of the substance is also broader ( more dispersed ) than at lower temperatures .
Thus , the entropy for any substance increases with temperature .
The entropy of a substance is influenced by the structure of the particles ( atoms or molecules ) that comprise the substance .
For molecules , greater numbers of atoms increase the number of ways in which the molecules can vibrate and thus the number of possible microstates and the entropy of the system .
Finally , variations in the types of particles affects the entropy of a system .
Compared to a pure substance , in which all particles are identical , the entropy of a mixture of two or more different particle types is greater .
This is because of the additional orientations and interactions that are possible in a system comprised of nonidentical components .
For example , when a solid dissolves in a liquid , the particles of the solid experience both a greater freedom of motion and additional interactions with the solvent particles .
This corresponds to a more uniform dispersal of matter and energy and a greater number of microstates .
The process of dissolution therefore involves an increase in entropy , Δ S > 0 .
Considering the various factors that affect entropy allows us to make informed predictions of the sign of Δ S for various chemical and physical processes as illustrated in .
Predict the sign of the entropy change for the following processes .
Indicate the reason for each of your predictions .
Give a reason for your prediction .
( a ) ( b ) the freezing of liquid water ( c ) ( d ) Answer : ( a ) Positive ; The solid dissolves to give an increase of mobile ions in solution .
( b ) Negative ; The liquid becomes a more ordered solid .
( c ) Positive ; The relatively ordered solid becomes a gas .
( d ) Positive ; There is a net increase in the amount of gaseous species .
Processes that involve an increase in entropy of the system ( Δ S > 0 ) are very often spontaneous ; however , examples to the contrary are plentiful .
By expanding consideration of entropy changes to include the surroundings , we may reach a significant conclusion regarding the relation between this property and spontaneity .
There are three possibilities for such a process : The objects are at different temperatures , and heat flows from the hotter to the cooler object .
This is always observed to occur spontaneously .
Designating the hotter object as the system and invoking the definition of entropy yields the following : The magnitudes of − q and q are equal , their opposite arithmetic signs denoting loss of heat by the system and gain of heat by the surroundings .
This is never observed to occur spontaneously .
Again designating the hotter object as the system and invoking the definition of entropy yields the following : The arithmetic signs of q denote the gain of heat by the system and the loss of heat by the surroundings .
This process involves a decrease in the entropy of the universe .
The objects are at essentially the same temperature , T ≈ T , and so the magnitudes of the entropy changes are essentially the same for both the system and the surroundings .
In this case , the entropy change of the universe is zero , and the system is at equilibrium .
These results lead to a profound statement regarding the relation between entropy and spontaneity known as the second law of thermodynamics : all spontaneous changes cause an increase in the entropy of the universe .
A summary of these three relations is provided in .
For many realistic applications , the surroundings are vast in comparison to the system .
In such cases , the heat gained or lost by the surroundings as a result of some process represents a very small , nearly infinitesimal , fraction of its total thermal energy .
For example , combustion of a fuel in air involves transfer of heat from a system ( the fuel and oxygen molecules undergoing reaction ) to surroundings that are infinitely more massive ( the earth ’ s atmosphere ) .
As a result , q is a good approximation of q , and the second law may be stated as the following : We may use this equation to predict the spontaneity of a process as illustrated in .
The entropy change for the process is 22.1 J/K and requires that the surroundings transfer 6.00 kJ of heat to the system .
Is the process spontaneous at −10.00 °C ?
Is it spontaneous at +10.00 °C ?
We can assess the spontaneity of the process by calculating the entropy change of the universe .
If Δ S is positive , then the process is spontaneous .
At both temperatures , Δ S = 22.1 J/K and q = −6.00 kJ .
At −10.00 °C ( 263.15 K ) , the following is true : S < 0 , so melting is nonspontaneous ( not spontaneous ) at −10.0 °C .
At 10.00 °C ( 283.15 K ) , the following is true : S > 0 , so melting is spontaneous at 10.00 °C .
Using this information , determine if liquid water will spontaneously freeze at the same temperatures .
What can you say about the values of S ?
Answer : Entropy is a state function , so Δ S = −Δ S = −22.1 J/K and q = +6.00 kJ .
At −10.00 °C spontaneous , +0.7 J/K ; at +10.00 °C nonspontaneous , −0.9 J/K .
The previous section described the various contributions of matter and energy dispersal that contribute to the entropy of a system .
With these contributions in mind , consider the entropy of a pure , perfectly crystalline solid possessing no kinetic energy ( that is , at a temperature of absolute zero , 0 K ) .
This system may be described by a single microstate , as its purity , perfect crystallinity and complete lack of motion means there is but one possible location for each identical atom or molecule comprising the crystal ( W = 1 ) .
According to the Boltzmann equation , the entropy of this system is zero .
This limiting condition for a system ’ s entropy represents the third law of thermodynamics : the entropy of a pure , perfect crystalline substance at 0 K is zero .
Careful calorimetric measurements can be made to determine the temperature dependence of a substance ’ s entropy and to derive absolute entropy values under specific conditions .
Standard entropies ( S ° ) are for one mole of substance under standard conditions ( a pressure of 1 bar and a temperature of 298.15 K ; see details regarding standard conditions in the thermochemistry chapter of this text ) .
The standard entropy change ( Δ S ° ) for a reaction may be computed using standard entropies as shown below : where ν represents stoichiometric coefficients in the balanced equation representing the process .
For example , Δ S ° for the following reaction at room temperature is computed as : A partial listing of standard entropies is provided in , and additional values are provided in .
The example exercises that follow demonstrate the use of S ° values in calculating standard entropy changes for physical and chemical processes .
Calculate the standard entropy change for the following process : Calculate the entropy change using standard entropies as shown above : The value for Δ S ° is negative , as expected for this phase transition ( condensation ) , which the previous section discussed .
An alternative approach involving a new thermodynamic property defined in terms of system properties only was introduced in the late nineteenth century by American mathematician Josiah Willard Gibbs .
summarizes the relation between the spontaneity of a process and the arithmetic signs of these indicators .
In addition to indicating spontaneity , the free energy change also provides information regarding the amount of useful work ( w ) that may be accomplished by a spontaneous process .
Although a rigorous treatment of this subject is beyond the scope of an introductory chemistry text , a brief discussion is helpful for gaining a better perspective on this important thermodynamic property .
For this purpose , consider a spontaneous , exothermic process that involves a decrease in entropy .
The free energy , as defined by may be interpreted as representing the difference between the energy produced by the process , Δ H , and the energy lost to the surroundings , T Δ S .
The difference between the energy produced and the energy lost is the energy available ( or “ free ” ) to do useful work by the process , Δ G .
If the process somehow could be made to take place under conditions of thermodynamic reversibility , the amount of work that could be done would be maximal : However , as noted previously in this chapter , such conditions are not realistic .
In addition , the technologies used to extract work from a spontaneous process ( e.g. , automobile engine , steam turbine ) are never 100 % efficient , and so the work done by these processes is always less than the theoretical maximum .
Similar reasoning may be applied to a nonspontaneous process , for which the free energy change represents the minimum amount of work that must be done on the system to carry out the process .
Free energy is a state function , so its value depends only on the conditions of the initial and final states of the system .
A convenient and common approach to the calculation of free energy changes for physical and chemical reactions is by use of widely available compilations of standard state thermodynamic data .
One method involves the use of standard enthalpies and entropies to compute standard free energy changes , Δ G ° , according to the following relation .
Use standard enthalpy and entropy data from to calculate the standard free energy change for the vaporization of water at room temperature ( 298 K ) .
What does the computed value for Δ G ° say about the spontaneity of this process ?
At 298 K ( 25 °C ) Use standard enthalpy and entropy data from to calculate the standard free energy change for the reaction shown here ( 298 K ) .
What does the computed value for Δ G ° say about the spontaneity of this process ?
Answer : the reaction is nonspontaneous ( not spontaneous ) at 25 °C .
The standard free energy change for a reaction may also be calculated from standard free energy of formation Δ G ° values of the reactants and products involved in the reaction .
The standard free energy of formation is the free energy change that accompanies the formation of one mole of a substance from its elements in their standard states .
Similar to the standard enthalpy of formation , is by definition zero for elemental substances under standard state conditions .
The approach used to calculate for a reaction from values is the same as that demonstrated previously for enthalpy and entropy changes .
For the reaction the standard free energy change at room temperature may be calculated as Consider the decomposition of yellow mercury ( II ) oxide .
Calculate the standard free energy change at room temperature , using ( a ) standard free energies of formation and ( b ) standard enthalpies of formation and standard entropies .
Do the results indicate the reaction to be spontaneous or nonspontaneous under standard conditions ?
The required data are available in and are shown here .
Calculate Δ G ° using ( a ) free energies of formation and ( b ) enthalpies of formation and entropies .
Do the results indicate the reaction to be spontaneous or nonspontaneous at 25 °C ?
Consider the vaporization of water as an example : An equation representing this process may be derived by adding the formation reactions for the two phases of water ( necessarily reversing the reaction for the liquid phase ) .
The free energy change for the sum reaction is the sum of free energy changes for the two added reactions : This approach may also be used in cases where a nonspontaneous reaction is enabled by coupling it to a spontaneous reaction .
The gist of the calculation , however , holds true .
Is a reaction coupling the decomposition of ZnS to the formation of H2S expected to be spontaneous under standard conditions ?
Following the approach outlined above and using free energy values from : The coupled reaction exhibits a positive free energy change and is thus nonspontaneous .
What is the standard free energy change for the reaction below ?
Is the reaction expected to be spontaneous under standard conditions ?
Answer : −199.7 kJ ; spontaneous As was previously demonstrated in this chapter ’ s section on entropy , the spontaneity of a process may depend upon the temperature of the system .
Phase transitions , for example , will proceed spontaneously in one direction or the other depending upon the temperature of the substance in question .
Likewise , some chemical reactions can also exhibit temperature dependent spontaneities .
Since T is the absolute ( kelvin ) temperature , it can only have positive values .
Four possibilities therefore exist with regard to the signs of the enthalpy and entropy changes : Both Δ H and Δ S are positive .
This condition describes an endothermic process that involves an increase in system entropy .
In this case , Δ G will be negative if the magnitude of the T Δ S term is greater than Δ H .
If the T Δ S term is less than Δ H , the free energy change will be positive .
Such a process is spontaneous at high temperatures and nonspontaneous at low temperatures .
Both Δ H and Δ S are negative .
This condition describes an exothermic process that involves a decrease in system entropy .
In this case , Δ G will be negative if the magnitude of the T Δ S term is less than Δ H .
If the T Δ S term ’ s magnitude is greater than Δ H , the free energy change will be positive .
Such a process is spontaneous at low temperatures and nonspontaneous at high temperatures .
Δ H is positive and Δ S is negative .
This condition describes an endothermic process that involves a decrease in system entropy .
In this case , Δ G will be positive regardless of the temperature .
Such a process is nonspontaneous at all temperatures .
Δ H is negative and Δ S is positive .
This condition describes an exothermic process that involves an increase in system entropy .
In this case , Δ G will be negative regardless of the temperature .
Such a process is spontaneous at all temperatures .
These four scenarios are summarized in .
The incomplete combustion of carbon is described by the following equation : How does the spontaneity of this process depend upon temperature ?
Combustion processes are exothermic ( Δ H < 0 ) .
This particular reaction involves an increase in entropy due to the accompanying increase in the amount of gaseous species ( net gain of one mole of gas , Δ S > 0 ) .
The reaction is therefore spontaneous ( Δ G < 0 ) at all temperatures .
Popular chemical hand warmers generate heat by the air-oxidation of iron : How does the spontaneity of this process depend upon temperature ?
Answer : Δ H and Δ S are negative ; the reaction is spontaneous at low temperatures .
When considering the conclusions drawn regarding the temperature dependence of spontaneity , it is important to keep in mind what the terms “ high ” and “ low ” mean .
Since these terms are adjectives , the temperatures in question are deemed high or low relative to some reference temperature .
A process that is nonspontaneous at one temperature but spontaneous at another will necessarily undergo a change in “ spontaneity ” ( as reflected by its Δ G ) as temperature varies .
This is clearly illustrated by a graphical presentation of the free energy change equation , in which Δ G is plotted on the y axis versus T on the x axis : Such a plot is shown in .
A process whose enthalpy and entropy changes are of the same arithmetic sign will exhibit a temperature-dependent spontaneity as depicted by the two yellow lines in the plot .
Each line crosses from one spontaneity domain ( positive or negative Δ G ) to the other at a temperature that is characteristic of the process in question .
As noted earlier , the condition of ΔG = 0 describes a system at equilibrium .
As defined in the chapter on liquids and solids , the boiling point of a liquid is the temperature at which its liquid and gaseous phases are in equilibrium ( that is , when vaporization and condensation occur at equal rates ) .
Use the information in to estimate the boiling point of water .
Note that the values for enthalpy and entropy changes data used were derived from standard data at 298 K .
If desired , you could obtain more accurate results by using enthalpy and entropy changes determined at ( or at least closer to ) the actual boiling point .
Use the information in to estimate the boiling point of CS .
Answer : 313 K ( accepted value 319 K ) The free energy change for a process may be viewed as a measure of its driving force .
A negative value for Δ G represents a driving force for the process in the forward direction , while a positive value represents a driving force for the process in the reverse direction .
When Δ G is zero , the forward and reverse driving forces are equal , and the process occurs in both directions at the same rate ( the system is at equilibrium ) .
In the chapter on equilibrium the reaction quotient , Q , was introduced as a convenient measure of the status of an equilibrium system .
Recall that Q is the numerical value of the mass action expression for the system , and that you may use its value to identify the direction in which a reaction will proceed in order to achieve equilibrium .
When Q is lesser than the equilibrium constant , K , the reaction will proceed in the forward direction until equilibrium is reached and Q = K .
Conversely , if Q > K , the process will proceed in the reverse direction until equilibrium is achieved .
This equation may be used to predict the spontaneity for a process under any given set of conditions as illustrated in .
What is the free energy change for the process shown here under the specified conditions ?
T = 25 °C , and The equation relating free energy change to standard free energy change and reaction quotient may be used directly : Since the computed value for Δ G is positive , the reaction is nonspontaneous under these conditions .
Calculate the free energy change for this same reaction at 875 °C in a 5.00 L mixture containing 0.100 mol of each gas .
Is the reaction spontaneous under these conditions ?
The relations between standard free energy changes and equilibrium constants are summarized in .
Given that the standard free energies of formation of Ag ( aq ) , Cl ( aq ) , and AgCl ( s ) are 77.1 kJ/mol , −131.2 kJ/mol , and −109.8 kJ/mol , respectively , calculate the solubility product , K , for AgCl .
Use the thermodynamic data provided in to calculate the equilibrium constant for the dissociation of dinitrogen tetroxide at 25 °C .
Answer : K = 6.9 To further illustrate the relation between these two essential thermodynamic concepts , consider the observation that reactions spontaneously proceed in a direction that ultimately establishes equilibrium .
As may be shown by plotting the free energy change versus the extent of the reaction ( for example , as reflected in the value of Q ) , equilibrium is established when the system ’ s free energy is minimized .
If a system consists of reactants and products in nonequilibrium amounts ( Q ≠ K ) , the reaction will proceed spontaneously in the direction necessary to establish equilibrium .
Another chapter in this text introduced the chemistry of reduction-oxidation ( redox ) reactions .
This important reaction class is defined by changes in oxidation states for one or more reactant elements , and it includes a subset of reactions involving the transfer of electrons between reactant species .
Around the turn of the nineteenth century , chemists began exploring ways these electrons could be transferred indirectly via an external circuit rather than directly via intimate contact of redox reactants .
In the two centuries since , the field of electrochemistry has evolved to yield significant insights on the fundamental aspects of redox chemistry as well as a wealth of technologies ranging from industrialscale metallurgical processes to robust , rechargeable batteries for electric vehicles .
In this chapter , the essential concepts of electrochemistry will be addressed .
Readers wishing additional review are referred to the text chapter on reaction stoichiometry .
By definition , a redox reaction is one that entails changes in oxidation number ( or oxidation state ) for one or more of the elements involved .
The oxidation number of an element in a compound is essentially an assessment of how the electronic environment of its atoms is different in comparison to atoms of the pure element .
By this description , the oxidation number of an atom in an element is equal to zero .
For an atom in a compound , the oxidation number is equal to the charge the atom would have in the compound if the compound were ionic .
Consequential to these rules , the sum of oxidation numbers for all atoms in a molecule is equal to the charge on the molecule .
To illustrate this formalism , examples from the two compound classes , ionic and covalent , will be considered .
Simple ionic compounds present the simplest examples to illustrate this formalism , since by definition the elements ’ oxidation numbers are numerically equivalent to ionic charges .
Sodium chloride , NaCl , is comprised of Na cations and Cl anions , and so oxidation numbers for sodium and chlorine are , +1 and −1 , respectively .
Calcium fluoride , CaF , is comprised of Ca cations and F anions , and so oxidation numbers for calcium and fluorine are , +2 and −1 , respectively .
Covalent compounds require a more challenging use of the formalism .
Water is a covalent compound whose molecules consist of two H atoms bonded separately to a central O atom via polar covalent O−H bonds .
The shared electrons comprising an O−H bond are more strongly attracted to the more electronegative O atom , and so it acquires a partial negative charge in the water molecule ( relative to an O atom in elemental oxygen ) .
Consequently , H atoms in a water molecule exhibit partial positive charges compared to H atoms in elemental hydrogen .
The sum of the partial negative and partial positive charges for each water molecule is zero , and the water molecule is neutral .
Imagine that the polarization of shared electrons within the O−H bonds of water were 100 % complete—the result would be transfer of electrons from H to O , and water would be an ionic compound comprised of O anions and H cations .
And so , the oxidations numbers for oxygen and hydrogen in water are −2 and +1 , respectively .
Applying this same logic to carbon tetrachloride , CCl , yields oxidation numbers of +4 for carbon and −1 for chlorine .
In these cases , equations representing the redox reaction can be very challenging to balance by inspection , and the use of a systematic approach called the half-reaction method is helpful .
This approach involves the following steps : Write skeletal equations for the oxidation and reduction half-reactions .
Balance each half-reaction for all elements except H and O .
Balance each half-reaction for O by adding H O .
Balance each half-reaction for H by adding H .
Balance each half-reaction for charge by adding electrons .
If necessary , multiply one or both half-reactions so that the number of electrons consumed in one is equal to the number produced in the other .
Add the two half-reactions and simplify .
If the reaction takes place in a basic medium , add OH ions the equation obtained in step 7 to neutralize the H ions ( add in equal numbers to both sides of the equation ) and simplify .
The examples below demonstrate the application of this method to balancing equations for aqueous redox reactions .
Write the balanced equation representing reaction between solid copper and nitric acid to yield aqueous copper ( II ) ions and nitrogen monoxide gas .
Following the steps of the half-reaction method : Write skeletal equations for the oxidation and reduction half-reactions .
Balance each half-reaction for all elements except H and O .
Balance each half-reaction for O by adding H O .
Balance each half-reaction for H by adding H .
Balance each half-reaction for charge by adding electrons .
If necessary , multiply one or both half-reactions so that the number of electrons consumed in one is equal to the number produced in the other .
Add the two half-reactions and simplify .
If the reaction takes place in a basic medium , add OH ions the equation obtained in step 7 to neutralize the H ions ( add in equal numbers to both sides of the equation ) and simplify .
This step not necessary since the solution is stipulated to be acidic .
The balanced equation for the reaction in an acidic solution is then The reaction above results when using relatively diluted nitric acid .
If concentrated nitric acid is used , nitrogen dioxide is produced instead of nitrogen monoxide .
Write a balanced equation for this reaction .
Write skeletal equations for the oxidation and reduction half-reactions .
Balance each half-reaction for all elements except H and O .
Balance each half-reaction for O by adding H O .
Balance each half-reaction for H by adding H .
Balance each half-reaction for charge by adding electrons .
If necessary , multiply one or both half-reactions so that the number of electrons consumed in one is equal to the number produced in the other .
This step is not necessary since the number of electrons is already in balance .
Add the two half-reactions and simplify .
If the reaction takes place in a basic medium , add OH ions the equation obtained in step 7 to neutralize the H ions ( add in equal numbers to both sides of the equation ) and simplify .
Aqueous permanganate ion may also be reduced using aqueous bromide ion , Br , the products of this .
Write the balanced equation for reaction being solid manganese ( IV ) oxide and aqueous bromate ion , BrO this reaction occurring in a basic medium .
A gradual but visually impressive change spontaneously occurs as the initially colorless solution becomes increasingly blue , and the initially smooth copper wire becomes covered with a porous gray solid .
And so , the direct transfer of electrons from the copper wire to the aqueous silver ions is spontaneous under the employed conditions .
A summary of this redox system is provided by these equations : Consider the construction of a device that contains all the reactants and products of a redox system like the one here , but prevents physical contact between the reactants .
Direct transfer of electrons is , therefore , prevented ; transfer , instead , takes place indirectly through an external circuit that contacts the separated reactants .
Devices of this sort are generally referred to as electrochemical cells , and those in which a spontaneous redox reaction takes place are called galvanic cells ( or voltaic cells ) .
A galvanic cell based on the spontaneous reaction between copper and silver ( I ) is depicted in .
The cell is comprised of two half-cells , each containing the redox conjugate pair ( “ couple ” ) of a single reactant .
The halfcell shown at the left contains the Cu ( 0 ) /Cu ( II ) couple in the form of a solid copper foil and an aqueous solution of copper nitrate .
The right half-cell contains the Ag ( I ) /Ag ( 0 ) couple as solid silver foil and an aqueous silver nitrate solution .
An external circuit is connected to each half-cell at its solid foil , meaning the Cu and Ag foil each function as an electrode .
By definition , the anode of an electrochemical cell is the electrode at which oxidation occurs ( in this case , the Cu foil ) and the cathode is the electrode where reduction occurs ( the Ag foil ) .
The redox reactions in a galvanic cell occur only at the interface between each half-cell ’ s reaction mixture and its electrode .
To keep the reactants separate while maintaining charge-balance , the two half-cell solutions are connected by a tube filled with inert electrolyte solution called a salt bridge .
The spontaneous reaction in this cell produces Cu cations in the anode half-cell and consumes Ag ions in the cathode half-cell , resulting in a compensatory flow of inert ions from the salt bridge that maintains charge balance .
Increasing concentrations of Cu in the anode half-cell are balanced by an from the salt bridge , while a flow of Na into the cathode half-cell compensates for the decreasing influx of NO Ag concentration .
Abbreviated symbolism is commonly used to represent a galvanic cell by providing essential information on its composition and structure .
The cell schematic is then written as Notice the cathode half-cell is different from the others considered thus far in that its electrode is comprised of a substance ( Pt ) that is neither a reactant nor a product of the cell reaction .
This is required when neither member of the half-cell ’ s redox couple can reasonably function as an electrode , which must be electrically conductive and in a phase separate from the half-cell solution .
In this case , both members of the redox couple are solute species , and so Pt is used as an inert electrode that can simply provide or accept electrons to redox species in solution .
Electrodes constructed from a member of the redox couple , such as the Mg anode in this cell , are called active electrodes .
A galvanic cell is fabricated by connecting two half-cells with a salt bridge , one in which a chromium wire is immersed in a 1 M CrCl solution and another in which a copper wire is immersed in 1 M CuCl .
Assuming the chromium wire functions as an anode , write the schematic for this cell along with equations for the anode half-reaction , the cathode half-reaction , and the overall cell reaction .
The two species , Ag ( aq ) and Pb ( aq ) , thus show a distinct difference in their redox activity towards copper : the silver ion spontaneously oxidized copper , but the lead ion did not .
Electrochemical cells permit this relative redox activity to be quantified by an easily measured property , potential .
This property is more commonly called voltage when referenced in regard to electrical applications , and it is a measure of energy accompanying the transfer of charge .
Potentials are measured in the volt unit , defined as one joule of energy per one coulomb of charge , V = J/C .
When measured for purposes of electrochemistry , a potential reflects the driving force for a specific type of charge transfer process , namely , the transfer of electrons between redox reactants .
Instead , a half-cell potential may only be assessed relative to that of another half-cell .
It is only the difference in potential between two half-cells that may be measured , and these measured potentials are called cell potentials , E , defined as where E and E are the potentials of two different half-cells functioning as specified in the subscripts .
The assigned potential of the SHE permits the definition of a conveniently measured potential for a single half-cell .
Since the definition of cell potential requires the half-cells function as cathodes , these potentials are sometimes called standard reduction potentials .
This approach to measuring electrode potentials is illustrated in , which depicts a cell comprised of an SHE connected to a copper ( II ) /copper ( 0 ) half-cell under standard-state conditions .
A voltmeter in the external circuit allows measurement of the potential difference between the two half-cells .
Since the Cu half-cell is designated as the cathode in the definition of cell potential , it is connected to the red ( positive ) input of the voltmeter , while the designated SHE anode is connected to the black ( negative ) input .
These connections insure that the sign of the measured potential will be consistent with the sign conventions of electrochemistry per the various definitions discussed above .
A cell potential of +0.337 V is measured , and so Tabulations of E° values for other half-cells measured in a similar fashion are available as reference literature to permit calculations of cell potentials and the prediction of the spontaneity of redox processes .
provides a listing of standard electrode potentials for a selection of half-reactions in numerical order , and a more extensive alphabetical listing is given in .
What is the standard potential of the galvanic cell shown in ?
Answer : −0 .
47 V Thinking carefully about the definitions of cell and electrode potentials and the observations of spontaneous redox change presented thus far , a significant relation is noted .
The previous section described the spontaneous oxidation of copper by aqueous silver ( I ) ions , but no observed reaction with aqueous lead ( II ) ions .
Results of the calculations in have just shown the spontaneous process is described by a positive cell potential while the nonspontaneous process exhibits a negative cell potential .
And so , with regard to the relative effectiveness ( “ strength ” ) with which aqueous Ag and Pb ions oxidize Cu under standard conditions , the stronger oxidant is the one exhibiting the greater standard electrode potential , E° .
Since by convention electrode potentials are for reduction processes , an increased value of E° corresponds to an increased driving force behind the reduction of the species ( hence increased effectiveness of its action as an oxidizing agent on some other species ) .
Negative values for electrode potentials are simply a consequence of assigning a value of 0 V to the SHE , indicating the reactant of the half-reaction is a weaker oxidant than aqueous hydrogen ions .
Predictions regarding the spontaneity of redox reactions under standard state conditions can then be easily made by simply comparing the relative positions of their table entries .
By definition , E ° is positive when E ° > E ° , and so any redox reaction in which the oxidant ’ s entry is above the reductant ’ s entry is predicted to be spontaneous .
Reconsideration of the two redox reactions in provides support for this fact .
Recalling the chapter on thermodynamics , the spontaneities of the forward and reverse reactions of a reversible process show a reciprocal relationship : if a process is spontaneous in one direction , it is non-spontaneous in the opposite direction .
As an indicator of spontaneity for redox reactions , the potential of a cell reaction shows a consequential relationship in its arithmetic sign .
In practice , a voltmeter would report a potential of −0.47 V with its red and black inputs connected to the Pb and Cu electrodes , respectively .
If the inputs were swapped , the reported voltage would be +0.47 V. Are aqueous iron ( II ) ions predicted to spontaneously oxidize elemental chromium under standard state conditions ?
Assume the half-reactions to be those available in .
Supporting this predication by calculating the standard cell potential for this reaction gives The positive value for the standard cell potential indicates the process is spontaneous under standard state conditions .
Use the data in to predict the spontaneity of the oxidation of bromide ion by molecular iodine under standard state conditions , supporting the prediction by calculating the standard cell potential for the reaction .
Repeat for the oxidation of iodide ion by molecular bromine .
The interpretation of potentials as measures of oxidant strength was presented , bringing to mind similar measures of acid-base strength as reflected in equilibrium constants ( see the chapter on acid-base equilibria ) .
The relation between free energy change and standard cell potential confirms the sign conventions and spontaneity criteria previously discussed for both of these properties : spontaneous redox reactions exhibit positive potentials and negative free energy changes .
A summary of the relations between E ° , Δ G ° and K is depicted in , and a table correlating reaction spontaneity to values of these properties is provided in .
Comment on the spontaneity of the forward reaction and the composition of an equilibrium mixture of reactants and products .
The reaction involves an oxidation-reduction reaction , so the standard cell potential can be calculated using the data in .
With n = 2 , the equilibrium constant is then The standard free energy is then The reaction is spontaneous , as indicated by a negative free energy change and a positive cell potential .
The K value is very large , indicating the reaction proceeds to near completion to yield an equilibrium mixture containing mostly products .
What is the standard free energy change and the equilibrium constant for the following reaction at room temperature ?
Is the reaction spontaneous ?
Answer : Spontaneous ; n = 2 ; K = 6.8 10 .
Most of the redox processes that interest science and society do not occur under standard state conditions , and so the potentials of these systems under nonstandard conditions are a property worthy of attention .
Having established the relationship between potential and free energy change in this section , the previously discussed relation between free energy change and reaction mixture composition can be used for this purpose .
Notice the reaction quotient , Q , appears in this equation , making the free energy change dependent upon the composition of the reaction mixture .
Collecting information from and the problem , Notice the negative value of the standard cell potential indicates the process is not spontaneous under standard conditions .
Substitution of the Nernst equation terms for the nonstandard conditions yields : The cell potential remains negative ( slightly ) under the specified conditions , and so the reaction remains nonspontaneous .
For the cell schematic below , identify values for n and Q , and calculate the cell potential , E .
Answer : n = 6 ; Q = 1440 ; E = +1.97 V , spontaneous .
A concentration cell is constructed by connecting two nearly identical half-cells , each based on the same halfreaction and using the same electrode , varying only in the concentration of one redox species .
The potential of a concentration cell , therefore , is determined only by the difference in concentration of the chosen redox species .
The example problem below illustrates the use of the Nernst equation in calculations involving concentration cells .
What is the cell potential of the concentration cell described by From the information given : Substituting into the Nernst equation , The positive value for cell potential indicates the overall cell reaction ( see above ) is spontaneous .
This spontaneous reaction is one in which the zinc ion concentration in the cathode falls ( it is reduced to elemental zinc ) while that in the anode rises ( it is produced by oxidation of the zinc anode ) .
A greater driving force for zinc reduction is present in the cathode , where the zinc ( II ) ion concentration is greater ( E > E ) .
The concentration cell above was allowed to operate until the cell reaction reached equilibrium .
What are the cell potential and the concentrations of zinc ( II ) in each half-cell for the cell now ?
A battery is a galvanic cell that has been specially designed and constructed in a way that best suits its intended use a source of electrical power for specific applications .
Some batteries are designed for single-use applications and can not be recharged ( primary cells ) , while others are based on conveniently reversible cell reactions that allow recharging by an external power source ( secondary cells ) .
This section will provide a summary of the basic electrochemical aspects of several batteries familiar to most consumers , and will introduce a related electrochemical device called a fuel cell that can offer improved performance in certain applications .
A common primary battery is the dry cell , which uses a zinc can as both container and anode ( “ – ” terminal ) and a graphite rod as the cathode ( “ + ” terminal ) .
The Zn can is filled with an electrolyte paste containing manganese ( IV ) oxide , zinc ( II ) chloride , ammonium chloride , and water .
A graphite rod is immersed in the electrolyte paste to complete the cell .
All sizes of dry cells comprise the same components , and so they exhibit the same voltage , but larger cells contain greater amounts of the redox reactants and therefore are capable of transferring correspondingly greater amounts of charge .
Like other galvanic cells , dry cells may be connected in series to yield batteries with greater voltage outputs , if needed .
Alkaline batteries were developed in the 1950s to improve on the performance of the dry cell , and they were designed around the same redox couples .
As their name suggests , these types of batteries use alkaline electrolytes , often potassium hydroxide .
The reactions are An alkaline battery can deliver about three to five times the energy of a zinc-carbon dry cell of similar size .
Alkaline batteries are prone to leaking potassium hydroxide , so they should be removed from devices for long-term storage .
While some alkaline batteries are rechargeable , most are not .
Attempts to recharge an alkaline battery that is not rechargeable often leads to rupture of the battery and leakage of the potassium hydroxide electrolyte .
Nickel-cadmium , or NiCd , batteries consist of a nickel-plated cathode , cadmium-plated anode , and a potassium hydroxide electrode .
The positive and negative plates , which are prevented from shorting by the separator , are rolled together and put into the case .
This is a “ jelly-roll ” design and allows the NiCd cell to deliver much more current than a similar-sized alkaline battery .
The reactions are When properly treated , a NiCd battery can be recharged about 1000 times .
Cadmium is a toxic heavy metal so NiCd batteries should never be ruptured or incinerated , and they should be disposed of in accordance with relevant toxic waste guidelines .
Lithium ion batteries are among the most popular rechargeable batteries and are used in many portable electronic devices .
The lead acid battery is the type of secondary battery commonly used in automobiles .
It is inexpensive and capable of producing the high current required by automobile starter motors .
The reactions for a lead acid battery are Each cell produces 2 V , so six cells are connected in series to produce a 12-V car battery .
Lead acid batteries are heavy and contain a caustic liquid electrolyte , H SO ( aq ) , but are often still the battery of choice because of their high current density .
Since these batteries contain a significant amount of lead , they must always be disposed of properly .
A fuel cell is a galvanic cell that uses traditional combustive fuels , most often hydrogen or methane , that are continuously fed into the cell along with an oxidant .
( An alternative , but not very popular , name for a fuel cell is a flow battery . )
Within the cell , fuel and oxidant undergo the same redox chemistry as when they are combusted , but via a catalyzed electrochemical that is significantly more efficient .
Hydrogen fuel cells are commonly used on extended space missions , and prototypes for personal vehicles have been developed , though the technology remains relatively immature .
By the end of this section , you will be able to : Define corrosion List some of the methods used to prevent or slow corrosion Corrosion is usually defined as the degradation of metals by a naturally occurring electrochemical process .
The formation of rust on iron , tarnish on silver , and the blue-green patina that develops on copper are all examples of corrosion .
The total cost of corrosion remediation in the United States is significant , with estimates in excess of half a trillion dollars a year .
Perhaps the most familiar example of corrosion is the formation of rust on iron .
Iron will rust when it is exposed to oxygen and water .
Rust formation involves the creation of a galvanic cell at an iron surface , as illustrated in .
Unlike the patina on copper , the formation of rust does not create a protective layer and so corrosion of the iron continues as the rust flakes off and exposes fresh iron to the atmosphere .
One way to keep iron from corroding is to keep it painted .
The layer of paint prevents the water and oxygen necessary for rust formation from coming into contact with the iron .
As long as the paint remains intact , the iron is protected from corrosion .
Other strategies include alloying the iron with other metals .
For example , stainless steel is an alloy of iron containing a small amount of chromium .
The chromium tends to collect near the surface , where it corrodes and forms a passivating an oxide layer that protects the iron .
Iron and other metals may also be protected from corrosion by galvanization , a process in which the metal to be protected is coated with a layer of a more readily oxidized metal , usually zinc .
When the zinc layer is intact , it prevents air from contacting the underlying iron and thus prevents corrosion .
If the zinc layer is breached by either corrosion or mechanical abrasion , the iron may still be protected from corrosion by a cathodic protection process , which is described in the next paragraph .
Another important way to protect metal is to make it the cathode in a galvanic cell .
This is cathodic protection and can be used for metals other than just iron .
For example , the rusting of underground iron storage tanks and pipes can be prevented or greatly reduced by connecting them to a more active metal such as zinc or magnesium .
This is also used to protect the metal parts in water heaters .
The more active metals ( lower reduction potential ) are called sacrificial anodes because as they get used up as they corrode ( oxidize ) at the anode .
The metal being protected serves as the cathode for the reduction of oxygen in air , and so it simply serves to conduct ( not react with ) the electrons being transferred .
When the anodes are properly monitored and periodically replaced , the useful lifetime of the iron storage tank can be greatly extended .
In these cells , electrical work is done by a redox system on its surroundings as electrons produced by the redox reaction are transferred through an external circuit .
This final section of the chapter will address an alternative scenario in which an external circuit does work on a redox system by imposing a voltage sufficient to drive an otherwise nonspontaneous reaction , a process known as electrolysis .
A familiar example of electrolysis is recharging a battery , which involves use of an external power source to drive the spontaneous ( discharge ) cell reaction in the reverse direction , restoring to some extent the composition of the half-cells and the voltage of the battery .
Perhaps less familiar is the use of electrolysis in the refinement of metallic ores , the manufacture of commodity chemicals , and the electroplating of metallic coatings on various products ( e.g. , jewelry , utensils , auto parts ) .
To illustrate the essential concepts of electrolysis , a few specific processes will be considered .
Metallic sodium , Na , and chlorine gas , Cl , are used in numerous applications , and their industrial production relies on the large-scale electrolysis of molten sodium chloride , NaCl ( l ) .
The industrial process typically uses a Downs cell similar to the simplified illustration shown in .
The reactions associated with this process are : The cell potential for the above process is negative , indicating the reaction as written ( decomposition of liquid NaCl ) is not spontaneous .
To force this reaction , a positive potential of magnitude greater than the negative cell potential must be applied to the cell .
Water may be electrolytically decomposed in a cell similar to the one illustrated in .
To improve electrical conductivity without introducing a different redox species , the hydrogen ion concentration of the water is typically increased by addition of a strong acid .
Therefore , at best , calculated cell potentials should be considered ballpark estimates .
When aqueous solutions of ionic compounds are electrolyzed , the anode and cathode half-reactions may involve the electrolysis of either water species ( H O , H , OH ) or solute species ( the cations and anions of the compound ) .
Thermodynamics thus predicts that water would be more readily oxidized , though in practice it is observed that both water and chloride ion are oxidized under typical conditions , producing a mixture of oxygen and chlorine gas .
Turning attention to the cathode , the possibilities for reduction are : Comparison of these standard half-reaction potentials suggests the reduction of hydrogen ion is thermodynamically favored .
However , in a neutral aqueous sodium chloride solution , the concentration of hydrogen ion is far below the standard state value of 1 M ( approximately 10 M ) , and so the observed cathode reaction is actually reduction of water .
The net cell reaction in this case is then This electrolysis reaction is part of the chlor-alkali process used by industry to produce chlorine and sodium hydroxide ( lye ) .
Electrical current is defined as the rate of flow for any charged species .
Most relevant to this discussion is the flow of electrons .
Current is measured in a composite unit called an ampere , defined as one coulomb per second ( A = 1 C/ s ) .
For example , the generic reduction process involves the transfer of n mole of electrons .
The charge transferred is , therefore , where F is Faraday ’ s constant , the charge in coulombs for one mole of electrons .
If the reaction takes place in an electrochemical cell , the current flow is conveniently measured , and it may be used to assist in stoichiometric calculations related to the cell reaction .
In one process used for electroplating silver , a current of 10.23 A was passed through an electrolytic cell for exactly 1 hour .
How many moles of electrons passed through the cell ?
What mass of silver was deposited at the cathode from the silver nitrate solution ?
Faraday ’ s constant can be used to convert the charge ( Q ) into moles of electrons ( n ) .
What is the half-reaction at the cathode ?
What mass of aluminum metal would be recovered if a current of 25.0 A passed through the solution for 15.0 minutes ?
Answer : 0.0777 mol Al = 2.10 g Al .
In one application , a 0.010-mm layer of chromium must be deposited on a part with a total surface area of 3.3 m from a solution of containing chromium ( III ) ions .
How long would it take to deposit the layer of chromium if the current was 33.46 A ?
The density of chromium ( metal ) is 7.19 g/cm .
If the zinc comes from a solution of Zn ( NO ) and the current is 25.5 A , how long will it take to galvanize the top of the iron ?
The density of zinc is 7.140 g/cm .
Answer : 11.8 kg Zn requires 382 hours .
The development of the periodic table in the mid-1800s came from observations that there was a periodic relationship between the properties of the elements .
Chemists , who have an understanding of the variations of these properties , have been able to use this knowledge to solve a wide variety of technical challenges .
For example , silicon and other semiconductors form the backbone of modern electronics because of our ability to fine-tune the electrical properties of these materials .
This chapter explores important properties of representative metals , metalloids , and nonmetals in the periodic table .
By the end of this section , you will be able to : Classify elements Make predictions about the periodicity properties of the representative elements We begin this section by examining the behaviors of representative metals in relation to their positions in the periodic table .
The primary focus of this section will be the application of periodicity to the representative metals .
It is possible to divide elements into groups according to their electron configurations .
The representative elements are elements where the s and p orbitals are filling .
The transition elements are elements where the d orbitals ( groups 3–11 on the periodic table ) are filling , and the inner transition metals are the elements where the f orbitals are filling .
The d orbitals fill with the elements in group 11 ; therefore , the elements in group 12 qualify as representative elements because the last electron enters an s orbital .
Metals among the representative elements are the representative metals .
Metallic character results from an element ’ s ability to lose its outer valence electrons and results in high thermal and electrical conductivity , among other physical and chemical properties .
There are 20 nonradioactive representative metals in groups 1 , 2 , 3 , 12 , 13 , 14 , and 15 of the periodic table ( the elements shaded in yellow in ) .
The radioactive elements copernicium , flerovium , polonium , and livermorium are also metals but are beyond the scope of this chapter .
In addition to the representative metals , some of the representative elements are metalloids .
A metalloid is an element that has properties that are between those of metals and nonmetals ; these elements are typically semiconductors .
The remaining representative elements are nonmetals .
Unlike metals , which typically form cations and ionic compounds ( containing ionic bonds ) , nonmetals tend to form anions or molecular compounds .
In general , the combination of a metal and a nonmetal produces a salt .
A salt is an ionic compound consisting of cations and anions .
Most of the representative metals do not occur naturally in an uncombined state because they readily react with water and oxygen in the air .
However , it is possible to isolate elemental beryllium , magnesium , zinc , cadmium , mercury , aluminum , tin , and lead from their naturally occurring minerals and use them because they react very slowly with air .
Part of the reason why these elements react slowly is that these elements react with air to form a protective coating .
The formation of this protective coating is passivation .
The coating is a nonreactive film of oxide or some other compound .
Elemental magnesium , aluminum , zinc , and tin are important in the fabrication of many familiar items , including wire , cookware , foil , and many household and personal objects .
Although beryllium , cadmium , mercury , and lead are readily available , there are limitations in their use because of their toxicity .
The alkali metals lithium , sodium , potassium , rubidium , cesium , and francium constitute group 1 of the periodic table .
Although hydrogen is in group 1 ( and also in group 17 ) , it is a nonmetal and deserves separate consideration later in this chapter .
The name alkali metal is in reference to the fact that these metals and their oxides react with water to form very basic ( alkaline ) solutions .
The properties of the alkali metals are similar to each other as expected for elements in the same family .
The alkali metals have the largest atomic radii and the lowest first ionization energy in their periods .
This combination makes it very easy to remove the single electron in the outermost ( valence ) shell of each .
The easy loss of this valence electron means that these metals readily form stable cations with a charge of 1+ .
Their reactivity increases with increasing atomic number due to the ease of losing the lone valence electron ( decreasing ionization energy ) .
Since oxidation is so easy , the reverse , reduction , is difficult , which explains why it is hard to isolate the elements .
The solid alkali metals are very soft ; lithium , shown in , has the lowest density of any metal ( 0.5 g/cm ) .
The alkali metals all react vigorously with water to form hydrogen gas and a basic solution of the metal hydroxide .
This means they are easier to oxidize than is hydrogen .
As an example , the reaction of lithium with water is : Alkali metals react directly with all the nonmetals ( except the noble gases ) to yield binary ionic compounds containing 1+ metal ions .
These metals are so reactive that it is necessary to avoid contact with both moisture and oxygen in the air .
Therefore , they are stored in sealed containers under mineral oil , as shown in , to prevent contact with air and moisture .
The pure metals never exist free ( uncombined ) in nature due to their high reactivity .
In addition , this high reactivity makes it necessary to prepare the metals by electrolysis of alkali metal compounds .
Unlike many other metals , the reactivity and softness of the alkali metals make these metals unsuitable for structural applications .
However , there are applications where the reactivity of the alkali metals is an advantage .
For example , the production of metals such as titanium and zirconium relies , in part , on the ability of sodium to reduce compounds of these metals .
The manufacture of many organic compounds , including certain dyes , drugs , and perfumes , utilizes reduction by lithium or sodium .
Sodium and its compounds impart a bright yellow color to a flame , as seen in .
Passing an electrical discharge through sodium vapor also produces this color .
In both cases , this is an example of an emission spectrum as discussed in the chapter on electronic structure .
Streetlights sometime employ sodium vapor lights because the sodium vapor penetrates fog better than most other light .
This is because the fog does not scatter yellow light as much as it scatters white light .
The other alkali metals and their salts also impart color to a flame .
Lithium creates a bright , crimson color , whereas the others create a pale , violet color .
The alkaline earth metals ( beryllium , magnesium , calcium , strontium , barium , and radium ) constitute group 2 of the periodic table .
The name alkaline metal comes from the fact that the oxides of the heavier members of the group react with water to form alkaline solutions .
The nuclear charge increases when going from group 1 to group 2 .
Because of this charge increase , the atoms of the alkaline earth metals are smaller and have higher first ionization energies than the alkali metals within the same period .
The higher ionization energy makes the alkaline earth metals less reactive than the alkali metals ; however , they are still very reactive elements .
Their reactivity increases , as expected , with increasing size and decreasing ionization energy .
In chemical reactions , these metals readily lose both valence electrons to form compounds in which they exhibit an oxidation state of 2+ .
Due to their high reactivity , it is common to produce the alkaline earth metals , like the alkali metals , by electrolysis .
Even though the ionization energies are low , the two metals with the highest ionization energies ( beryllium and magnesium ) do form compounds that exhibit some covalent characters .
Like the alkali metals , the heavier alkaline earth metals impart color to a flame .
As in the case of the alkali metals , this is part of the emission spectrum of these elements .
Calcium and strontium produce shades of red , whereas barium produces a green color .
Magnesium is a silver-white metal that is malleable and ductile at high temperatures .
Passivation decreases the reactivity of magnesium metal .
Upon exposure to air , a tightly adhering layer of magnesium oxycarbonate forms on the surface of the metal and inhibits further reaction .
( The carbonate comes from the reaction of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere . )
Magnesium is the lightest of the widely used structural metals , which is why most magnesium production is for lightweight alloys .
Magnesium ( shown in ) , calcium , strontium , and barium react with water and air .
At room temperature , barium shows the most vigorous reaction .
The products of the reaction with water are hydrogen and the metal hydroxide .
The formation of hydrogen gas indicates that the heavier alkaline earth metals are better reducing agents ( more easily oxidized ) than is hydrogen .
As expected , these metals react with both acids and nonmetals to form ionic compounds .
Unlike most salts of the alkali metals , many of the common salts of the alkaline earth metals are insoluble in water because of the high lattice energies of these compounds , containing a divalent metal ion .
The potent reducing power of hot magnesium is useful in preparing some metals from their oxides .
Indeed , magnesium ’ s affinity for oxygen is so great that burning magnesium reacts with carbon dioxide , producing elemental carbon : For this reason , a CO fire extinguisher will not extinguish a magnesium fire .
Additionally , the brilliant white light emitted by burning magnesium makes it useful in flares and fireworks .
The elements in group 12 are transition elements ; however , the last electron added is not a d electron , but an s electron .
Since the last electron added is an s electron , these elements qualify as representative metals , or post-transition metals .
The group 12 elements behave more like the alkaline earth metals than transition metals .
Group 12 contains the four elements zinc , cadmium , mercury , and copernicium .
Each of these elements has two electrons in its outer shell ( ns ) .
When atoms of these metals form cations with a charge of 2+ , where the two outer electrons are lost , they have pseudo-noble gas electron configurations .
Mercury is sometimes an exception because it also exhibits an oxidation ion .
In their elemental forms and in compounds , cadmium state of 1+ in compounds that contain a diatomic and mercury are both toxic .
Zinc is the most reactive in group 12 , and mercury is the least reactive .
( This is the reverse of the reactivity trend of the metals of groups 1 and 2 , in which reactivity increases down a group .
The increase in reactivity with increasing atomic number only occurs for the metals in groups 1 and 2 . )
The decreasing reactivity is due to the formation of ions with a pseudo-noble gas configuration and to other factors that are beyond the scope of this discussion .
The chemical behaviors of zinc and cadmium are quite similar to each other but differ from that of mercury .
Zinc and cadmium have lower reduction potentials than hydrogen , and , like the alkali metals and alkaline earth metals , they will produce hydrogen gas when they react with acids .
The reaction of zinc with hydrochloric acid , shown in , is : Zinc is a silvery metal that quickly tarnishes to a blue-gray appearance .
This change in color is due to an adherent coating of a basic carbonate , Zn ( OH ) CO , which passivates the metal to inhibit further corrosion .
Dry cell and alkaline batteries contain a zinc anode .
Brass ( Cu and Zn ) and some bronze ( Cu , Sn , and sometimes Zn ) are important zinc alloys .
About half of zinc production serves to protect iron and other metals from corrosion .
This protection may take the form of a sacrificial anode ( also known as a galvanic anode , which is a means of providing cathodic protection for various metals ) or as a thin coating on the protected metal .
Galvanized steel is steel with a protective coating of zinc .
Mercury is very different from zinc and cadmium .
Mercury is the only metal that is liquid at 25 °C .
Many metals dissolve in mercury , forming solutions called amalgams ( see the feature on Amalgams ) , which are alloys of mercury with one or more other metals .
Mercury , shown in , is a nonreactive element that is more difficult to oxidize than hydrogen .
Thus , it does not displace hydrogen from acids ; however , it will react with strong oxidizing acids , such as nitric acid : The clear NO initially formed quickly undergoes further oxidation to the reddish brown NO .
Most mercury compounds decompose when heated .
Most mercury compounds contain mercury with a 2+-oxidation ion .
When there is a large excess of mercury , it is possible to form compounds containing the mercury compounds are toxic , and it is necessary to exercise great care in their synthesis .
Group 13 contains the metalloid boron and the metals aluminum , gallium , indium , and thallium .
The lightest element , boron , is semiconducting , and its binary compounds tend to be covalent and not ionic .
The remaining elements of the group are metals , but their oxides and hydroxides change characters .
The oxides and hydroxides of aluminum and gallium exhibit both acidic and basic behaviors .
A substance , such as these two , that will react with both acids and bases is amphoteric .
This characteristic illustrates the combination of nonmetallic and metallic behaviors of these two elements .
Indium and thallium oxides and hydroxides exhibit only basic behavior , in accordance with the clearly metallic character of these two elements .
The melting point of gallium is unusually low ( about 30 °C ) and will melt in your hand .
Aluminum is amphoteric because it will react with both acids and bases .
A typical reaction with an acid is : The products of the reaction of aluminum with a base depend upon the reaction conditions , with the following being one possibility : With both acids and bases , the reaction with aluminum generates hydrogen gas .
The group 13 elements have a valence shell electron configuration of ns np .
Aluminum normally uses all of its valence electrons when it reacts , giving compounds in which it has an oxidation state of 3+ .
Although many of these compounds are covalent , others , such as AlF and Al ( SO ) , are ionic .
Aqueous solutions of aluminum salts abbreviated as Al ( aq ) .
Gallium , indium , and thallium also form ionic compounds contain the cation containing M ions .
These three elements exhibit not only the expected oxidation state of 3+ from the three valence electrons but also an oxidation state ( in this case , 1+ ) that is two below the expected value .
This phenomenon , the inert pair effect , refers to the formation of a stable ion with an oxidation state two lower than expected for the group .
The pair of electrons is the valence s orbital for those elements .
In general , the inert pair effect is important for the lower p -block elements .
In an aqueous solution , the Tl ( aq ) ion is more stable than is Tl ( aq ) .
In general , these metals will react with air and water to form 3+ ions ; however , thallium reacts to give thallium ( I ) derivatives .
The metals of group 13 all react directly with nonmetals such as sulfur , phosphorus , and the halogens , forming binary compounds .
The metals of group 13 ( Al , Ga , In , and Tl ) are all reactive .
However , passivation occurs as a tough , hard , thin film of the metal oxide forms upon exposure to air .
Disruption of this film may counter the passivation , allowing the metal to react .
One way to disrupt the film is to expose the passivated metal to mercury .
Some of the metal dissolves in the mercury to form an amalgam , which sheds the protective oxide layer to expose the metal to further reaction .
The formation of an amalgam allows the metal to react with air and water .
The most important uses of aluminum are in the construction and transportation industries , and in the manufacture of aluminum cans and aluminum foil .
These uses depend on the lightness , toughness , and strength of the metal , as well as its resistance to corrosion .
Because aluminum is an excellent conductor of heat and resists corrosion , it is useful in the manufacture of cooking utensils .
Aluminum is a very good reducing agent and may replace other reducing agents in the isolation of certain metals from their oxides .
Although more expensive than reduction by carbon , aluminum is important in the isolation of Mo , W , and Cr from their oxides .
The metallic members of group 14 are tin , lead , and flerovium .
Carbon is a typical nonmetal .
The remaining elements of the group , silicon and germanium , are examples of semimetals or metalloids .
Tin and lead form the stable divalent cations , Sn and Pb , with oxidation states two below the group oxidation state of 4+ .
The stability of this oxidation state is a consequence of the inert pair effect .
Tin and lead also form covalent compounds with a formal 4+-oxidation state .
For example , SnCl and PbCl are low-boiling covalent liquids .
Lead is less reactive .
It is only slightly easier to oxidize than hydrogen , and oxidation normally requires a hot concentrated acid .
Many of these elements exist as allotropes .
Allotropes are two or more forms of the same element in the same physical state with different chemical and physical properties .
There are two common allotropes of tin .
These allotropes are grey ( brittle ) tin and white tin .
As with other allotropes , the difference between these forms of tin is in the arrangement of the atoms .
White tin is stable above 13.2 °C and is malleable like other metals .
At low temperatures , gray tin is the more stable form .
Gray tin is brittle and tends to break down to a powder .
Consequently , articles made of tin will disintegrate in cold weather , particularly if the cold spell is lengthy .
The change progresses slowly from the spot of origin , and the gray tin that is first formed catalyzes further change .
In a way , this effect is similar to the spread of an infection in a plant or animal body , leading people to call this process tin disease or tin pest .
The principal use of tin is in the coating of steel to form tin plate-sheet iron , which constitutes the tin in tin cans .
Important tin alloys are bronze ( Cu and Sn ) and solder ( Sn and Pb ) .
Lead is important in the lead storage batteries in automobiles .
Bismuth , the heaviest member of group 15 , is a less reactive metal than the other representative metals .
It readily gives up three of its five valence electrons to active nonmetals to form the tri-positive ion , Bi .
It forms compounds with the group oxidation state of 5+ only when treated with strong oxidizing agents .
The stability of the 3+-oxidation state is another example of the inert pair effect .
However , compounds that contain ions of most representative metals are abundant .
In this section , we will consider the two common techniques used to isolate the metals from these compounds—electrolysis and chemical reduction .
These metals primarily occur in minerals , with lithium found in silicate or phosphate minerals , and sodium and potassium found in salt deposits from evaporation of ancient seas and in silicates .
The alkaline earth metals occur as silicates and , with the exception of beryllium , as carbonates and sulfates .
Beryllium occurs as the mineral beryl , Be Al Si O , which , with certain impurities , may be either the gemstone emerald or aquamarine .
Magnesium is in seawater and , along with the heavier alkaline earth metals , occurs as silicates , carbonates , and sulfates .
Aluminum occurs abundantly in many types of clay and in bauxite , an impure aluminum oxide hydroxide .
The principle tin ore is the oxide cassiterite , SnO , and the principle lead and thallium ores are the sulfides or the products of weathering of the sulfides .
The remaining representative metals occur as impurities in zinc or aluminum ores .
Ions of metals in of groups 1 and 2 , along with aluminum , are very difficult to reduce ; therefore , it is necessary to prepare these elements by electrolysis , an important process discussed in the chapter on electrochemistry .
Briefly , electrolysis involves using electrical energy to drive unfavorable chemical reactions to completion ; it is useful in the isolation of reactive metals in their pure forms .
Sodium , aluminum , and magnesium are typical examples .
The most important method for the production of sodium is the electrolysis of molten sodium chloride ; the set-up is a Downs cell , shown in .
The reaction involved in this process is : The electrolysis cell contains molten sodium chloride ( melting point 801 °C ) , to which calcium chloride has been added to lower the melting point to 600 °C ( a colligative effect ) .
The passage of a direct current through the cell causes the sodium ions to migrate to the negatively charged cathode and pick up electrons , reducing the ions to sodium metal .
Chloride ions migrate to the positively charged anode , lose electrons , and undergo oxidation to chlorine gas .
The overall cell reaction comes from adding the following reactions : Separation of the molten sodium and chlorine prevents recombination .
The liquid sodium , which is less dense than molten sodium chloride , floats to the surface and flows into a collector .
The gaseous chlorine goes to storage tanks .
Chlorine is also a valuable product .
The preparation of aluminum utilizes a process invented in 1886 by Charles M. Hall , who began to work on the problem while a student at Oberlin College in Ohio .
Paul L. T. Héroult discovered the process independently a month or two later in France .
In honor to the two inventors , this electrolysis cell is known as the Hall–Héroult cell .
The Hall–Héroult cell is an electrolysis cell for the production of aluminum .
illustrates the Hall–Héroult cell .
The production of aluminum begins with the purification of bauxite , the most common source of aluminum .
Heating the hydroxide produces aluminum oxide , Al O , which dissolves in a molten mixture of cryolite , Na AlF , and calcium fluoride , CaF .
Electrolysis of this solution takes place in a cell like that shown in .
Reduction of aluminum ions to the metal occurs at the cathode , while oxygen , carbon monoxide , and carbon dioxide form at the anode .
Magnesium is the other metal is isolated in large quantities by electrolysis .
Seawater , which contains approximately 0.5 % magnesium chloride , serves as the major source of magnesium .
Addition of calcium hydroxide to seawater precipitates magnesium hydroxide .
The addition of hydrochloric acid to magnesium hydroxide , followed by evaporation of the resultant aqueous solution , leaves pure magnesium chloride .
The electrolysis of molten magnesium chloride forms liquid magnesium and chlorine gas : that Some production facilities have moved away from electrolysis completely .
In the next section , we will see how the Pidgeon process leads to the chemical reduction of magnesium .
It is possible to isolate many of the representative metals by chemical reduction using other elements as reducing agents .
In general , chemical reduction is much less expensive than electrolysis , and for this reason , chemical reduction is the method of choice for the isolation of these elements .
For example , it is possible to produce potassium , rubidium , and cesium by chemical reduction , as it is possible to reduce the molten chlorides of these metals with sodium metal .
This may be surprising given that these metals are more reactive than sodium ; however , the metals formed are more volatile than sodium and can be distilled for collection .
The removal of the metal vapor leads to a shift in the equilibrium to produce more metal ( see how reactions can be driven in the discussions of Le Châtelier ’ s principle in the chapter on fundamental equilibrium concepts ) .
The production of magnesium , zinc , and tin provide additional examples of chemical reduction .
Over 75 % of the world ’ s production of magnesium , primarily in China , comes from this process .
Zinc ores usually contain zinc sulfide , zinc oxide , or zinc carbonate .
This zinc contains impurities of cadmium ( 767 °C ) , iron ( 2862 °C ) , lead ( 1750 °C ) , and arsenic ( 613 °C ) .
Careful redistillation produces pure zinc .
Arsenic and cadmium are distilled from the zinc because they have lower boiling points .
At higher temperatures , the zinc is distilled from the other impurities , mainly lead and iron .
The ready reduction of tin ( IV ) oxide by the hot coals of a campfire accounts for the knowledge of tin in the ancient world .
In the modern process , the roasting of tin ores containing SnO removes contaminants such as arsenic and sulfur as volatile oxides .
Treatment of the remaining material with hydrochloric acid removes the oxides of other metals .
Heating the purified ore with carbon at temperature above 1000 °C produces tin : The molten tin collects at the bottom of the furnace and is drawn off and cast into blocks .
The metalloids are boron , silicon , germanium , arsenic , antimony , and tellurium .
These elements look metallic ; however , they do not conduct electricity as well as metals so they are semiconductors .
They are semiconductors because their electrons are more tightly bound to their nuclei than are those of metallic conductors .
Their chemical behavior falls between that of metals and nonmetals .
For example , the pure metalloids form covalent crystals like the nonmetals , but like the metals , they generally do not form monatomic anions .
This intermediate behavior is in part due to their intermediate electronegativity values .
In this section , we will briefly discuss the chemical behavior of metalloids and deal with two of these elements—boron and silicon—in more detail .
The metalloid boron exhibits many similarities to its neighbor carbon and its diagonal neighbor silicon .
All three elements form covalent compounds .
However , boron has one distinct difference in that its 2 s 2 p outer electron structure gives it one less valence electron than it has valence orbitals .
Although boron exhibits an oxidation state of 3+ in most of its stable compounds , this electron deficiency provides boron with the ability to form other , sometimes fractional , oxidation states , which occur , for example , in the boron hydrides .
Silicon has the valence shell electron configuration 3 s 3 p , and it commonly forms tetrahedral structures in which it is sp hybridized with a formal oxidation state of 4+ .
The major differences between the chemistry of carbon and silicon result from the relative strength of the carbon-carbon bond , carbon ’ s ability to form stable bonds to itself , and the presence of the empty 3 d valence-shell orbitals in silicon .
Silicon ’ s empty d orbitals and boron ’ s empty p orbital enable tetrahedral silicon compounds and trigonal planar boron compounds to act as Lewis acids .
Carbon , on the other hand , has no available valence shell orbitals ; tetrahedral carbon compounds can not act as Lewis acids .
Germanium is very similar to silicon in its chemical behavior .
Arsenic and antimony generally form compounds in which an oxidation state of 3+ or 5+ is exhibited ; however , arsenic can form arsenides with an oxidation state of 3− .
These elements tarnish only slightly in dry air but readily oxidize when warmed .
Tellurium combines directly with most elements .
The most stable tellurium compounds are the tellurides—salts of Te formed with active metals and lanthanides—and compounds with oxygen , fluorine , and chlorine , in which tellurium normally exhibits an oxidation state 2+ or 4+ .
Although tellurium ( VI ) compounds are known ( for example , TeF ) , there is a marked resistance to oxidation to this maximum group oxidation state .
Covalent bonding is the key to the crystal structures of the metalloids .
In this regard , these elements resemble nonmetals in their behavior .
Elemental silicon , germanium , arsenic , antimony , and tellurium are lustrous , metallic-looking solids .
Silicon and germanium crystallize with a diamond structure .
Each atom within the crystal has covalent bonds to four neighboring atoms at the corners of a regular tetrahedron .
Single crystals of silicon and germanium are giant , three-dimensional molecules .
There are several allotropes of arsenic with the most stable being layer like and containing puckered sheets of arsenic atoms .
Each arsenic atom forms covalent bonds to three other atoms within the sheet .
The crystal structure of antimony is similar to that of arsenic , both shown in .
The structures of arsenic and antimony are similar to the structure of graphite , covered later in this chapter .
Tellurium forms crystals that contain infinite spiral chains of tellurium atoms .
Each atom in the chain bonds to two other atoms .
Pure crystalline boron is transparent .
The crystals consist of icosahedra , as shown in , with a boron atom at each corner .
In the most common form of boron , the icosahedra pack together in a manner similar to the cubic closest packing of spheres .
All boron-boron bonds within each icosahedron are identical and are approximately 176 pm in length .
In the different forms of boron , there are different arrangements and connections between the icosahedra .
The name silicon is derived from the Latin word for flint , silex .
The metalloid silicon readily forms compounds containing Si-O-Si bonds , which are of prime importance in the mineral world .
This bonding capability is in contrast to the nonmetal carbon , whose ability to form carbon-carbon bonds gives it prime importance in the plant and animal worlds .
Boron constitutes less than 0.001 % by weight of the earth ’ s crust .
In nature , it only occurs in compounds with oxygen .
At higher temperatures , boron reacts with all nonmetals , except tellurium and the noble gases , and with nearly all metals ; it oxidizes to B O when heated with concentrated nitric or sulfuric acid .
Boron does not react with nonoxidizing acids .
Many boron compounds react readily with water to give boric acid , B ( OH ) ( sometimes written as H BO ) .
Reduction of boric oxide with magnesium powder forms boron ( 95–98.5 % pure ) as a brown , amorphous powder : An amorphous substance is a material that appears to be a solid , but does not have a long-range order like a true solid .
Treatment with hydrochloric acid removes the magnesium oxide .
Further purification of the boron begins with conversion of the impure boron into boron trichloride .
The next step is to heat a mixture of boron trichloride and hydrogen : Silicon makes up nearly one-fourth of the mass of the earth ’ s crust—second in abundance only to oxygen .
The crust is composed almost entirely of minerals in which the silicon atoms are at the center of the silicon-oxygen tetrahedron , which connect in a variety of ways to produce , among other things , chains , layers , and three-dimensional frameworks .
These minerals constitute the bulk of most common rocks , soil , and clays .
In addition , materials such as bricks , ceramics , and glasses contain silicon compounds .
It is possible to produce silicon by the high-temperature reduction of silicon dioxide with strong reducing agents , such as carbon and magnesium : Extremely pure silicon is necessary for the manufacture of semiconductor electronic devices .
This process begins with the conversion of impure silicon into silicon tetrahalides , or silane ( SiH ) , followed by decomposition at high temperatures .
Zone refining , illustrated in , completes the purification .
In this method , a rod of silicon is heated at one end by a heat source that produces a thin cross-section of molten silicon .
Slowly lowering the rod through the heat source moves the molten zone from one end of the rod to other .
As this thin , molten region moves , impurities in the silicon dissolve in the liquid silicon and move with the molten region .
Ultimately , the impurities move to one end of the rod , which is then cut off .
This highly purified silicon , containing no more than one part impurity per million parts of silicon , is the most important element in the computer industry .
Pure silicon is necessary in semiconductor electronic devices such as transistors , computer chips , and solar cells .
Like some metals , passivation of silicon occurs due the formation of a very thin film of oxide ( primarily silicon dioxide , SiO ) .
Silicon dioxide is soluble in hot aqueous base ; thus , strong bases destroy the passivation .
Removal of the passivation layer allows the base to dissolve the silicon , forming hydrogen gas and silicate anions .
For example : Silicon reacts with halogens at high temperatures , forming volatile tetrahalides , such as SiF .
Unlike carbon , silicon does not readily form double or triple bonds .
Silicon compounds of the general formula SiX , where X is a highly electronegative group , can act as Lewis acids to form six-coordinate silicon .
Depending on the stoichiometry , it forms antimony ( III ) sulfide , Sb S , or antimony ( V ) sulfide when heated with sulfur .
As expected , the metallic nature of the element is greater than that of arsenic , which lies immediately above it in group 15 .
Boron trihalides—BF , BCl , BBr , and BI —can be prepared by the direct reaction of the elements .
These nonpolar molecules contain boron with sp hybridization and a trigonal planar molecular geometry .
The fluoride and chloride compounds are colorless gasses , the bromide is a liquid , and the iodide is a white crystalline solid .
Except for boron trifluoride , the boron trihalides readily hydrolyze in water to form boric acid and the corresponding hydrohalic acid .
Silicon tetrachloride can be prepared by direct chlorination at elevated temperatures or by heating silicon dioxide with chlorine and carbon : Silicon tetrachloride is a covalent tetrahedral molecule , which is a nonpolar , low-boiling ( 57 °C ) , colorless liquid .
It is possible to prepare silicon tetrafluoride by the reaction of silicon dioxide with hydrofluoric acid : Hydrofluoric acid is the only common acid that will react with silicon dioxide or silicates .
This reaction occurs because the silicon-fluorine bond is the only bond that silicon forms that is stronger than the silicon-oxygen bond .
For this reason , it is possible to store all common acids , other than hydrofluoric acid , in glass containers .
Except for silicon tetrafluoride , silicon halides are extremely sensitive to water .
Upon exposure to water , SiCl reacts rapidly with hydroxide groups , replacing all four chlorine atoms to produce unstable orthosilicic acid , Si ( OH ) or H SiO , which slowly decomposes into SiO .
Boron burns at 700 °C in oxygen , forming boric oxide , B O .
Boric oxide is necessary for the production of heatresistant borosilicate glass , like that shown in and certain optical glasses .
Boric oxide dissolves in hot water to form boric acid , B ( OH ) : The boron atom in B ( OH ) is sp hybridized and is located at the center of an equilateral triangle with oxygen atoms at the corners .
In solid B ( OH ) , hydrogen bonding holds these triangular units together .
At about 150 °C , additional B-O-B linkages form , connecting the BO groups together with shared oxygen atoms to form tetraboric acid , H B O .
Complete water loss , at still higher temperatures , results in boric oxide .
Borates are salts of the oxyacids of boron .
Borates result from the reactions of a base with an oxyacid or from the fusion of boric acid or boric oxide with a metal oxide or hydroxide .
Borate anions range from the simple ion to complex species containing chains and rings of threeand four-coordinated boron trigonal planar atoms .
Commercially , the most important borate is borax , Na [ B O ( OH ) ] 8H O , which is an important component of some laundry detergents .
Most of the supply of borax comes directly from dry lakes , such as Searles Lake in California , or is prepared from kernite , Na B O 4H O .
Silicon dioxide , silica , occurs in both crystalline and amorphous forms .
The usual crystalline form of silicon dioxide is quartz , a hard , brittle , clear , colorless solid .
It is useful in many ways—for architectural decorations , semiprecious jewels , and frequency control in radio transmitters .
Silica takes many crystalline forms , or polymorphs , in nature .
Trace amounts of Fe in quartz give amethyst its characteristic purple color .
The term quartz is also used for articles such as tubing and lenses that are manufactured from amorphous silica .
Opal is a naturally occurring form of amorphous silica .
The contrast in structure and physical properties between silicon dioxide and carbon dioxide is interesting , as illustrated in .
Solid carbon dioxide ( dry ice ) contains single CO molecules with each of the two oxygen atoms attached to the carbon atom by double bonds .
Very weak intermolecular forces hold the molecules together in the crystal .
The volatility of dry ice reflect these weak forces between molecules .
In contrast , silicon dioxide is a covalent network solid .
In silicon dioxide , each silicon atom links to four oxygen atoms by single bonds directed toward the corners of a regular tetrahedron , and SiO tetrahedra share oxygen atoms .
This arrangement gives a three dimensional , continuous , silicon-oxygen network .
A quartz crystal is a macromolecule of silicon dioxide .
The difference between these two compounds is the ability of the group 14 elements to form strong π bonds .
Secondperiod elements , such as carbon , form very strong π bonds , which is why carbon dioxide forms small molecules with strong double bonds .
Elements below the second period , such as silicon , do not form π bonds as readily as secondperiod elements , and when they do form , the π bonds are weaker than those formed by second-period elements .
For this reason , silicon dioxide does not contain π bonds but only σ bonds .
At 1600 °C , quartz melts to yield a viscous liquid .
When the liquid cools , it does not crystallize readily but usually supercools and forms a glass , also called silica .
The SiO tetrahedra in glassy silica have a random arrangement characteristic of supercooled liquids , and the glass has some very useful properties .
Silica is highly transparent to both visible and ultraviolet light .
For this reason , it is important in the manufacture of lamps that give radiation rich in ultraviolet light and in certain optical instruments that operate with ultraviolet light .
The coefficient of expansion of silica glass is very low ; therefore , rapid temperature changes do not cause it to fracture .
CorningWare and other ceramic cookware contain amorphous silica .
Silicates are salts containing anions composed of silicon and oxygen .
In nearly all silicates , sp -hybridized silicon atoms occur at the centers of tetrahedra with oxygen at the corners .
There is a variation in the silicon-to-oxygen ratio that occurs because silicon-oxygen tetrahedra may exist as discrete , independent units or may share oxygen atoms at corners in a variety of ways .
In addition , the presence of a variety of cations gives rise to the large number of silicate minerals .
Many ceramics are composed of silicates .
By including small amounts of other compounds , it is possible to modify the physical properties of the silicate materials to produce ceramics with useful characteristics .
By the end of this section , you will be able to : Describe structure and properties of nonmetals The nonmetals are elements located in the upper right portion of the periodic table .
Their properties and behavior are quite different from those of metals on the left side .
Under normal conditions , more than half of the nonmetals are gases , one is a liquid , and the rest include some of the softest and hardest of solids .
The nonmetals exhibit a rich variety of chemical behaviors .
They include the most reactive and least reactive of elements , and they form many different ionic and covalent compounds .
This section presents an overview of the properties and chemical behaviors of the nonmetals , as well as the chemistry of specific elements .
Many of these nonmetals are important in biological systems .
In many cases , trends in electronegativity enable us to predict the type of bonding and the physical states in compounds involving the nonmetals .
We know that electronegativity decreases as we move down a given group and increases as we move from left to right across a period .
The nonmetals have higher electronegativities than do metals , and compounds formed between metals and nonmetals are generally ionic in nature because of the large differences in electronegativity between them .
The metals form cations , the nonmetals form anions , and the resulting compounds are solids under normal conditions .
On the other hand , compounds formed between two or more nonmetals have small differences in electronegativity between the atoms , and covalent bonding—sharing of electrons—results .
These substances tend to be molecular in nature and are gases , liquids , or volatile solids at room temperature and pressure .
In normal chemical processes , nonmetals do not form monatomic positive ions ( cations ) because their ionization energies are too high .
All monatomic nonmetal ions are anions ; examples include the chloride ion , Cl , the nitride ion , N , and the selenide ion , Se .
The common oxidation states that the nonmetals exhibit in their ionic and covalent compounds are shown in .
Remember that an element exhibits a positive oxidation state when combined with a more electronegative element and that it exhibits a negative oxidation state when combined with a less electronegative element .
The first member of each nonmetal group exhibits different behaviors , in many respects , from the other group members .
For example , nitrogen forms only NF whereas phosphorus forms both PF and PF .
Another difference between the first group member and subsequent members is the greater ability of the first member to form π bonds .
This is primarily a function of the smaller size of the first member of each group , which allows better overlap of atomic orbitals .
Nonmetals , other than the first member of each group , rarely form π bonds to nonmetals that are the first member of a group .
For example , sulfur-oxygen π bonds are well known , whereas sulfur does not normally form stable π bonds to itself .
The variety of oxidation states displayed by most of the nonmetals means that many of their chemical reactions involve changes in oxidation state through oxidation-reduction reactions .
There are five general aspects of the oxidation-reduction chemistry : Nonmetals oxidize most metals .
The oxidation state of the metal becomes positive as it undergoes oxidation and that of the nonmetal becomes negative as it undergoes reduction .
Within any period , the strongest oxidizing agent is in group 17 .
A nonmetal often oxidizes an element that lies to its left in the same period .
For example : The stronger a nonmetal is as an oxidizing agent , the more difficult it is to oxidize the anion formed by the nonmetal .
This means that the most stable negative ions are formed by elements at the top of the group or in group 17 of the period .
Fluorine and oxygen are the strongest oxidizing elements known .
Fluorine does not form compounds in which it exhibits positive oxidation states ; oxygen exhibits a positive oxidation state only when combined with fluorine .
For example : With the exception of most of the noble gases , all nonmetals form compounds with oxygen , yielding covalent oxides .
Most of these oxides are acidic , that is , they react with water to form oxyacids .
Recall from the acid-base chapter that an oxyacid is an acid consisting of hydrogen , oxygen , and some other element .
Notable exceptions are carbon monoxide , CO , nitrous oxide , N O , and nitric oxide , NO .
There are three characteristics of these acidic oxides : Oxides such as SO and N O , in which the nonmetal exhibits one of its common oxidation states , are acid anhydrides and react with water to form acids with no change in oxidation state .
The product is an oxyacid .
For example : Those oxides such as NO and ClO , in which the nonmetal does not exhibit one of its common oxidation states , also react with water .
In these reactions , the nonmetal is both oxidized and reduced .
For example : Reactions in which the same element is both oxidized and reduced are called disproportionation reactions .
The acid strength increases as the electronegativity of the central atom increases .
To learn more , see the discussion in the chapter on acid-base chemistry .
The binary hydrogen compounds of the nonmetals also exhibit an acidic behavior in water , although only HCl , HBr , and HI are strong acids .
The acid strength of the nonmetal hydrogen compounds increases from left to right across a period and down a group .
For example , ammonia , NH , is a weaker acid than is water , H O , which is weaker than is hydrogen fluoride , HF .
Water , H O , is also a weaker acid than is hydrogen sulfide , H S which is weaker than is hydrogen selenide , H Se .
Weaker acidic character implies greater basic character .
The structures of the nonmetals differ dramatically from those of metals .
Metals crystallize in closely packed arrays that do not contain molecules or covalent bonds .
Nonmetal structures contain covalent bonds , and many nonmetals consist of individual molecules .
The electrons in nonmetals are localized in covalent bonds , whereas in a metal , there is delocalization of the electrons throughout the solid .
The noble gases are all monatomic , whereas the other nonmetal gases—hydrogen , nitrogen , oxygen , fluorine , and chlorine—normally exist as the diatomic molecules H N , O , F , and Cl .
The other halogens are also diatomic ; Br is a liquid and I exists as a solid under normal conditions .
The changes in state as one moves down the halogen family offer excellent examples of the increasing strength of intermolecular London forces with increasing molecular mass and increasing polarizability .
Oxygen has two allotropes : O , dioxygen , and O , ozone .
Phosphorus has three common allotropes , commonly referred to by their colors : white , red , and black .
Sulfur has several allotropes .
There are also many carbon allotropes .
Most people know of diamond , graphite , and charcoal , but fewer people know of the recent discovery of fullerenes , carbon nanotubes , and graphene .
Descriptions of the physical properties of three nonmetals that are characteristic of molecular solids follow .
Carbon occurs in the uncombined ( elemental ) state in many forms , such as diamond , graphite , charcoal , coke , carbon black , graphene , and fullerene .
Diamond , shown in , is a very hard crystalline material that is colorless and transparent when pure .
Each atom forms four single bonds to four other atoms at the corners of a tetrahedron ( sp hybridization ) ; this makes the diamond a giant molecule .
Carbon-carbon single bonds are very strong , and , because they extend throughout the crystal to form a three-dimensional network , the crystals are very hard and have high melting points ( ~4400 °C ) .
Graphite , also shown in , is a soft , slippery , grayish-black solid that conducts electricity .
These properties relate to its structure , which consists of layers of carbon atoms , with each atom surrounded by three other carbon atoms in a trigonal planar arrangement .
Each carbon atom in graphite forms three σ bonds , one to each of its nearest neighbors , by means of sp -hybrid orbitals .
The unhybridized p orbital on each carbon atom will overlap unhybridized orbitals on adjacent carbon atoms in the same layer to form π bonds .
Many resonance forms are necessary to describe the electronic structure of a graphite layer ; illustrates two of these forms .
Atoms within a graphite layer are bonded together tightly by the σ and π bonds ; however , the forces between layers are weak .
London dispersion forces hold the layers together .
To learn more , see the discussion of these weak forces in the chapter on liquids and solids .
The weak forces between layers give graphite the soft , flaky character that makes it useful as the so-called “ lead ” in pencils and the slippery character that makes it useful as a lubricant .
The loosely held electrons in the resonating π bonds can move throughout the solid and are responsible for the electrical conductivity of graphite .
Other forms of elemental carbon include carbon black , charcoal , and coke .
Carbon black is an amorphous form of carbon prepared by the incomplete combustion of natural gas , CH .
It is possible to produce charcoal and coke by heating wood and coal , respectively , at high temperatures in the absence of air .
Recently , new forms of elemental carbon molecules have been identified in the soot generated by a smoky flame and in the vapor produced when graphite is heated to very high temperatures in a vacuum or in helium .
One of these new forms , first isolated by Professor Richard Smalley and coworkers at Rice University , consists of icosahedral ( soccerball-shaped ) molecules that contain 60 carbon atoms , C .
This is buckminsterfullerene ( often called bucky balls ) after the architect Buckminster Fuller , who designed domed structures , which have a similar appearance .
The name phosphorus comes from the Greek words meaning light bringing .
When phosphorus was first isolated , scientists noted that it glowed in the dark and burned when exposed to air .
Phosphorus is the only member of its group that does not occur in the uncombined state in nature ; it exists in many allotropic forms .
We will consider two of those forms : white phosphorus and red phosphorus .
White phosphorus is a white , waxy solid that melts at 44.2 °C and boils at 280 °C .
It is insoluble in water ( in which it is stored—see ) , is very soluble in carbon disulfide , and bursts into flame in air .
As a solid , as a liquid , as a gas , and in solution , white phosphorus exists as P molecules with four phosphorus atoms at the corners of a regular tetrahedron , as illustrated in .
Each phosphorus atom covalently bonds to the other three atoms in the molecule by single covalent bonds .
White phosphorus is the most reactive allotrope and is very toxic .
Heating white phosphorus to 270–300 °C in the absence of air yields red phosphorus .
Red phosphorus ( shown in ) is denser , has a higher melting point ( ~600 °C ) , is much less reactive , is essentially nontoxic , and is easier and safer to handle than is white phosphorus .
Its structure is highly polymeric and appears to contain threedimensional networks of P tetrahedra joined by P-P single bonds .
Red phosphorus is insoluble in solvents that dissolve white phosphorus .
When red phosphorus is heated , P molecules sublime from the solid .
The allotropy of sulfur is far greater and more complex than that of any other element .
Sulfur is the brimstone referred to in the Bible and other places , and references to sulfur occur throughout recorded history—right up to the relatively recent discovery that it is a component of the atmospheres of Venus and of Io , a moon of Jupiter .
The most common and most stable allotrope of sulfur is yellow , rhombic sulfur , so named because of the shape of its crystals .
Rhombic sulfur is the form to which all other allotropes revert at room temperature .
Crystals of rhombic sulfur melt at 113 °C .
Cooling this liquid gives long needles of monoclinic sulfur .
This form is stable from 96 °C to the melting point , 119 °C .
At room temperature , it gradually reverts to the rhombic form .
Both rhombic sulfur and monoclinic sulfur contain S molecules in which atoms form eight-membered , puckered rings that resemble crowns , as illustrated in .
Each sulfur atom is bonded to each of its two neighbors in the ring by covalent S-S single bonds .
When rhombic sulfur melts , the straw-colored liquid is quite mobile ; its viscosity is low because S molecules are essentially spherical and offer relatively little resistance as they move past each other .
As the temperature rises , S-S bonds in the rings break , and polymeric chains of sulfur atoms result .
These chains combine end to end , forming still longer chains that tangle with one another .
The liquid gradually darkens in color and becomes so viscous that finally ( at about 230 °C ) it does not pour easily .
The dangling atoms at the ends of the chains of sulfur atoms are responsible for the dark red color because their electronic structure differs from those of sulfur atoms that have bonds to two adjacent sulfur atoms .
This causes them to absorb light differently and results in a different visible color .
Cooling the liquid rapidly produces a rubberlike amorphous mass , called plastic sulfur .
As seen in this discussion , an important feature of the structural behavior of the nonmetals is that the elements usually occur with eight electrons in their valence shells .
If necessary , the elements form enough covalent bonds to supplement the electrons already present to possess an octet .
For example , members of group 15 have five valence electrons and require only three additional electrons to fill their valence shells .
These elements form three covalent bonds in their free state : triple bonds in the N molecule or single bonds to three different atoms in arsenic and phosphorus .
The elements of group 16 require only two additional electrons .
Oxygen forms a double bond in the O molecule , and sulfur , selenium , and tellurium form two single bonds in various rings and chains .
The halogens form diatomic molecules in which each atom is involved in only one bond .
This provides the electron required necessary to complete the octet on the halogen atom .
The noble gases do not form covalent bonds to other noble gas atoms because they already have a filled outer shell .
By the end of this section , you will be able to : Describe the properties , preparation , and compounds of hydrogen Hydrogen is the most abundant element in the universe .
The sun and other stars are composed largely of hydrogen .
Astronomers estimate that 90 % of the atoms in the universe are hydrogen atoms .
Hydrogen is a component of more compounds than any other element .
Water is the most abundant compound of hydrogen found on earth .
Hydrogen is an important part of petroleum , many minerals , cellulose and starch , sugar , fats , oils , alcohols , acids , and thousands of other substances .
At ordinary temperatures , hydrogen is a colorless , odorless , tasteless , and nonpoisonous gas consisting of the diatomic molecule H .
Hydrogen is composed of three isotopes , and unlike other elements , these isotopes have different names and chemical symbols : protium , H , deuterium , H ( or “ D ” ) , and tritium H ( or “ T ” ) .
In a naturally occurring sample of hydrogen , there is one atom of deuterium for every 7000 H atoms and one atom of radioactive tritium for every 10 H atoms .
The chemical properties of the different isotopes are very similar because they have identical electron structures , but they differ in some physical properties because of their differing atomic masses .
Elemental deuterium and tritium have lower vapor pressure than ordinary hydrogen .
Consequently , when liquid hydrogen evaporates , the heavier isotopes are concentrated in the last portions to evaporate .
Electrolysis of heavy water , D O , yields deuterium .
Most tritium originates from nuclear reactions .
Elemental hydrogen must be prepared from compounds by breaking chemical bonds .
The most common methods of preparing hydrogen follow .
Water is the cheapest and most abundant source of hydrogen .
Passing steam over coke ( an impure form of elemental carbon ) at 1000 °C produces a mixture of carbon monoxide and hydrogen known as water gas : Water gas is as an industrial fuel .
It is possible to produce additional hydrogen by mixing the water gas with steam in the presence of a catalyst to convert the CO to CO .
This reaction is the water gas shift reaction .
It is also possible to prepare a mixture of hydrogen and carbon monoxide by passing hydrocarbons from natural gas or petroleum and steam over a nickel-based catalyst .
Propane is an example of a hydrocarbon reactant : Hydrogen forms when direct current electricity passes through water containing an electrolyte such as H SO , as illustrated in .
Bubbles of hydrogen form at the cathode , and oxygen evolves at the anode .
The net reaction is : This is the most convenient laboratory method of producing hydrogen .
Metals with lower reduction potentials reduce the hydrogen ion in dilute acids to produce hydrogen gas and metal salts .
They are important in the inflation of life jackets , life rafts , and military balloons .
Under normal conditions , hydrogen is relatively inactive chemically , but when heated , it enters into many chemical reactions .
Two thirds of the world ’ s hydrogen production is devoted to the manufacture of ammonia , which is a fertilizer and used in the manufacture of nitric acid .
Large quantities of hydrogen are also important in the process of hydrogenation , discussed in the chapter on organic chemistry .
It is possible to use hydrogen as a nonpolluting fuel .
The reaction of hydrogen with oxygen is a very exothermic reaction , releasing 286 kJ of energy per mole of water formed .
Hydrogen burns without explosion under controlled conditions .
The oxygen-hydrogen torch , because of the high heat of combustion of hydrogen , can achieve temperatures up to 2800 °C .
The hot flame of this torch is useful in cutting thick sheets of many metals .
Liquid hydrogen is also an important rocket fuel .
An uncombined hydrogen atom consists of a nucleus and one valence electron in the 1 s orbital .
The n = 1 valence shell has a capacity for two electrons , and hydrogen can rightfully occupy two locations in the periodic table .
It is possible to consider hydrogen a group 1 element because hydrogen can lose an electron to form the cation , H .
It is also possible to consider hydrogen to be a group 17 element because it needs only one electron to fill its valence orbital to form a hydride ion , H , or it can share an electron to form a single , covalent bond .
In reality , hydrogen is a unique element that almost deserves its own location in the periodic table .
When heated , hydrogen reacts with the metals of group 1 and with Ca , Sr , and Ba ( the more active metals in group 2 ) .
The compounds formed are crystalline , ionic hydrides that contain the hydride anion , H , a strong reducing agent and a strong base , which reacts vigorously with water and other acids to form hydrogen gas .
The reactions of hydrogen with nonmetals generally produce acidic hydrogen compounds with hydrogen in the 1+ oxidation state .
The reactions become more exothermic and vigorous as the electronegativity of the nonmetal increases .
Hydrogen reacts with nitrogen and sulfur only when heated , but it reacts explosively with fluorine ( forming HF ) and , under some conditions , with chlorine ( forming HCl ) .
A mixture of hydrogen and oxygen explodes if ignited .
Because of the explosive nature of the reaction , it is necessary to exercise caution when handling hydrogen ( or any other combustible gas ) to avoid the formation of an explosive mixture in a confined space .
Although most hydrides of the nonmetals are acidic , ammonia and phosphine ( PH ) are very , very weak acids and generally function as bases .
There is a summary of these reactions of hydrogen with the elements in .
Hydrogen reduces the heated oxides of many metals , with the formation of the metal and water vapor .
For example , passing hydrogen over heated CuO forms copper and water .
Hydrogen may also reduce the metal ions in some metal oxides to lower oxidation states : Other than the noble gases , each of the nonmetals forms compounds with hydrogen .
For brevity , we will discuss only a few hydrogen compounds of the nonmetals here .
Ammonia , NH , forms naturally when any nitrogen-containing organic material decomposes in the absence of air .
The laboratory preparation of ammonia is by the reaction of an ammonium salt with a strong base such as sodium hydroxide .
The acid-base reaction with the weakly acidic ammonium ion gives ammonia , illustrated in .
Ammonia also forms when ionic nitrides react with water .
The nitride ion is a much stronger base than the hydroxide ion : The commercial production of ammonia is by the direct combination of the elements in the Haber process : Ammonia is a colorless gas with a sharp , pungent odor .
Smelling salts utilize this powerful odor .
Gaseous ammonia readily liquefies to give a colorless liquid that boils at −33 °C .
Due to intermolecular hydrogen bonding , the enthalpy of vaporization of liquid ammonia is higher than that of any other liquid except water , so ammonia is useful as a refrigerant .
Ammonia is quite soluble in water ( 658 L at STP dissolves in 1 L H O ) .
The chemical properties of ammonia are as follows : Ammonia acts as a Brønsted base , as discussed in the chapter on acid-base chemistry .
The ammonium ion is similar in size to the potassium ion ; compounds of the two ions exhibit many similarities in their structures and solubilities .
Ammonia can display acidic behavior , although it is a much weaker acid than water .
Like other acids , ammonia reacts with metals , although it is so weak that high temperatures are necessary .
Hydrogen and ( depending on the stoichiometry ) amides ( salts of form .
imides ( salts of NH ) , or nitrides ( salts of N ) The nitrogen atom in ammonia has its lowest possible oxidation state ( 3− ) and thus is not susceptible to reduction .
However , it can be oxidized .
Ammonia burns in air , giving NO and water .
Hot ammonia and the ammonium ion are active reducing agents .
Of particular interest are the oxidations of ammonium ion by nitrite ion , to yield pure nitrogen and by nitrate ion to yield nitrous oxide , N O .
There are a number of compounds that we can consider derivatives of ammonia through the replacement of one or more hydrogen atoms with some other atom or group of atoms .
Inorganic derivations include chloramine , NH Cl , and hydrazine , N H : Chloramine , NH Cl , results from the reaction of sodium hypochlorite , NaOCl , with ammonia in basic solution .
It burns rapidly and completely in air with substantial evolution of heat : Like ammonia , hydrazine is both a Brønsted base and a Lewis base , although it is weaker than ammonia .
It reacts with ions , respectively .
Some rockets strong acids and forms two series of salts that contain the use hydrazine as a fuel .
and The most important hydride of phosphorus is phosphine , PH , a gaseous analog of ammonia in terms of both formula and structure .
Unlike ammonia , it is not possible to form phosphine by direct union of the elements .
There are two methods for the preparation of phosphine .
One method is by the action of an acid on an ionic phosphide .
The other method is the disproportionation of white phosphorus with hot concentrated base to produce phosphine and the hydrogen phosphite ion : Phosphine is a colorless , very poisonous gas , which has an odor like that of decaying fish .
Heat easily decomposes phosphine and the compound burns in air .
The major uses of phosphine are as a fumigant for grains and in semiconductor processing .
Like ammonia , gaseous phosphine unites with gaseous hydrogen halides , forming phosphonium compounds like PH Cl and PH I. Phosphine is a much weaker base than ammonia ; therefore , these compounds decompose in water , and the insoluble PH escapes from solution .
Hydrogen sulfide , H S , is a colorless gas that is responsible for the offensive odor of rotten eggs and of many hot springs .
Hydrogen sulfide is as toxic as hydrogen cyanide ; therefore , it is necessary to exercise great care in handling it .
Hydrogen sulfide is particularly deceptive because it paralyzes the olfactory nerves ; after a short exposure , one does not smell it .
The production of hydrogen sulfide by the direct reaction of the elements ( H + S ) is unsatisfactory because the yield is low .
A more effective preparation method is the reaction of a metal sulfide with a dilute acid .
For example : It is easy to oxidize the sulfur in metal sulfides and in hydrogen sulfide , making metal sulfides and H S good reducing agents .
In acidic solutions , hydrogen sulfide reduces Fe to Fe , to Cr , and HNO to NO .
The sulfur in H S usually oxidizes to elemental sulfur , unless a large excess of the oxidizing agent is present .
In which case , the sulfide may oxidize to ( or to SO or SO in the absence of water ) : to Mn , or This oxidation process leads to the removal of the hydrogen sulfide found in many sources of natural gas .
The deposits of sulfur in volcanic regions may be the result of the oxidation of H S present in volcanic gases .
Hydrogen sulfide is a weak diprotic acid that dissolves in water to form hydrosulfuric acid .
The acid ionizes in two stages , yielding hydrogen sulfide ions , HS , in the first stage and sulfide ions , S , in the second .
Since hydrogen sulfide is a weak acid , aqueous solutions of soluble sulfides and hydrogen sulfides are basic : Binary compounds containing only hydrogen and a halogen are hydrogen halides .
At room temperature , the pure hydrogen halides HF , HCl , HBr , and HI are gases .
In general , it is possible to prepare the halides by the general techniques used to prepare other acids .
Fluorine , chlorine , and bromine react directly with hydrogen to form the respective hydrogen halide .
This is a commercially important reaction for preparing hydrogen chloride and hydrogen bromide .
The acid-base reaction between a nonvolatile strong acid and a metal halide will yield a hydrogen halide .
The escape of the gaseous hydrogen halide drives the reaction to completion .
The reaction of concentrated sulfuric acid with a chloride salt produces hydrogen chloride both commercially and in the laboratory .
In most cases , sodium chloride is the chloride of choice because it is the least expensive chloride .
Hydrogen bromide and hydrogen iodide can not be prepared using sulfuric acid because this acid is an oxidizing agent capable of oxidizing both bromide and iodide .
However , it is possible to prepare both hydrogen bromide and hydrogen iodide using an acid such as phosphoric acid because it is a weaker oxidizing agent .
For example : All of the hydrogen halides are very soluble in water , forming hydrohalic acids .
With the exception of hydrogen fluoride , which has a strong hydrogen-fluoride bond , they are strong acids .
Reactions of hydrohalic acids with metals , metal hydroxides , oxides , or carbonates produce salts of the halides .
Most chloride salts are soluble in water .
AgCl , PbCl , and Hg Cl are the commonly encountered exceptions .
The halide ions give the substances the properties associated with X ( aq ) .
Because hydrogen fluoride attacks glass , it can frost or etch glass and is used to etch markings on thermometers , burets , and other glassware .
The largest use for hydrogen fluoride is in production of hydrochlorofluorocarbons for refrigerants , in plastics , and in propellants .
The second largest use is in the manufacture of cryolite , Na AlF , which is important in the production of aluminum .
The acid is also important in the production of other inorganic fluorides ( such as BF ) , which serve as catalysts in the industrial synthesis of certain organic compounds .
Hydrochloric acid is relatively inexpensive .
It is an important and versatile acid in industry and is important for the manufacture of metal chlorides , dyes , glue , glucose , and various other chemicals .
A considerable amount is also important for the activation of oil wells and as pickle liquor—an acid used to remove oxide coating from iron or steel that is to be galvanized , tinned , or enameled .
The amounts of hydrobromic acid and hydroiodic acid used commercially are insignificant by comparison .
By the end of this section , you will be able to : Describe the preparation , properties , and uses of some representative metal carbonates The chemistry of carbon is extensive ; however , most of this chemistry is not relevant to this chapter .
The other aspects of the chemistry of carbon will appear in the chapter covering organic chemistry .
In this chapter , we will focus on the carbonate ion and related substances .
Examples of such reactions include : also known as the bicarbonate anion .
The carbonates of the alkaline earth metals of group 12 and lead ( II ) are not soluble .
These carbonates precipitate upon mixing a solution of soluble alkali metal carbonate with a solution of soluble salts of these metals .
Examples of net ionic equations for the reactions are : Pearls and the shells of most mollusks are calcium carbonate .
Tin ( II ) or one of the trivalent or tetravalent ions such as Al or Sn behave differently in this reaction as carbon dioxide and the corresponding oxide form instead of the carbonate .
Alkali metal hydrogen carbonates such as NaHCO and CsHCO form by saturating a solution of the hydroxides with carbon dioxide .
The net ionic reaction involves hydroxide ion and carbon dioxide : It is possible to isolate the solids by evaporation of the water from the solution .
Although they are insoluble in pure water , alkaline earth carbonates dissolve readily in water containing carbon dioxide because hydrogen carbonate salts form .
For example , caves and sinkholes form in limestone when CaCO dissolves in water containing dissolved carbon dioxide : Hydrogen carbonates of the alkaline earth metals remain stable only in solution ; evaporation of the solution produces the carbonate .
Stalactites and stalagmites , like those shown in , form in caves when drops of water containing dissolved calcium hydrogen carbonate evaporate to leave a deposit of calcium carbonate .
The two carbonates used commercially in the largest quantities are sodium carbonate and calcium carbonate .
In the United States , sodium carbonate is extracted from the mineral trona , Na ( CO ) ( HCO ) ( H O ) .
Following recrystallization to remove clay and other impurities , heating the recrystallized trona produces Na CO : Carbonates are moderately strong bases .
Aqueous solutions are basic because the carbonate ion accepts hydrogen ion from water in this reversible reaction : Carbonates react with acids to form salts of the metal , gaseous carbon dioxide , and water .
Hydrogen carbonates are amphoteric because they act as both weak acids and weak bases .
Hydrogen carbonate ions act as acids and react with solutions of soluble hydroxides to form a carbonate and water : With acids , hydrogen carbonates form a salt , carbon dioxide , and water .
Baking soda ( bicarbonate of soda or sodium bicarbonate ) is sodium hydrogen carbonate .
Baking powder contains baking soda and a solid acid such as potassium hydrogen tartrate ( cream of tartar ) , KHC H O .
By the end of this section , you will be able to : Describe the properties , preparation , and uses of nitrogen Most pure nitrogen comes from the fractional distillation of liquid air .
The atmosphere consists of 78 % nitrogen by volume .
This means there are more than 20 million tons of nitrogen over every square mile of the earth ’ s surface .
Nitrogen is a component of proteins and of the genetic material ( DNA/RNA ) of all plants and animals .
Under ordinary conditions , nitrogen is a colorless , odorless , and tasteless gas .
It boils at 77 K and freezes at 63 K. Liquid nitrogen is a useful coolant because it is inexpensive and has a low boiling point .
Nitrogen is very unreactive because of the very strong triple bond between the nitrogen atoms .
The only common reactions at room temperature occur with lithium to form Li N , with certain transition metal complexes , and with hydrogen or oxygen in nitrogenfixing bacteria .
The general lack of reactivity of nitrogen makes the remarkable ability of some bacteria to synthesize nitrogen compounds using atmospheric nitrogen gas as the source one of the most exciting chemical events on our planet .
This process is one type of nitrogen fixation .
In this case , nitrogen fixation is the process where organisms convert atmospheric nitrogen into biologically useful chemicals .
Nitrogen fixation also occurs when lightning passes through air , causing molecular nitrogen to react with oxygen to form nitrogen oxides , which are then carried down to the soil .
Large volumes of atmospheric nitrogen are necessary for making ammonia—the principal starting material used for preparation of large quantities of other nitrogen-containing compounds .
Most other uses for elemental nitrogen depend on its inactivity .
It is helpful when a chemical process requires an inert atmosphere .
Canned foods and luncheon meats can not oxidize in a pure nitrogen atmosphere , so they retain a better flavor and color , and spoil less rapidly , when sealed in nitrogen instead of air .
This technology allows fresh produce to be available year-round , regardless of growing season .
There are compounds with nitrogen in all of its oxidation states from 3− to 5+ .
Much of the chemistry of nitrogen involves oxidation-reduction reactions .
Some active metals ( such as alkali metals and alkaline earth metals ) can reduce nitrogen to form metal nitrides .
In the remainder of this section , we will examine nitrogen-oxygen chemistry .
There are well-characterized nitrogen oxides in which nitrogen exhibits each of its positive oxidation numbers from 1+ to 5+ .
When ammonium nitrate is carefully heated , nitrous oxide ( dinitrogen oxide ) and water vapor form .
Stronger heating generates nitrogen gas , oxygen gas , and water vapor .
No one should ever attempt this reaction—it can be very explosive .
In 1947 , there was a major ammonium nitrate explosion in Texas City , Texas , and , in 2013 , there was another major explosion in West , Texas .
In the last 100 years , there were nearly 30 similar disasters worldwide , resulting in the loss of numerous lives .
In this oxidation-reduction reaction , the nitrogen in the nitrate ion oxidizes the nitrogen in the ammonium ion .
Nitrous oxide , shown in , is a colorless gas possessing a mild , pleasing odor and a sweet taste .
It finds application as an anesthetic for minor operations , especially in dentistry , under the name “ laughing gas. ” Low yields of nitric oxide , NO , form when heating nitrogen and oxygen together .
NO also forms when lightning passes through air during thunderstorms .
Burning ammonia is the commercial method of preparing nitric oxide .
In the laboratory , the reduction of nitric acid is the best method for preparing nitric oxide .
When copper reacts with dilute nitric acid , nitric oxide is the principal reduction product : Gaseous nitric oxide is the most thermally stable of the nitrogen oxides and is the simplest known thermally stable molecule with an unpaired electron .
It is one of the air pollutants generated by internal combustion engines , resulting from the reaction of atmospheric nitrogen and oxygen during the combustion process .
At room temperature , nitric oxide is a colorless gas consisting of diatomic molecules .
As is often the case with molecules that contain an unpaired electron , two molecules combine to form a dimer by pairing their unpaired electrons to form a bond .
Liquid and solid NO both contain N O dimers , like that shown in .
Most substances with unpaired electrons exhibit color by absorbing visible light ; however , NO is colorless because the absorption of light is not in the visible region of the spectrum .
Cooling a mixture of equal parts nitric oxide and nitrogen dioxide to −21 °C produces dinitrogen trioxide , a blue liquid consisting of N O molecules ( shown in ) .
Dinitrogen trioxide exists only in the liquid and solid states .
When heated , it reverts to a mixture of NO and NO .
It is possible to prepare nitrogen dioxide in the laboratory by heating the nitrate of a heavy metal , or by the reduction of concentrated nitric acid with copper metal , as shown in .
Commercially , it is possible to prepare nitrogen dioxide by oxidizing nitric oxide with air .
The nitrogen dioxide molecule ( illustrated in ) contains an unpaired electron , which is responsible for its color and paramagnetism .
It is also responsible for the dimerization of NO .
At low pressures or at high temperatures , nitrogen dioxide has a deep brown color that is due to the presence of the NO molecule .
At low temperatures , the color almost entirely disappears as dinitrogen tetraoxide , N O , forms .
The oxides of nitrogen ( III ) , nitrogen ( IV ) , and nitrogen ( V ) react with water and form nitrogen-containing oxyacids .
Nitrogen ( III ) oxide , N O , is the anhydride of nitrous acid ; HNO forms when N O reacts with water .
There are no stable oxyacids containing nitrogen with an oxidation state of 4+ ; therefore , nitrogen ( IV ) oxide , NO , disproportionates in one of two ways when it reacts with water .
In cold water , a mixture of HNO and HNO forms .
At higher temperatures , HNO and NO will form .
Nitrogen ( V ) oxide , N O , is the anhydride of nitric acid ; HNO is produced when N O reacts with water : The nitrogen oxides exhibit extensive oxidation-reduction behavior .
Nitrous oxide resembles oxygen in its behavior when heated with combustible substances .
N O is a strong oxidizing agent that decomposes when heated to form nitrogen and oxygen .
Because one-third of the gas liberated is oxygen , nitrous oxide supports combustion better than air ( one-fifth oxygen ) .
A glowing splinter bursts into flame when thrust into a bottle of this gas .
Nitric oxide acts both as an oxidizing agent and as a reducing agent .
For example : Nitrogen dioxide ( or dinitrogen tetraoxide ) is a good oxidizing agent .
The preparation of many other phosphorus compounds begins with P O .
The acids and phosphates are useful as fertilizers and in the chemical industry .
Other uses are in the manufacture of special alloys such as ferrophosphorus and phosphor bronze .
Phosphorus is important in making pesticides , matches , and some plastics .
Phosphorus is an active nonmetal .
In compounds , phosphorus usually occurs in oxidation states of 3− , 3+ , and 5+ .
Phosphorus exhibits oxidation numbers that are unusual for a group 15 element in compounds that contain phosphorus-phosphorus bonds ; examples include diphosphorus tetrahydride , H P-PH , and tetraphosphorus trisulfide , P S , illustrated in .
Phosphorus forms two common oxides , phosphorus ( III ) oxide ( or tetraphosphorus hexaoxide ) , P O , and phosphorus ( V ) oxide ( or tetraphosphorus decaoxide ) , P O , both shown in .
Phosphorus ( III ) oxide is a white crystalline solid with a garlic-like odor .
Its vapor is very poisonous .
It oxidizes slowly in air and inflames when heated to 70 °C , forming P O .
Phosphorus ( III ) oxide dissolves slowly in cold water to form phosphorous acid , H PO .
Phosphorus ( V ) oxide , P O , is a white powder that is prepared by burning phosphorus in excess oxygen .
Its enthalpy of formation is very high ( −2984 kJ ) , and it is quite stable and a very poor oxidizing agent .
Dropping P O into water produces a hissing sound , heat , and orthophosphoric acid : Because of its great affinity for water , phosphorus ( V ) oxide is an excellent drying agent for gases and solvents , and for removing water from many compounds .
Phosphorus will react directly with the halogens , forming trihalides , PX , and pentahalides , PX .
The trihalides are much more stable than the corresponding nitrogen trihalides ; nitrogen pentahalides do not form because of nitrogen ’ s inability to form more than four bonds .
The chlorides PCl and PCl , both shown in , are the most important halides of phosphorus .
Phosphorus trichloride is a colorless liquid that is prepared by passing chlorine over molten phosphorus .
Phosphorus pentachloride is an off-white solid that is prepared by oxidizing the trichloride with excess chlorine .
The pentachloride sublimes when warmed and forms an equilibrium with the trichloride and chlorine when heated .
Like most other nonmetal halides , both phosphorus chlorides react with an excess of water and yield hydrogen chloride and an oxyacid : PCl yields phosphorous acid H PO and PCl yields phosphoric acid , H PO .
The pentahalides of phosphorus are Lewis acids because of the empty valence d orbitals of phosphorus .
The earth ’ s surface is composed of the crust , atmosphere , and hydrosphere .
About 50 % of the mass of the earth ’ s crust consists of oxygen ( combined with other elements , principally silicon ) .
Oxygen occurs as O molecules and , to a limited extent , as O ( ozone ) molecules in air .
It forms about 20 % of the mass of the air .
About 89 % of water by mass consists of combined oxygen .
In combination with carbon , hydrogen , and nitrogen , oxygen is a large part of plants and animals .
Oxygen is a colorless , odorless , and tasteless gas at ordinary temperatures .
It is slightly denser than air .
Although it is only slightly soluble in water ( 49 mL of gas dissolves in 1 L at STP ) , oxygen ’ s solubility is very important to aquatic life .
Most of the oxygen isolated commercially comes from air and the remainder from the electrolysis of water .
The separation of oxygen from air begins with cooling and compressing the air until it liquefies .
As liquid air warms , oxygen with its higher boiling point ( 90 K ) separates from nitrogen , which has a lower boiling point ( 77 K ) .
It is possible to separate the other components of air at the same time based on differences in their boiling points .
Oxygen is essential in combustion processes such as the burning of fuels .
Plants and animals use the oxygen from the air in respiration .
The administration of oxygen-enriched air is an important medical practice when a patient is receiving an inadequate supply of oxygen because of shock , pneumonia , or some other illness .
The chemical industry employs oxygen for oxidizing many substances .
A significant amount of oxygen produced commercially is important in the removal of carbon from iron during steel production .
Large quantities of pure oxygen are also necessary in metal fabrication and in the cutting and welding of metals with oxyhydrogen and oxyacetylene torches .
Liquid oxygen is important to the space industry .
It is an oxidizing agent in rocket engines .
It is also the source of gaseous oxygen for life support in space .
As we know , oxygen is very important to life .
The energy required for the maintenance of normal body functions in human beings and in other organisms comes from the slow oxidation of chemical compounds .
Oxygen is the final oxidizing agent in these reactions .
In humans , oxygen passes from the lungs into the blood , where it combines with hemoglobin , producing oxyhemoglobin .
In this form , blood transports the oxygen to tissues , where it is transferred to the tissues .
The ultimate products are carbon dioxide and water .
The blood carries the carbon dioxide through the veins to the lungs , where the blood releases the carbon dioxide and collects another supply of oxygen .
Digestion and assimilation of food regenerate the materials consumed by oxidation in the body ; the energy liberated is the same as if the food burned outside the body .
Green plants continually replenish the oxygen in the atmosphere by a process called photosynthesis .
When dry oxygen is passed between two electrically charged plates , ozone ( O , illustrated in ) , an allotrope of oxygen possessing a distinctive odor , forms .
The formation of ozone from oxygen is an endothermic reaction , in which the energy comes from an electrical discharge , heat , or ultraviolet light : The sharp odor associated with sparking electrical equipment is due , in part , to ozone .
Ozone forms naturally in the upper atmosphere by the action of ultraviolet light from the sun on the oxygen there .
Most atmospheric ozone occurs in the stratosphere , a layer of the atmosphere extending from about 10 to 50 kilometers above the earth ’ s surface .
This ozone acts as a barrier to harmful ultraviolet light from the sun by absorbing it via a chemical decomposition reaction : The reactive oxygen atoms recombine with molecular oxygen to complete the ozone cycle .
The presence of stratospheric ozone decreases the frequency of skin cancer and other damaging effects of ultraviolet radiation .
It has been clearly demonstrated that chlorofluorocarbons , CFCs ( known commercially as Freons ) , which were present as aerosol propellants in spray cans and as refrigerants , caused depletion of ozone in the stratosphere .
This occurred because ultraviolet light also causes CFCs to decompose , producing atomic chlorine .
The chlorine atoms react with ozone molecules , resulting in a net removal of O molecules from stratosphere .
This process is explored in detail in our coverage of chemical kinetics .
There is a worldwide effort to reduce the amount of CFCs used commercially , and the ozone hole is already beginning to decrease in size as atmospheric concentrations of atomic chlorine decrease .
While ozone in the stratosphere helps protect us , ozone in the troposphere is a problem .
This ozone is a toxic component of photochemical smog .
The uses of ozone depend on its reactivity with other substances .
It can be used as a bleaching agent for oils , waxes , fabrics , and starch : It oxidizes the colored compounds in these substances to colorless compounds .
It is an alternative to chlorine as a disinfectant for water .
Elemental oxygen is a strong oxidizing agent .
It reacts with most other elements and many compounds .
Oxygen reacts directly at room temperature or at elevated temperatures with all other elements except the noble gases , the halogens , and few secondand third-row transition metals of low reactivity ( those with higher reduction potentials than copper ) .
Rust is an example of the reaction of oxygen with iron .
The more active metals form peroxides or superoxides .
Less active metals and the nonmetals give oxides .
Two examples of these reactions are : The oxides of halogens , at least one of the noble gases , and metals with higher reduction potentials than copper do not form by the direct action of the elements with oxygen .
Elemental oxygen also reacts with some compounds .
If it is possible to oxidize any of the elements in a given compound , further oxidation by oxygen can occur .
For example , hydrogen sulfide , H S , contains sulfur with an oxidation state of 2− .
Because the sulfur does not exhibit its maximum oxidation state , we would expect H S to react with oxygen .
It does , yielding water and sulfur dioxide .
The reaction is : It is also possible to oxidize oxides such as CO and P O that contain an element with a lower oxidation state .
The ease with which elemental oxygen picks up electrons is mirrored by the difficulty of removing electrons from oxygen in most oxides .
Of the elements , only the very reactive fluorine can oxidize oxides to form oxygen gas .
All representative metals form oxides .
Some of the metals of group 2 also form peroxides , MO , and the metals of group 1 also form peroxides , M O , and superoxides , MO .
It is possible to produce the oxides of most representative metals by heating the corresponding hydroxides ( forming the oxide and gaseous water ) or carbonates ( forming the oxide and gaseous CO ) .
Equations for example reactions are : However , alkali metal salts generally are very stable and do not decompose easily when heated .
Alkali metal oxides result from the oxidation-reduction reactions created by heating nitrates or hydroxides with the metals .
Equations for sample reactions are : With the exception of mercury ( II ) oxide , it is possible to produce the oxides of the metals of groups 2–15 by burning the corresponding metal in air .
The heaviest member of each group , the member for which the inert pair effect is most pronounced , forms an oxide in which the oxidation state of the metal ion is two less than the group oxidation state ( inert pair effect ) .
Thus , Tl O , PbO , and Bi O form when burning thallium , lead , and bismuth , respectively .
The oxides of the lighter members of each group exhibit the group oxidation state .
For example , SnO forms from burning tin .
Mercury ( II ) oxide , HgO , forms slowly when mercury is warmed below 500 °C ; it decomposes at higher temperatures .
Burning the members of groups 1 and 2 in air is not a suitable way to form the oxides of these elements .
These metals are reactive enough to combine with nitrogen in the air , so they form mixtures of oxides and ionic nitrides .
Several also form peroxides or superoxides when heated in air .
Ionic oxides all contain the oxide ion , a very powerful hydrogen ion acceptor .
With the exception of the very insoluble aluminum oxide , Al O , tin ( IV ) , SnO , and lead ( IV ) , PbO , the oxides of the representative metals react with acids to form salts .
Some equations for these reactions are : The oxides of the metals of groups 1 and 2 and of thallium ( I ) oxide react with water and form hydroxides .
Examples of such reactions are : is important The oxides of the alkali metals have little industrial utility , unlike magnesium oxide , calcium oxide , and aluminum oxide .
Magnesium oxide and thermal insulation—applications that require chemical and thermal stability .
Calcium oxide , sometimes called quicklime or lime in the industrial market , is very reactive , and its principal uses reflect its reactivity .
Pure calcium oxide emits an intense white light when heated to a high temperature ( as illustrated in ) .
Blocks of calcium oxide heated by gas flames were the stage lights in theaters before electricity was available .
This is the source of the phrase “ in the limelight. ” in making firebrick , crucibles , furnace linings , Calcium oxide and calcium hydroxide are inexpensive bases used extensively in chemical processing , although most of the useful products prepared from them do not contain calcium .
It is possible to prepare calcium hydroxide by the familiar acid-base reaction of a soluble metal oxide with water : Both CaO and Ca ( OH ) are useful as bases ; they accept protons and neutralize acids .
Alumina ( Al O ) occurs in nature as the mineral corundum , a very hard substance used as an abrasive for grinding and polishing .
Corundum is important to the jewelry trade as ruby and sapphire .
The color of ruby is due to the presence of a small amount of chromium ; other impurities produce the wide variety of colors possible for sapphires .
Artificial rubies and sapphires are now manufactured by melting aluminum oxide ( melting point = 2050 °C ) with small amounts of oxides to produce the desired colors and cooling the melt in such a way as to produce large crystals .
Ruby lasers use synthetic ruby crystals .
Zinc oxide , ZnO , was a useful white paint pigment ; however , pollutants tend to discolor the compound .
The compound is also important in the manufacture of automobile tires and other rubber goods , and in the preparation of medicinal ointments .
For example , zinc-oxide-based sunscreens , as shown in , help prevent sunburn .
The zinc oxide in these sunscreens is present in the form of very small grains known as nanoparticles .
Lead dioxide is a constituent of charged lead storage batteries .
Lead ( IV ) tends to revert to the more stable lead ( II ) ion by gaining two electrons , so lead dioxide is a powerful oxidizing agent .
Peroxides and superoxides are strong oxidizers and are important in chemical processes .
Hydrogen peroxide , H O , prepared from metal peroxides , is an important bleach and disinfectant .
Peroxides and superoxides form when the metal or metal oxides of groups 1 and 2 react with pure oxygen at elevated temperatures .
For example : The stability of the peroxides and superoxides of the alkali metals increases as the size of the cation increases .
Hydroxides are compounds that contain the OH ion .
It is possible to prepare these compounds by two general types of reactions .
Soluble metal hydroxides can be produced by the reaction of the metal or metal oxide with water .
Insoluble metal hydroxides form when a solution of a soluble salt of the metal combines with a solution containing hydroxide ions .
With the exception of beryllium and magnesium , the metals of groups 1 and 2 react with water to form hydroxides and hydrogen gas .
Examples of such reactions include : However , these reactions can be violent and dangerous ; therefore , it is preferable to produce soluble metal hydroxides by the reaction of the respective oxide with water : Most metal oxides are base anhydrides .
This is obvious for the soluble oxides because they form metal hydroxides .
Most other metal oxides are insoluble and do not form hydroxides in water ; however , they are still base anhydrides because they will react with acids .
It is possible to prepare the insoluble hydroxides of beryllium , magnesium , and other representative metals by the addition of sodium hydroxide to a solution of a salt of the respective metal .
The important aspect of complex ions for this chapter is that they form by a Lewis acid-base reaction with the metal being the Lewis acid .
and Industry uses large quantities of sodium hydroxide as a cheap , strong base .
Sodium chloride is the starting material for the production of NaOH because NaCl is a less expensive starting material than the oxide .
Sodium hydroxide is among the top 10 chemicals in production in the United States , and this production was almost entirely by electrolysis of solutions of sodium chloride .
This process is the chlor-alkali process , and it is the primary method for producing chlorine .
Sodium hydroxide is an ionic compound and melts without decomposition .
It is very soluble in water , giving off a great deal of heat and forming very basic solutions : 40 grams of sodium hydroxide dissolves in only 60 grams of water at 25 °C .
Sodium hydroxide is employed in the production of other sodium compounds and is used to neutralize acidic solutions during the production of other chemicals such as petrochemicals and polymers .
Many of the applications of hydroxides are for the neutralization of acids ( such as the antacid shown in ) and for the preparation of oxides by thermal decomposition .
An aqueous suspension of magnesium hydroxide constitutes the antacid milk of magnesia .
Because of its ready availability ( from the reaction of water with calcium oxide prepared by the decomposition of limestone , CaCO ) , low cost , and activity , calcium hydroxide is used extensively in commercial applications needing a cheap , strong base .
The reaction of hydroxides with appropriate acids is also used to prepare salts .
Most nonmetals react with oxygen to form nonmetal oxides .
Depending on the available oxidation states for the element , a variety of oxides might form .
Fluorine will combine with oxygen to form fluorides such as OF , where the oxygen has a 2+-oxidation state .
The two common oxides of sulfur are sulfur dioxide , SO , and sulfur trioxide , SO .
The odor of burning sulfur comes from sulfur dioxide .
Sulfur dioxide , shown in , occurs in volcanic gases and in the atmosphere near industrial plants that burn fuel containing sulfur compounds .
Commercial production of sulfur dioxide is from either burning sulfur or roasting sulfide ores such as ZnS , FeS , and Cu S in air .
( Roasting , which forms the metal oxide , is the first step in the separation of many metals from their ores . )
A convenient method for preparing sulfur dioxide in the laboratory is by the action of a strong acid on either sulfite Sulfurous acid , H SO , forms first , but salts containing the quickly decomposes into sulfur dioxide and water .
Sulfur dioxide also forms when many reducing agents react with hot , concentrated sulfuric acid .
Sulfur trioxide forms slowly when heating sulfur dioxide and oxygen together , and the reaction is exothermic : ion or hydrogen sulfite salts containing Sulfur dioxide is a gas at room temperature , and the SO molecule is bent .
Sulfur trioxide melts at 17 °C and boils at 43 °C .
In the vapor state , its molecules are single SO units ( shown in ) , but in the solid state , SO exists in several polymeric forms .
The sulfur oxides react as Lewis acids with many oxides and hydroxides in Lewis acid-base reactions , with the formation of sulfites or hydrogen sulfites , and sulfates or hydrogen sulfates , respectively .
The halogens do not react directly with oxygen , but it is possible to prepare binary oxygen-halogen compounds by the reactions of the halogens with oxygen-containing compounds .
Oxygen compounds with chlorine , bromine , and iodine are oxides because oxygen is the more electronegative element in these compounds .
On the other hand , fluorine compounds with oxygen are fluorides because fluorine is the more electronegative element .
As a class , the oxides are extremely reactive and unstable , and their chemistry has little practical importance .
Dichlorine oxide , formally called dichlorine monoxide , and chlorine dioxide , both shown in , are the only commercially important compounds .
They are important as bleaching agents ( for use with pulp and flour ) and for water treatment .
Nonmetal oxides form acids when allowed to react with water ; these are acid anhydrides .
The resulting oxyanions can form salts with various metal ions .
Nitrogen pentaoxide , N O , and NO react with water to form nitric acid , HNO .
Alchemists , as early as the eighth century , knew nitric acid ( shown in ) as aqua fortis ( meaning `` strong water '' ) .
The acid was useful in the separation of gold from silver because it dissolves silver but not gold .
Traces of nitric acid occur in the atmosphere after thunderstorms , and its salts are widely distributed in nature .
There are tremendous deposits of Chile saltpeter , NaNO , in the desert region near the boundary of Chile and Peru .
Bengal saltpeter , KNO , occurs in India and in other countries of the Far East .
In the laboratory , it is possible to produce nitric acid by heating a nitrate salt ( such as sodium or potassium nitrate ) with concentrated sulfuric acid : The Ostwald process is the commercial method for producing nitric acid .
This process involves the oxidation of ammonia to nitric oxide , NO ; oxidation of nitric oxide to nitrogen dioxide , NO ; and further oxidation and hydration of nitrogen dioxide to form nitric acid : Or Pure nitric acid is a colorless liquid .
However , it is often yellow or brown in color because NO forms as the acid decomposes .
Nitric acid is stable in aqueous solution ; solutions containing 68 % of the acid are commercially available concentrated nitric acid .
It is both a strong oxidizing agent and a strong acid .
The action of nitric acid on a metal rarely produces H ( by reduction of H ) in more than small amounts .
Instead , the reduction of nitrogen occurs .
The products formed depend on the concentration of the acid , the activity of the metal , and the temperature .
Normally , a mixture of nitrates , nitrogen oxides , and various reduction products form .
Less active metals such as copper , silver , and lead reduce concentrated nitric acid primarily to nitrogen dioxide .
The reaction of dilute nitric acid with copper produces NO .
In each case , the nitrate salts of the metals crystallize upon evaporation of the resultant solutions .
A mixture of one part concentrated nitric acid and three parts concentrated hydrochloric acid ( called aqua regia , which means royal water ) reacts vigorously with metals .
This mixture is particularly useful in dissolving gold , platinum , and other metals that are more difficult to oxidize than hydrogen .
A simplified equation to represent the action of aqua regia on gold is : Nitrates , salts of nitric acid , form when metals , oxides , hydroxides , or carbonates react with nitric acid .
Most nitrates are soluble in water ; indeed , one of the significant uses of nitric acid is to prepare soluble metal nitrates .
Nitric acid finds extensive use in the laboratory and in chemical industries as a strong acid and strong oxidizing agent .
It is important in the manufacture of explosives , dyes , plastics , and drugs .
Salts of nitric acid ( nitrates ) are valuable as fertilizers .
Gunpowder is a mixture of potassium nitrate , sulfur , and charcoal .
The reaction of N O with water gives a pale blue solution of nitrous acid , HNO .
It disproportionates slowly at room temperature ( rapidly when heated ) into nitric acid and nitric oxide .
Nitrous acid is an active oxidizing agent with strong reducing agents , and strong oxidizing agents oxidize it to nitric acid .
Sodium nitrite , NaNO , is an additive to meats such as hot dogs and cold cuts .
The nitrite ion has two functions .
It limits the growth of bacteria that can cause food poisoning , and it prolongs the meat ’ s retention of its red color .
The addition of sodium nitrite to meat products is controversial because nitrous acid reacts with certain organic compounds to form a class of compounds known as nitrosamines .
Nitrosamines produce cancer in laboratory animals .
This has prompted the FDA to limit the amount of NaNO in foods .
The nitrites are much more stable than the acid , but nitrites , like nitrates , can explode .
Nitrites , like nitrates , are also soluble in water ( AgNO is only slightly soluble ) .
Pure orthophosphoric acid , H PO ( shown in ) , forms colorless , deliquescent crystals that melt at 42 °C .
The common name of this compound is phosphoric acid , and is commercially available as a viscous 82 % solution known as syrupy phosphoric acid .
One use of phosphoric acid is as an additive to many soft drinks .
It is possible to prepare pure orthophosphoric acid by dissolving P O in water .
The action of water on P O , PCl , PBr , or PI forms phosphorous acid , H PO ( shown in ) .
The best method for preparing pure phosphorous acid is by hydrolyzing phosphorus trichloride : Heating the resulting solution expels the hydrogen chloride and leads to the evaporation of water .
When sufficient water evaporates , white crystals of phosphorous acid will appear upon cooling .
The crystals are deliquescent , very soluble in water , and have an odor like that of garlic .
or the respectively .
It is not possible to replace the third atom of hydrogen because it The preparation of sulfuric acid , H SO ( shown in ) , begins with the oxidation of sulfur to sulfur trioxide and then converting the trioxide to sulfuric acid .
Pure sulfuric acid is a colorless , oily liquid that freezes at 10.5 °C .
It fumes when heated because the acid decomposes to water and sulfur trioxide .
The heating process causes the loss of more sulfur trioxide than water , until reaching a concentration of 98.33 % acid .
Acid of this concentration boils at 338 °C without further change in concentration ( a constant boiling solution ) and is commercially concentrated H SO .
The amount of sulfuric acid used in industry exceeds that of any other manufactured compound .
salt : K = 1.2 10 ) .
The strong affinity of concentrated sulfuric acid for water makes it a good dehydrating agent .
It is possible to dry gases and immiscible liquids that do not react with the acid by passing them through the acid .
Sulfuric acid is a strong diprotic acid that ionizes in two stages .
In aqueous solution , the first stage is essentially is a moderately strong acid ( about 25 % complete .
The secondary ionization is not nearly so complete , and ionized in solution of a Being a diprotic acid , sulfuric acid forms both sulfates , such as Na SO , and hydrogen sulfates , such as NaHSO .
Most sulfates are soluble in water ; however , the sulfates of barium , strontium , calcium , and lead are only slightly soluble in water .
ion is an Among the important sulfates are Na SO 10H O and Epsom salts , MgSO 7H O .
Because the acid , hydrogen sulfates , such as NaHSO , exhibit acidic behavior , and this compound is the primary ingredient in some household cleansers .
Hot , concentrated sulfuric acid is an oxidizing agent .
Sulfurous acid is unstable , and it is not possible to isolate anhydrous H SO .
Heating a solution of sulfurous acid expels the sulfur dioxide .
Like other diprotic acids , sulfurous acid ionizes in two steps : The hydrogen sulfite ion , form .
Sulfurous acid is a moderately strong acid .
Ionization is about 25 % in the first stage , but it is much less in the second ( K = 1.2 10 and K = 6.2 10 ) .
In order to prepare solid sulfite and hydrogen sulfite salts , it is necessary to add a stoichiometric amount of a base to a sulfurous acid solution and then evaporate the water .
These salts also form from the reaction of SO with oxides and hydroxides .
Heating solid sodium hydrogen sulfite forms sodium sulfite , sulfur dioxide , and water : and the sulfite ion , S , H S or S .
Strong oxidizing agents can oxidize sulfurous acid .
Oxygen in the air oxidizes it slowly to the more stable sulfuric acid : Solutions of sulfites are also very susceptible to air oxidation to produce sulfates .
Thus , solutions of sulfites always contain sulfates after exposure to air .
The compounds HXO , HXO , HXO , and HXO , where X represents Cl , Br , or I , are the hypohalous , halous , halic , and perhalic acids , respectively .
The strengths of these acids increase from the hypohalous acids , which are very weak acids , to the perhalic acids , which are very strong .
lists the known acids , and , where known , their pK values are given in parentheses .
The only known oxyacid of fluorine is the very unstable hypofluorous acid , HOF , which is prepared by the reaction of gaseous fluorine with ice : The compound is very unstable and decomposes above −40 °C .
This compound does not ionize in water , and there are no known salts .
It is uncertain whether the name hypofluorous acid is even appropriate for HOF ; a more appropriate name might be hydrogen hypofluorite .
The reactions of chlorine and bromine with water are analogous to that of fluorine with ice , but these reactions do not go to completion , and mixtures of the halogen and the respective hypohalous and hydrohalic acids result .
Other than HOF , the hypohalous acids only exist in solution .
The hypohalous acids are all very weak acids ; however , HOCl is a stronger acid than HOBr , which , in turn , is stronger than HOI .
The addition of base to solutions of the hypohalous acids produces solutions of salts containing the basic hypohalite ions , OX .
It is possible to isolate these salts as solids .
All of the hypohalites are unstable with respect to disproportionation in solution , but the reaction is slow for hypochlorite .
Hypobromite and hypoiodite disproportionate rapidly , even in the cold : Sodium hypochlorite is an inexpensive bleach ( Clorox ) and germicide .
The commercial preparation involves the electrolysis of cold , dilute , aqueous sodium chloride solutions under conditions where the resulting chlorine and hydroxide ion can react .
The net reaction is : The only definitely known halous acid is chlorous acid , HClO , obtained by the reaction of barium chlorite with dilute sulfuric acid : Filtering the insoluble barium sulfate leaves a solution of HClO .
Chlorous acid is not stable ; it slowly decomposes in solution to yield chlorine dioxide , hydrochloric acid , and water .
Chlorous acid reacts with bases to give salts containing the chlorite ion ( shown in ) .
Sodium chlorite finds an extensive application in the bleaching of paper because it is a strong oxidizing agent and does not damage the paper .
Chloric acid , HClO , and bromic acid , HBrO , are stable only in solution .
The reaction of iodine with concentrated nitric acid produces stable white iodic acid , HIO : It is possible to obtain the lighter halic acids from their barium salts by reaction with dilute sulfuric acid .
The reaction is analogous to that used to prepare chlorous acid .
All of the halic acids are strong acids and very active oxidizing agents .
The acids react with bases to form salts containing chlorate ions ( shown in ) .
Another preparative method is the electrochemical oxidation of a hot solution of a metal halide to form the appropriate metal chlorates .
Sodium chlorate is a weed killer ; potassium chlorate is used as an oxidizing agent .
Perchloric acid , HClO , forms when treating a perchlorate , such as potassium perchlorate , with sulfuric acid under reduced pressure .
The HClO can be distilled from the mixture : Dilute aqueous solutions of perchloric acid are quite stable thermally , but concentrations above 60 % are unstable and dangerous .
Perchloric acid and its salts are powerful oxidizing agents , as the very electronegative chlorine is more stable in a lower oxidation state than 7+ .
Serious explosions have occurred when heating concentrated solutions with easily oxidized substances .
However , its reactions as an oxidizing agent are slow when perchloric acid is cold and dilute .
The acid is among the strongest of all acids .
Most salts containing the perchlorate ion ( shown in ) are soluble .
It is possible to prepare them from reactions of bases with perchloric acid and , commercially , by the electrolysis of hot solutions of their chlorides .
Perbromate salts are difficult to prepare , and the best syntheses currently involve the oxidation of bromates in basic solution with fluorine gas followed by acidification .
There are few , if any , commercial uses of this acid or its salts .
There are several different acids containing iodine in the 7+-oxidation state ; they include metaperiodic acid , HIO , and paraperiodic acid , H IO .
These acids are strong oxidizing agents and react with bases to form the appropriate salts .
Hydrogen sulfide is often a component of natural gas and occurs in many volcanic gases , like those shown in .
Sulfur is a constituent of many proteins and is essential for life .
The Frasch process , illustrated in , is important in the mining of free sulfur from enormous underground deposits in Texas and Louisiana .
Superheated water ( 170 °C and 10 atm pressure ) is forced down the outermost of three concentric pipes to the underground deposit .
The hot water melts the sulfur .
The innermost pipe conducts compressed air into the liquid sulfur .
The air forces the liquid sulfur , mixed with air , to flow up through the outlet pipe .
Transferring the mixture to large settling vats allows the solid sulfur to separate upon cooling .
This sulfur is 99.5 % to 99.9 % pure and requires no purification for most uses .
Larger amounts of sulfur also come from hydrogen sulfide recovered during the purification of natural gas .
Sulfur exists in several allotropic forms .
The stable form at room temperature contains eight-membered rings , and so the true formula is S .
However , chemists commonly use S to simplify the coefficients in chemical equations ; we will follow this practice in this book .
Like oxygen , which is also a member of group 16 , sulfur exhibits a distinctly nonmetallic behavior .
It oxidizes metals , giving a variety of binary sulfides in which sulfur exhibits a negative oxidation state ( 2− ) .
Elemental sulfur oxidizes less electronegative nonmetals , and more electronegative nonmetals , such as oxygen and the halogens , will oxidize it .
Other strong oxidizing agents also oxidize sulfur .
For example , concentrated nitric acid oxidizes sulfur to the sulfate ion , with the concurrent formation of nitrogen ( IV ) oxide : The chemistry of sulfur with an oxidation state of 2− is similar to that of oxygen .
Unlike oxygen , however , sulfur forms many compounds in which it exhibits positive oxidation states .
By the end of this section , you will be able to : Describe the preparation , properties , and uses of halogens Describe the properties , preparation , and uses of halogen compounds The elements in group 17 are the halogens .
These are the elements fluorine , chlorine , bromine , iodine , and astatine .
These elements are too reactive to occur freely in nature , but their compounds are widely distributed .
Chlorides are the most abundant ; although fluorides , bromides , and iodides are less common , they are reasonably available .
In this section , we will examine the occurrence , preparation , and properties of halogens .
Next , we will examine halogen compounds with the representative metals followed by an examination of the interhalogens .
This section will conclude with some applications of halogens .
All of the halogens occur in seawater as halide ions .
The concentration of the chloride ion is 0.54 M ; that of the other halides is less than 10 M .
Fluoride also occurs in minerals such as CaF , Ca ( PO ) F , and Na AlF .
Chloride also occurs in the Great Salt Lake and the Dead Sea , and in extensive salt beds that contain NaCl , KCl , or MgCl .
Part of the chlorine in your body is present as hydrochloric acid , which is a component of stomach acid .
Bromine compounds occur in the Dead Sea and underground brines .
Iodine compounds are found in small quantities in Chile saltpeter , underground brines , and sea kelp .
Iodine is essential to the function of the thyroid gland .
The best sources of halogens ( except iodine ) are halide salts .
It is possible to oxidize the halide ions to free diatomic halogen molecules by various methods , depending on the ease of oxidation of the halide ion .
Fluoride is the most difficult to oxidize , whereas iodide is the easiest .
The major method for preparing fluorine is electrolytic oxidation .
The most common electrolysis procedure is to use a molten mixture of potassium hydrogen fluoride , KHF , and anhydrous hydrogen fluoride .
Electrolysis causes HF to decompose , forming fluorine gas at the anode and hydrogen at the cathode .
It is necessary to keep the two gases separated to prevent their explosive recombination to reform hydrogen fluoride .
Most commercial chlorine comes from the electrolysis of the chloride ion in aqueous solutions of sodium chloride ; this is the chlor-alkali process discussed previously .
Chlorine is also a product of the electrolytic production of metals such as sodium , calcium , and magnesium from their fused chlorides .
It is also possible to prepare chlorine by the chemical oxidation of the chloride ion in acid solution with strong oxidizing agents such as manganese dioxide ( MnO ) or sodium dichromate ( Na Cr O ) .
The reaction with manganese dioxide is : The commercial preparation of bromine involves the oxidation of bromide ion by chlorine : Chlorine is a stronger oxidizing agent than bromine .
This method is important for the production of essentially all domestic bromine .
Some iodine comes from the oxidation of iodine chloride , ICl , or iodic acid , HlO .
Liquid bromine has a high vapor pressure , and the reddish vapor is readily visible in .
Iodine crystals have a noticeable vapor pressure .
When gently heated , these crystals sublime and form a beautiful deep violet vapor .
Bromine is only slightly soluble in water , but it is miscible in all proportions in less polar ( or nonpolar ) solvents such as chloroform , carbon tetrachloride , and carbon disulfide , forming solutions that vary from yellow to reddish-brown , depending on the concentration .
Iodine is soluble in chloroform , carbon tetrachloride , carbon disulfide , and many hydrocarbons , giving violet solutions of I molecules .
Iodine dissolves only slightly in water , giving brown solutions .
It is quite soluble in aqueous solutions of iodides , with which it forms brown solutions .
These brown solutions result because iodine molecules have empty valence d orbitals and can act as weak Lewis acids towards the iodide ion .
Fluorine generally oxidizes an element to its highest oxidation state , whereas the heavier halogens may not .
For example , when excess fluorine reacts with sulfur , SF forms .
Chlorine gives SCl and bromine , S Br .
Iodine does not react with sulfur .
Fluorine is the most powerful oxidizing agent of the known elements .
It spontaneously oxidizes most other elements ; therefore , the reverse reaction , the oxidation of fluorides , is very difficult to accomplish .
Fluorine reacts directly and forms binary fluorides with all of the elements except the lighter noble gases ( He , Ne , and Ar ) .
Fluorine is such a strong oxidizing agent that many substances ignite on contact with it .
Drops of water inflame in fluorine and form O , OF , H O , O , and HF .
Wood and asbestos ignite and burn in fluorine gas .
Most hot metals burn vigorously in fluorine .
However , it is possible to handle fluorine in copper , iron , or nickel containers because an adherent film of the fluoride salt passivates their surfaces .
Fluorine is the only element that reacts directly with the noble gas xenon .
Although it is a strong oxidizing agent , chlorine is less active than fluorine .
Mixing chlorine and hydrogen in the dark makes the reaction between them to be imperceptibly slow .
Exposure of the mixture to light causes the two to react explosively .
Chlorine is also less active towards metals than fluorine , and oxidation reactions usually require higher temperatures .
Molten sodium ignites in chlorine .
Chlorine attacks most nonmetals ( C , N , and O are notable exceptions ) , forming covalent molecular compounds .
Chlorine generally reacts with compounds that contain only carbon and hydrogen ( hydrocarbons ) by adding to multiple bonds or by substitution .
In cold water , chlorine undergoes a disproportionation reaction : Half the chlorine atoms oxidize to the 1+ oxidation state ( hypochlorous acid ) , and the other half reduce to the 1− oxidation state ( chloride ion ) .
This disproportionation is incomplete , so chlorine water is an equilibrium mixture of chlorine molecules , hypochlorous acid molecules , hydronium ions , and chloride ions .
When exposed to light , this solution undergoes a photochemical decomposition : The nonmetal chlorine is more electronegative than any other element except fluorine , oxygen , and nitrogen .
In general , very electronegative elements are good oxidizing agents ; therefore , we would expect elemental chlorine to oxidize all of the other elements except for these three ( and the nonreactive noble gases ) .
Its oxidizing property , in fact , is responsible for its principal use .
The chemical properties of bromine are similar to those of chlorine , although bromine is the weaker oxidizing agent and its reactivity is less than that of chlorine .
Iodine is the least reactive of the halogens .
It is the weakest oxidizing agent , and the iodide ion is the most easily oxidized halide ion .
Iodine reacts with metals , but heating is often required .
It does not oxidize other halide ions .
Compared with the other halogens , iodine reacts only slightly with water .
Traces of iodine in water react with a mixture of starch and iodide ion , forming a deep blue color .
This reaction is a very sensitive test for the presence of iodine in water .
Thousands of salts of the representative metals have been prepared .
The binary halides are an important subclass of salts .
A salt is an ionic compound composed of cations and anions , other than hydroxide or oxide ions .
In general , it is possible to prepare these salts from the metals or from oxides , hydroxides , or carbonates .
We will illustrate the general types of reactions for preparing salts through reactions used to prepare binary halides .
The binary compounds of a metal with the halogens are the halides .
Most binary halides are ionic .
However , mercury , the elements of group 13 with oxidation states of 3+ , tin ( IV ) , and lead ( IV ) form covalent binary halides .
The direct reaction of a metal and a halogen produce the halide of the metal .
Examples of these oxidation-reduction reactions include : If a metal can exhibit two oxidation states , it may be necessary to control the stoichiometry in order to obtain the halide with the lower oxidation state .
The reaction of zinc with hydrogen fluoride is : The active representative metals also react with solutions of hydrogen halides to form hydrogen and solutions of the corresponding halides .
Examples of such reactions include : Hydroxides , carbonates , and some oxides react with solutions of the hydrogen halides to form solutions of halide salts .
It is possible to prepare additional salts by the reaction of these hydroxides , carbonates , and oxides with aqueous solution of other acids : A few halides and many of the other salts of the representative metals are insoluble .
It is possible to prepare these soluble salts by metathesis reactions that occur when solutions of soluble salts are mixed ( see ) .
Metathesis reactions are examined in the chapter on the stoichiometry of chemical reactions .
Several halides occur in large quantities in nature .
The ocean and underground brines contain many halides .
For example , magnesium chloride in the ocean is the source of magnesium ions used in the production of magnesium .
Large underground deposits of sodium chloride , like the salt mine shown in , occur in many parts of the world .
These deposits serve as the source of sodium and chlorine in almost all other compounds containing these elements .
The chlor-alkali process is one example .
Compounds formed from two or more different halogens are interhalogens .
Interhalogen molecules consist of one atom of the heavier halogen bonded by single bonds to an odd number of atoms of the lighter halogen .
The structures of IF , IF , and IF are illustrated in .
Formulas for other interhalogens , each of which comes from the reaction of the respective halogens , are in .
Note from that fluorine is able to oxidize iodine to its maximum oxidation state , 7+ , whereas bromine and chlorine , which are more difficult to oxidize , achieve only the 5+-oxidation state .
A 7+-oxidation state is the limit for the halogens .
Because smaller halogens are grouped about a larger one , the maximum number of smaller atoms possible increases as the radius of the larger atom increases .
Many of these compounds are unstable , and most are extremely reactive .
The interhalogens react like their component halides ; halogen fluorides , for example , are stronger oxidizing agents than are halogen chlorides .
The ionic polyhalides of the alkali metals , such as KI , KICl , KICl , CsIBr , and CsBrCl , which contain an anion composed of at least three halogen atoms , are closely related to the interhalogens .
As seen previously , the formation is responsible for the solubility of iodine in aqueous solutions containing an iodide ion .
of the polyhalide anion The fluoride ion and fluorine compounds have many important uses .
Compounds of carbon , hydrogen , and fluorine are replacing Freons ( compounds of carbon , chlorine , and fluorine ) as refrigerants .
Teflon is a polymer composed of –CF CF – units .
Fluoride ion is added to water supplies and to some toothpastes as SnF or NaF to fight tooth decay .
Fluoride partially converts teeth from Ca ( PO ) ( OH ) into Ca ( PO ) F. Chlorine is important to bleach wood pulp and cotton cloth .
The chlorine reacts with water to form hypochlorous acid , which oxidizes colored substances to colorless ones .
Chlorine is also important to kill the bacteria in community water supplies .
Bromine is important in the production of certain dyes , and sodium and potassium bromides are used as sedatives .
At one time , light-sensitive silver bromide was a component of photographic film .
Iodine in alcohol solution with potassium iodide is an antiseptic ( tincture of iodine ) .
Iodide salts are essential for the proper functioning of the thyroid gland ; an iodine deficiency may lead to the development of a goiter .
Iodized table salt contains 0.023 % potassium iodide .
Silver iodide is useful in the seeding of clouds to induce rain ; it was important in the production of photographic film and iodoform , CHI , is an antiseptic .
By the end of this section , you will be able to : Describe the properties , preparation , and uses of the noble gases The elements in group 18 are the noble gases ( helium , neon , argon , krypton , xenon , and radon ) .
They earned the name “ noble ” because they were assumed to be nonreactive since they have filled valence shells .
In 1962 , Dr. Neil Bartlett at the University of British Columbia proved this assumption to be false .
These elements are present in the atmosphere in small amounts .
Some natural gas contains 1–2 % helium by mass .
Helium is isolated from natural gas by liquefying the condensable components , leaving only helium as a gas .
The United States possesses most of the world ’ s commercial supply of this element in its helium-bearing gas fields .
Argon , neon , krypton , and xenon come from the fractional distillation of liquid air .
Radon comes from other radioactive elements .
More recently , it was observed that this radioactive gas is present in very small amounts in soils and minerals .
Its accumulation in well-insulated , tightly sealed buildings , however , constitutes a health hazard , primarily lung cancer .
The boiling points and melting points of the noble gases are extremely low relative to those of other substances of comparable atomic or molecular masses .
This is because only weak London dispersion forces are present , and these forces can hold the atoms together only when molecular motion is very slight , as it is at very low temperatures .
Helium is the only substance known that does not solidify on cooling at normal pressure .
It remains liquid close to absolute zero ( 0.001 K ) at ordinary pressures , but it solidifies under elevated pressure .
Helium is used for filling balloons and lighter-than-air craft because it does not burn , making it safer to use than hydrogen .
Helium at high pressures is not a narcotic like nitrogen .
Thus , mixtures of oxygen and helium are important for divers working under high pressures .
Using a helium-oxygen mixture avoids the disoriented mental state known as nitrogen narcosis , the so-called rapture of the deep .
Helium is important as an inert atmosphere for the melting and welding of easily oxidizable metals and for many chemical processes that are sensitive to air .
Liquid helium ( boiling point , 4.2 K ) is an important coolant to reach the low temperatures necessary for cryogenic research , and it is essential for achieving the low temperatures necessary to produce superconduction in traditional superconducting materials used in powerful magnets and other devices .
This cooling ability is necessary for the magnets used for magnetic resonance imaging , a common medical diagnostic procedure .
The other common coolant is liquid nitrogen ( boiling point , 77 K ) , which is significantly cheaper .
Neon is a component of neon lamps and signs .
Passing an electric spark through a tube containing neon at low pressure generates the familiar red glow of neon .
It is possible to change the color of the light by mixing argon or mercury vapor with the neon or by utilizing glass tubes of a special color .
Argon was useful in the manufacture of gas-filled electric light bulbs , where its lower heat conductivity and chemical inertness made it preferable to nitrogen for inhibiting the vaporization of the tungsten filament and prolonging the life of the bulb .
Fluorescent tubes commonly contain a mixture of argon and mercury vapor .
Argon is the third most abundant gas in dry air .
Krypton-xenon flash tubes are used to take high-speed photographs .
An electric discharge through such a tube gives of a second .
Krypton forms a difluoride , KrF , which is thermally unstable a very intense light that lasts only at room temperature .
Stable compounds of xenon form when xenon reacts with fluorine .
Xenon difluoride , XeF , forms after heating an excess of xenon gas with fluorine gas and then cooling .
The material forms colorless crystals , which are stable at room temperature in a dry atmosphere .
Xenon tetrafluoride , XeF , and xenon hexafluoride , XeF , are prepared in an analogous manner , with a stoichiometric amount of fluorine and an excess of fluorine , respectively .
Compounds with oxygen are prepared by replacing fluorine atoms in the xenon fluorides with oxygen .
When XeF reacts with water , a solution of XeO results and the xenon remains in the 6+-oxidation state : Dry , solid xenon trioxide , XeO , is extremely explosive—it will spontaneously detonate .
Both XeF and XeO disproportionate in basic solution , producing xenon , oxygen , and salts of the perxenate ion , in which xenon reaches its maximum oxidation sate of 8+ .
Radon apparently forms RnF —evidence of this compound comes from radiochemical tracer techniques .
Unstable compounds of argon form at low temperatures , but stable compounds of helium and neon are not known .
We have daily contact with many transition metals .
Iron occurs everywhere—from the rings in your spiral notebook and the cutlery in your kitchen to automobiles , ships , buildings , and in the hemoglobin in your blood .
Titanium is useful in the manufacture of lightweight , durable products such as bicycle frames , artificial hips , and jewelry .
Chromium is useful as a protective plating on plumbing fixtures and automotive detailing .
In addition to being used in their pure elemental forms , many compounds containing transition metals have numerous other applications .
Silver nitrate is used to create mirrors , zirconium silicate provides friction in automotive brakes , and many important cancer-fighting agents , like the drug cisplatin and related species , are platinum compounds .
The variety of properties exhibited by transition metals is due to their complex valence shells .
Unlike most main group metals where one oxidation state is normally observed , the valence shell structure of transition metals means that they usually occur in several different stable oxidation states .
In addition , electron transitions in these elements can correspond with absorption of photons in the visible electromagnetic spectrum , leading to colored compounds .
Because of these behaviors , transition metals exhibit a rich and fascinating chemistry .
Transition metals are defined as those elements that have ( or readily form ) partially filled d orbitals .
As shown in , the d -block elements in groups 3–11 are transition elements .
The f -block elements , also called inner transition metals ( the lanthanides and actinides ) , also meet this criterion because the d orbital is partially occupied before the f orbitals .
The d orbitals fill with the copper family ( group 11 ) ; for this reason , the next family ( group 12 ) are technically not transition elements .
However , the group 12 elements do display some of the same chemical properties and are commonly included in discussions of transition metals .
Some chemists do treat the group 12 elements as transition metals .
The d -block elements are divided into the first transition series ( the elements Sc through Cu ) , the second transition series ( the elements Y through Ag ) , and the third transition series ( the element La and the elements Hf through Au ) .
Actinium , Ac , is the first member of the fourth transition series , which also includes Rf through Rg .
The f -block elements are the elements Ce through Lu , which constitute the lanthanide series ( or lanthanoid series ) , and the elements Th through Lr , which constitute the actinide series ( or actinoid series ) .
Because lanthanum behaves very much like the lanthanide elements , it is considered a lanthanide element , even though its electron configuration makes it the first member of the third transition series .
Similarly , the behavior of actinium means it is part of the actinide series , although its electron configuration makes it the first member of the fourth transition series .
Review how to write electron configurations , covered in the chapter on electronic structure and periodic properties of elements .
Recall that for the transition and inner transition metals , it is necessary to remove the s electrons before the d or f electrons .
For ions , the s -valence electrons are lost prior to the d or f electrons .
( a ) Ce [ Xe ] 4 f ; Ce is an inner transition element in the lanthanide series .
( b ) Pb [ Xe ] 6 s 5 d 4 f ; the electrons are lost from the p orbital .
This is a main group element .
Answer : V is one possibility .
Other examples include Sc , Ti , Cr , and Mn .
The transition elements have many properties in common with other metals .
They are almost all hard , high-melting solids that conduct heat and electricity well .
They readily form alloys and lose electrons to form stable cations .
In addition , transition metals form a wide variety of stable coordination compounds , in which the central metal atom or ion acts as a Lewis acid and accepts one or more pairs of electrons .
Many different molecules and ions can donate lone pairs to the metal center , serving as Lewis bases .
In this chapter , we shall focus primarily on the chemical behavior of the elements of the first transition series .
Transition metals demonstrate a wide range of chemical behaviors .
As can be seen from their reduction potentials ( see ) , some transition metals are strong reducing agents , whereas others have very low reactivity .
For example , the lanthanides all form stable 3+ aqueous cations .
The driving force for such oxidations is similar to that of alkaline earth metals such as Be or Mg , forming Be and Mg .
On the other hand , materials like platinum and gold have much higher reduction potentials .
Their ability to resist oxidation makes them useful materials for constructing circuits and jewelry .
Ions of the lighter d -block elements , such as Cr , Fe , and Co , form colorful hydrated ions that are stable in water .
However , ions in the period just below these ( Mo , Ru , and Ir ) are unstable and react readily with oxygen from the air .
The majority of simple , water-stable ions formed by the heavier d -block elements are oxyanions such as Ruthenium , osmium , rhodium , iridium , palladium , and platinum are the platinum metals .
With difficulty , they form simple cations that are stable in water , and , unlike the earlier elements in the second and third transition series , they do not form stable oxyanions .
and Both the d and f -block elements react with nonmetals to form binary compounds ; heating is often required .
These elements react with halogens to form a variety of halides ranging in oxidation state from 1+ to 6+ .
On heating , oxygen reacts with all of the transition elements except palladium , platinum , silver , and gold .
The oxides of these latter metals can be formed using other reactants , but they decompose upon heating .
The f -block elements , the elements of group 3 , and the elements of the first transition series except copper react with aqueous solutions of acids , forming hydrogen gas and solutions of the corresponding salts .
Transition metals can form compounds with a wide range of oxidation states .
Some of the observed oxidation states of the elements of the first transition series are shown in .
As we move from left to right across the first transition series , we see that the number of common oxidation states increases at first to a maximum towards the middle of the table , then decreases .
The values in the table are typical values ; there are other known values , and it is possible to synthesize new additions .
For example , in 2014 , researchers were successful in synthesizing a new oxidation state of iridium ( 9+ ) .
For the elements scandium through manganese ( the first half of the first transition series ) , the highest oxidation state corresponds to the loss of all of the electrons in both the s and d orbitals of their valence shells .
The titanium ( IV ) ion , for example , is formed when the titanium atom loses its two 3 d and two 4 s electrons .
These highest oxidation states are the most stable forms of scandium , titanium , and vanadium .
However , it is not possible to continue to remove all of the valence electrons from metals as we continue through the series .
Iron is known to form oxidation states from 2+ to 6+ , with iron ( II ) and iron ( III ) being the most common .
Most of the elements of the first transition series form ions with a charge of 2+ or 3+ that are stable in water , although those of the early members of the series can be readily oxidized by air .
The elements of the second and third transition series generally are more stable in higher oxidation states than are the elements of the first series .
In general , the atomic radius increases down a group , which leads to the ions of the second and third series being larger than are those in the first series .
Removing electrons from orbitals that are located farther from the nucleus is easier than removing electrons close to the nucleus .
For example , molybdenum and tungsten , members of group 6 , are limited mostly to an oxidation state of 6+ in aqueous solution .
Chromium , the lightest member of the group , forms stable Cr ions in water and , in the absence of air , less stable Cr ions .
The sulfide with the highest oxidation state for chromium is Cr S , which contains the Cr ion .
Molybdenum and tungsten form sulfides in which the metals exhibit oxidation states of 4+ and 6+ .
Which is the strongest oxidizing agent in acidic solution : dichromate ion , which contains chromium ( VI ) , permanganate ion , which contains manganese ( VII ) , or titanium dioxide , which contains titanium ( IV ) ?
First , we need to look up the reduction half reactions ( in ) for each oxide in the specified oxidation state : A larger reduction potential means that it is easier to reduce the reactant .
Permanganate , with the largest reduction potential , is the strongest oxidizer under these conditions .
Dichromate is next , followed by titanium dioxide as the weakest oxidizing agent ( the hardest to reduce ) of this set .
Predict what reaction ( if any ) will occur between HCl and Co ( s ) , and between HBr and Pt ( s ) .
You will need to use the standard reduction potentials from .
Answer : no reaction because Pt ( s ) will not be oxidized by H Ancient civilizations knew about iron , copper , silver , and gold .
The time periods in human history known as the Bronze Age and Iron Age mark the advancements in which societies learned to isolate certain metals and use them to make tools and goods .
Naturally occurring ores of copper , silver , and gold can contain high concentrations of these metals in elemental form .
Iron , on the other hand , occurs on earth almost exclusively in oxidized forms , such as rust ( Fe O ) .
The earliest known iron implements were made from iron meteorites .
Surviving iron artifacts dating from approximately 4000 to 2500 BC are rare , but all known examples contain specific alloys of iron and nickel that occur only in extraterrestrial objects , not on earth .
It took thousands of years of technological advances before civilizations developed iron smelting , the ability to extract a pure element from its naturally occurring ores and for iron tools to become common .
Generally , the transition elements are extracted from minerals found in a variety of ores .
However , the ease of their recovery varies widely , depending on the concentration of the element in the ore , the identity of the other elements present , and the difficulty of reducing the element to the free metal .
In general , it is not difficult to reduce ions of the d -block elements to the free element .
Carbon is a sufficiently strong reducing agent in most cases .
However , like the ions of the more active main group metals , ions of the f -block elements must be isolated by electrolysis or by reduction with an active metal such as calcium .
We shall discuss the processes used for the isolation of iron , copper , and silver because these three processes illustrate the principal means of isolating most of the d -block metals .
In general , each of these processes involves three principal steps : preliminary treatment , smelting , and refining .
In general , there is an initial treatment of the ores to make them suitable for the extraction of the metals .
This usually involves crushing or grinding the ore , concentrating the metal-bearing components , and sometimes treating these substances chemically to convert them into compounds that are easier to reduce to the metal .
The next step is the extraction of the metal in the molten state , a process called smelting , which includes reduction of the metallic compound to the metal .
Impurities may be removed by the addition of a compound that forms a slag—a substance with a low melting point that can be readily separated from the molten metal .
The final step in the recovery of a metal is refining the metal .
Low boiling metals such as zinc and mercury can be refined by distillation .
When fused on an inclined table , low melting metals like tin flow away from higher-melting impurities .
Electrolysis is another common method for refining metals .
The early application of iron to the manufacture of tools and weapons was possible because of the wide distribution of iron ores and the ease with which iron compounds in the ores could be reduced by carbon .
For a long time , charcoal was the form of carbon used in the reduction process .
The production and use of iron became much more widespread about 1620 , when coke was introduced as the reducing agent .
Coke is a form of carbon formed by heating coal in the absence of air to remove impurities .
The first step in the metallurgy of iron is usually roasting the ore ( heating the ore in air ) to remove water , decomposing carbonates into oxides , and converting sulfides into oxides .
The oxides are then reduced in a blast furnace that is 80–100 feet high and about 25 feet in diameter in which the roasted ore , coke , and limestone ( impure CaCO ) are introduced continuously into the top .
Molten iron and slag are withdrawn at the bottom .
The entire stock in a furnace may weigh several hundred tons .
Near the bottom of a furnace are nozzles through which preheated air is blown into the furnace .
As soon as the air enters , the coke in the region of the nozzles is oxidized to carbon dioxide with the liberation of a great deal of heat .
The hot carbon dioxide passes upward through the overlying layer of white-hot coke , where it is reduced to carbon monoxide : The carbon monoxide serves as the reducing agent in the upper regions of the furnace .
The individual reactions are indicated in .
The iron oxides are reduced in the upper region of the furnace .
In the middle region , limestone ( calcium carbonate ) decomposes , and the resulting calcium oxide combines with silica and silicates in the ore to form slag .
The slag is mostly calcium silicate and contains most of the commercially unimportant components of the ore : Just below the middle of the furnace , the temperature is high enough to melt both the iron and the slag .
They collect in layers at the bottom of the furnace ; the less dense slag floats on the iron and protects it from oxidation .
Several times a day , the slag and molten iron are withdrawn from the furnace .
The iron is transferred to casting machines or to a steelmaking plant .
Much of the iron produced is refined and converted into steel .
Steel is made from iron by removing impurities and adding substances such as manganese , chromium , nickel , tungsten , molybdenum , and vanadium to produce alloys with properties that make the material suitable for specific uses .
Most steels also contain small but definite percentages of carbon ( 0.04 % –2.5 % ) .
However , a large part of the carbon contained in iron must be removed in the manufacture of steel ; otherwise , the excess carbon would make the iron brittle .
The most important ores of copper contain copper sulfides ( such as covellite , CuS ) , although copper oxides ( such as tenorite , CuO ) and copper hydroxycarbonates [ such as malachite , Cu ( OH ) CO ] are sometimes found .
In the production of copper metal , the concentrated sulfide ore is roasted to remove part of the sulfur as sulfur dioxide .
The remaining mixture , which consists of Cu S , FeS , FeO , and SiO , is mixed with limestone , which serves as a flux ( a material that aids in the removal of impurities ) , and heated .
Molten slag forms as the iron and silica are removed by Lewis acid-base reactions : In these reactions , the silicon dioxide behaves as a Lewis acid , which accepts a pair of electrons from the Lewis base ( the oxide ion ) .
Reduction of the Cu S that remains after smelting is accomplished by blowing air through the molten material .
The air converts part of the Cu S into Cu O .
This impure copper is cast into large plates , which are used as anodes in the electrolytic refining of the metal ( which is described in the chapter on electrochemistry ) .
Silver sometimes occurs in large nuggets but more frequently in veins and related deposits .
At one time , panning was an effective method of isolating both silver and gold nuggets .
Due to their low reactivity , these metals , and a few others , occur in deposits as nuggets .
The discovery of platinum was due to Spanish explorers in Central America mistaking platinum nuggets for silver .
When the metal is not in the form of nuggets , it often useful to employ a process called hydrometallurgy to separate silver from its ores .
Hydrology involves the separation of a metal from a mixture by first converting it into soluble ions and then extracting and reducing them to precipitate the pure metal .
In the presence of air , alkali metal cyanides readily form the soluble dicyanoargentate ( I ) ion , from silver metal or silver-containing compounds such as Ag S and AgCl .
Why does the reaction not occur as : The charges , as well as the atoms , must balance in reactions .
The silver atom is being oxidized from the 0 oxidation state to the 1+ state .
Whenever something loses electrons , something must also gain electrons ( be reduced ) to balance the equation .
Oxygen is a good oxidizing agent for these reactions because it can gain electrons to go from the 0 oxidation state to the 2− state .
During the refining of iron , carbon must be present in the blast furnace .
Why is carbon necessary to convert iron oxide into iron ?
Answer : The carbon is converted into CO , which is the reducing agent that accepts electrons so that iron ( III ) can be reduced to iron ( 0 ) .
The bonding in the simple compounds of the transition elements ranges from ionic to covalent .
In their lower oxidation states , the transition elements form ionic compounds ; in their higher oxidation states , they form covalent compounds or polyatomic ions .
The variation in oxidation states exhibited by the transition elements gives these compounds a metal-based , oxidation-reduction chemistry .
The chemistry of several classes of compounds containing elements of the transition series follows .
Anhydrous halides of each of the transition elements can be prepared by the direct reaction of the metal with halogens .
Generally , fluorine forms fluoride-containing metals in their highest oxidation states .
The other halogens may not form analogous compounds .
In general , the preparation of stable water solutions of the halides of the metals of the first transition series is by the addition of a hydrohalic acid to carbonates , hydroxides , oxides , or other compounds that contain basic anions .
Sample reactions are : Most of the first transition series metals also dissolve in acids , forming a solution of the salt and hydrogen gas .
For example : The polarity of bonds with transition metals varies based not only upon the electronegativities of the atoms involved but also upon the oxidation state of the transition metal .
Remember that bond polarity is a continuous spectrum with electrons being shared evenly ( covalent bonds ) at one extreme and electrons being transferred completely ( ionic bonds ) at the other .
No bond is ever 100 % ionic , and the degree to which the electrons are evenly distributed determines many properties of the compound .
Transition metal halides with low oxidation numbers form more ionic bonds .
All halides of the heavier d -block elements have significant covalent characteristics .
The covalent behavior of the transition metals with higher oxidation states is exemplified by the reaction of the metal tetrahalides with water .
Oxides with low oxidation states tend to be more ionic , whereas those with higher oxidation states are more covalent .
These variations in bonding are because the electronegativities of the elements are not fixed values .
The electronegativity of an element increases with increasing oxidation state .
Transition metals in low oxidation states have lower electronegativity values than oxygen ; therefore , these metal oxides are ionic .
Transition metals in very high oxidation states have electronegativity values close to that of oxygen , which leads to these oxides being covalent .
The oxides of the first transition series can be prepared by heating the metals in air .
These oxides are Sc O , TiO , V O , Cr O , Mn O , Fe O , Co O , NiO , and CuO .
Alternatively , these oxides and other oxides ( with the metals in different oxidation states ) can be produced by heating the corresponding hydroxides , carbonates , or oxalates in an inert atmosphere .
They can react with acids and , in a few cases , with bases .
Overall , oxides of transition metals with the lowest oxidation states are basic ( and react with acids ) , the intermediate ones are amphoteric , and the highest oxidation states are primarily acidic .
Basic metal oxides at a low oxidation state react with aqueous acids to form solutions of salts and water .
Vanadium ( V ) oxide , chromium ( VI ) oxide , and manganese ( VII ) oxide are acidic .
When a soluble hydroxide is added to an aqueous solution of a salt of a transition metal of the first transition series , a gelatinous precipitate forms .
For example , adding a solution of sodium hydroxide to a solution of cobalt sulfate produces a gelatinous pink or blue precipitate of cobalt ( II ) hydroxide .
The net ionic equation is : In this and many other cases , these precipitates are hydroxides containing the transition metal ion , hydroxide ions , and water coordinated to the transition metal .
In other cases , the precipitates are hydrated oxides composed of the metal ion , oxide ions , and water of hydration : These substances do not contain hydroxide ions .
However , both the hydroxides and the hydrated oxides react with acids to form salts and water .
When precipitating a metal from solution , it is necessary to avoid an excess of hydroxide ion , as this may lead to complex ion formation as discussed later in this chapter .
The precipitated metal hydroxides can be separated for further processing or for waste disposal .
Many of the elements of the first transition series form insoluble carbonates .
It is possible to prepare these carbonates by the addition of a soluble carbonate salt to a solution of a transition metal salt .
For example , nickel carbonate can be prepared from solutions of nickel nitrate and sodium carbonate according to the following net ionic equation : The reactions of the transition metal carbonates are similar to those of the active metal carbonates .
They react with acids to form metals salts , carbon dioxide , and water .
Upon heating , they decompose , forming the transition metal oxides .
In many respects , the chemical behavior of the elements of the first transition series is very similar to that of the main group metals .
In particular , the same types of reactions that are used to prepare salts of the main group metals can be used to prepare simple ionic salts of these elements .
The reactions involved include the reactions of oxides , hydroxides , or carbonates with acids .
For example : Substitution reactions involving soluble salts may be used to prepare insoluble salts .
For example : In our discussion of oxides in this section , we have seen that reactions of the covalent oxides of the transition elements with hydroxides form salts that contain oxyanions of the transition elements .
Ions of the metals , especially the transition metals , are likely to form complexes .
Many of these compounds are highly colored .
In the remainder of this chapter , we will consider the structure and bonding of these remarkable compounds .
Remember that in most main group element compounds , the valence electrons of the isolated atoms combine to form chemical bonds that satisfy the octet rule .
For instance , the four valence electrons of carbon overlap with electrons from four hydrogen atoms to form CH .
The one valence electron leaves sodium and adds to the seven valence electrons of chlorine to form the ionic formula unit NaCl .
Transition metals do not normally bond in this fashion .
They primarily form coordinate covalent bonds , a form of the Lewis acid-base interaction in which both of the electrons in the bond are contributed by a donor ( Lewis base ) to an electron acceptor ( Lewis acid ) .
The Lewis acid in coordination complexes , often called a central metal ion ( or atom ) , is often a transition metal or inner transition metal , although main group elements can also form coordination compounds .
The Lewis base donors , called ligands , can be a wide variety of chemicals—atoms , molecules , or ions .
The only requirement is that they have one or more electron pairs , which can be donated to the central metal .
Most often , this involves a donor atom with a lone pair of electrons that can form a coordinate bond to the metal .
The coordination sphere consists of the central metal ion or atom plus its attached ligands .
Brackets in a formula enclose the coordination sphere ; species outside the brackets are not part of the coordination sphere .
The coordination number of the central metal ion or atom is the number of donor atoms bonded to it .
The coordination number for the silver ion in [ Ag ( NH ) ] is two .
For the copper ( II ) ion in [ CuCl ] , the coordination number is four , whereas for the cobalt ( II ) ion in [ Co ( H O ) ] the coordination number is six .
Each of these ligands is monodentate , from the Greek for “ one toothed , ” meaning that they connect with the central metal through only one atom .
In this case , the number of ligands and the coordination number are equal .
Many other ligands coordinate to the metal in more complex fashions .
Bidentate ligands are those in which two atoms coordinate to the metal center .
For example , ethylenediamine ( en , H NCH CH NH ) contains two nitrogen atoms , each of which has a lone pair and can serve as a Lewis base .
Both of the atoms can coordinate to a single metal center .
In the complex [ Co ( en ) ] , there are three bidentate en ligands , and the coordination number of the cobalt ( III ) ion is six .
The most common coordination numbers are two , four , and six , but examples of all coordination numbers from 1 to 15 are known .
Any ligand that bonds to a central metal ion by more than one donor atom is a polydentate ligand ( or “ many teeth ” ) because it can bite into the metal center with more than one bond .
The term chelate ( pronounced “ KEY-late ” ) from the Greek for “ claw ” is also used to describe this type of interaction .
Many polydentate ligands are chelating ligands , and a complex consisting of one or more of these ligands and a central metal is a chelate .
A chelating ligand is also known as a chelating agent .
A chelating ligand holds the metal ion rather like a crab ’ s claw would hold a marble .
showed one example of a chelate .
The heme complex in hemoglobin is another important example .
It contains a polydentate ligand with four donor atoms that coordinate to iron .
Polydentate ligands are sometimes identified with prefixes that indicate the number of donor atoms in the ligand .
As we have seen , ligands with one donor atom , such as NH , Cl , and H O , are monodentate ligands .
Ligands with two donor groups are bidentate ligands .
Ethylenediamine , H NCH CH NH , and the anion of the acid glycine , are examples of bidentate ligands .
Tridentate ligands , tetradentate ligands , pentadentate ligands , and hexadentate ligands contain three , four , five , and six donor atoms , respectively .
The ligand in heme is a tetradentate ligand .
The nomenclature of the complexes is patterned after a system suggested by Alfred Werner , a Swiss chemist and Nobel laureate , whose outstanding work more than 100 years ago laid the foundation for a clearer understanding of these compounds .
The following five rules are used for naming complexes : If a coordination compound is ionic , name the cation first and the anion second , in accordance with the usual nomenclature .
Name the ligands first , followed by the central metal .
Name the ligands alphabetically .
Negative ligands ( anions ) have names formed by adding o to the stem name of the group .
For examples , see .
For most neutral ligands , the name of the molecule is used .
The four common exceptions are aqua ( H O ) , as ammine diamminetetrachloroplatinum ( IV ) .
[ Pt ( NH ) Cl ] ( NO ) .
For example , the ion bis ( bipyridyl ) osmium ( II ) uses bisto signify that there are two ligands attached to Os , and each bipyridyl ligand contains two pyridine groups ( C H N ) .
When the complex is either a cation or a neutral molecule , the name of the central metal atom is spelled exactly like the name of the element and is followed by a Roman numeral in parentheses to indicate its oxidation state ( and ) .
When the complex is an anion , the suffix -ate is added to the stem of the name of the metal , followed by the Roman numeral designation of its oxidation state .
Sometimes , the Latin name of the metal is used when the English name is clumsy .
For example , ferrate is used instead of ironate , plumbate instead leadate , and stannate instead of tinate .
The oxidation state of the metal is determined based on the charges of each ligand and the overall charge of the coordination compound .
For example , in [ Cr ( H O ) Cl ] Br , the coordination sphere ( in brackets ) has a charge of 1+ to balance the bromide ion .
The water ligands are neutral , and the chloride ligands are anionic with a charge of 1− each .
To determine the oxidation state of the metal , we set the overall charge equal to the sum of the ligands and the metal : +1 = −2 + x , so the oxidation state ( x ) is equal to 3+ .
Determine the name of the following complexes and give the coordination number of the central metal atom .
There are six anionic chloride ligands , so −2 = −6 + x , and the oxidation state of the platinum is 4+ .
The name of the complex is sodium hexachloroplatinate ( IV ) , and the coordination number is six .
The name is potassium trisoxalatoferrate ( III ) ( note that tris is used instead of tri because the ligand name starts with a vowel ) .
Because oxalate is a bidentate ligand , this complex has a coordination number of six .
( c ) In this example , the coordination sphere has a cationic charge of 2+ .
The NH ligand is neutral , but the chloro ligand has a charge of 1− .
The oxidation state is found by +2 = −1 + x and is 3+ , so the complex is pentaamminechlorocobalt ( III ) chloride and the coordination number is six .
The complex potassium dicyanoargenate ( I ) is used to make antiseptic compounds .
Give the formula and coordination number .
Answer : K [ Ag ( CN ) ] ; coordination number two The most common structures of the complexes in coordination compounds are octahedral , tetrahedral , and square planar ( see ) .
For transition metal complexes , the coordination number determines the geometry around the central metal ion .
compares coordination numbers to the molecular geometry : Unlike main group atoms in which both the bonding and nonbonding electrons determine the molecular shape , the nonbonding d -electrons do not change the arrangement of the ligands .
Octahedral complexes have a coordination number of six , and the six donor atoms are arranged at the corners of an octahedron around the central metal ion .
Examples are shown in .
The chloride and nitrate anions in [ Co ( H O ) ] Cl and [ Cr ( en ) ] ( NO ) , and the potassium cations in K [ PtCl ] , are outside the brackets and are not bonded to the metal ion .
For transition metals with a coordination number of four , two different geometries are possible : tetrahedral or square planar .
Unlike main group elements , where these geometries can be predicted from VSEPR theory , a more detailed discussion of transition metal orbitals ( discussed in the section on Crystal Field Theory ) is required to predict which complexes will be tetrahedral and which will be square planar .
In tetrahedral complexes such as [ Zn ( CN ) ] , each of the ligand pairs forms an angle of 109.5° .
In square planar complexes , such as [ Pt ( NH ) Cl ] , each ligand has two other ligands at 90° angles ( called the cis positions ) and one additional ligand at an 180° angle , in the trans position .
Isomers are different chemical species that have the same chemical formula .
Transition metals often form geometric isomers , in which the same atoms are connected through the same types of bonds but with differences in their orientation in space .
Coordination complexes with two different ligands in the cis and trans positions from a ligand of interest form isomers .
For example , the octahedral [ Co ( NH ) Cl ] ion has two isomers .
In the cis configuration , the two chloride ligands are adjacent to each other .
The other isomer , the trans configuration , has the two chloride ligands directly across from one another .
Different geometric isomers of a substance are different chemical compounds .
They exhibit different properties , even though they have the same formula .
For example , the two isomers of [ Co ( NH ) Cl ] NO differ in color ; the cis form is violet , and the trans form is green .
Furthermore , these isomers have different dipole moments , solubilities , and reactivities .
As an example of how the arrangement in space can influence the molecular properties , consider the polarity of the two [ Co ( NH ) Cl ] NO isomers .
Remember that the polarity of a molecule or ion is determined by the bond dipoles ( which are due to the difference in electronegativity of the bonding atoms ) and their arrangement in space .
In one isomer , cis chloride ligands cause more electron density on one side of the molecule than on the other , making it polar .
For the trans isomer , each ligand is directly across from an identical ligand , so the bond dipoles cancel out , and the molecule is nonpolar .
Identify which geometric isomer of [ Pt ( NH ) Cl ] is shown in .
Draw the other geometric isomer and give its full name .
In the , the two chlorine ligands occupy cis positions .
The other form is shown in .
When naming specific isomers , the descriptor is listed in front of the name .
Therefore , this complex is trans -diamminedichloroplatinum ( II ) .
Draw the ion trans -diaquatrans -dibromotrans -dichlorocobalt ( II ) .
Answer : Another important type of isomers are optical isomers , or enantiomers , in which two objects are exact mirror images of each other but can not be lined up so that all parts match .
This means that optical isomers are nonsuperimposable mirror images .
A classic example of this is a pair of hands , in which the right and left hand are mirror images of one another but can not be superimposed .
Optical isomers are very important in organic and biochemistry because living systems often incorporate one specific optical isomer and not the other .
Unlike geometric isomers , pairs of optical isomers have identical properties ( boiling point , polarity , solubility , etc . ) .
Optical isomers differ only in the way they affect polarized light and how they react with other optical isomers .
For coordination complexes , many coordination compounds such as [ M ( en ) ] [ in which M is a central metal ion such as iron ( III ) or cobalt ( II ) ] form enantiomers , as shown in .
These two isomers will react differently with other optical isomers .
For example , DNA helices are optical isomers , and the form that occurs in nature ( right-handed DNA ) will bind to only one isomer of [ M ( en ) ] and not the other .
The [ Co ( en ) Cl ] ion exhibits geometric isomerism ( cis / trans ) , and its cis isomer exists as a pair of optical isomers .
Linkage isomers occur when the coordination compound contains a ligand that can bind to the transition metal center through two different atoms .
For example , the CN ligand can bind through the carbon atom ( cyano ) or through the nitrogen atom ( isocyano ) .
Similarly , SCN− can be bound through the sulfur or nitrogen atom , affording two distinct compounds ( [ Co ( NH ) SCN ] or [ Co ( NH ) NCS ] ) .
Ionization isomers ( or coordination isomers ) occur when one anionic ligand in the inner coordination sphere is replaced with the counter ion from the outer coordination sphere .
A simple example of two ionization isomers are [ CoCl ] [ Br ] and [ CoCl Br ] [ Cl ] .
Chlorophyll , the green pigment in plants , is a complex that contains magnesium .
This is an example of a main group element in a coordination complex .
Plants appear green because chlorophyll absorbs red and purple light ; the reflected light consequently appears green .
The energy resulting from the absorption of light is used in photosynthesis .
Many other coordination complexes are also brightly colored .
The square planar copper ( II ) complex phthalocyanine blue ( from ) is one of many complexes used as pigments or dyes .
This complex is used in blue ink , blue jeans , and certain blue paints .
The structure of heme , the iron-containing complex in hemoglobin , is very similar to that in chlorophyll .
In hemoglobin , the red heme complex is bonded to a large protein molecule ( globin ) by the attachment of the protein to the heme ligand .
Oxygen molecules are transported by hemoglobin in the blood by being bound to the iron center .
When the hemoglobin loses its oxygen , the color changes to a bluish red .
Hemoglobin will only transport oxygen if the iron is Fe ; oxidation of the iron to Fe prevents oxygen transport .
Complexing agents often are used for water softening because they tie up such ions as Ca , Mg , and Fe , which make water hard .
Many metal ions are also undesirable in food products because these ions can catalyze reactions that change the color of food .
Coordination complexes are useful as preservatives .
For example , the ligand EDTA , ( HO CCH ) NCH CH N ( CH CO H ) , coordinates to metal ions through six donor atoms and prevents the metals from reacting .
This ligand also is used to sequester metal ions in paper production , textiles , and detergents , and has pharmaceutical uses .
are that ions tie up metal also used as drugs .
British Anti-Lewisite Complexing agents ( BAL ) , HSCH CH ( SH ) CH OH , is a drug developed during World War I as an antidote for the arsenic-based war gas Lewisite .
BAL is now used to treat poisoning by heavy metals , such as arsenic , mercury , thallium , and chromium .
The drug is a ligand and functions by making a water-soluble chelate of the metal ; the kidneys eliminate this metal chelate .
Another polydentate ligand , enterobactin , which is isolated from certain bacteria , is used to form complexes of iron and thereby to control the severe iron buildup found in patients suffering from blood diseases such as Cooley ’ s anemia , who require frequent transfusions .
As the transfused blood breaks down , the usual metabolic processes that remove iron are overloaded , and excess iron can build up to fatal levels .
Enterobactin forms a watersoluble complex with excess iron , and the body can safely eliminate this complex .
Ligands like BAL and enterobactin are important in medical treatments for heavy metal poisoning .
However , chelation therapies can disrupt the normal concentration of ions in the body , leading to serious side effects , so researchers are searching for new chelation drugs .
One drug that has been developed is dimercaptosuccinic acid ( DMSA ) , shown in .
Identify which atoms in this molecule could act as donor atoms .
All of the oxygen and sulfur atoms have lone pairs of electrons that can be used to coordinate to a metal center , so there are six possible donor atoms .
Geometrically , only two of these atoms can be coordinated to a metal at once .
The most common binding mode involves the coordination of one sulfur atom and one oxygen atom , forming a five-member ring with the metal .
Some alternative medicine practitioners recommend chelation treatments for ailments that are not clearly related to heavy metals , such as cancer and autism , although the practice is discouraged by many scientific organizations .
Identify at least two biologically important metals that could be disrupted by chelation therapy .
Answer : Ca , Fe , Zn , and Cu Ligands are also used in the electroplating industry .
When metal ions are reduced to produce thin metal coatings , metals can clump together to form clusters and nanoparticles .
When metal coordination complexes are used , the ligands keep the metal atoms isolated from each other .
It has been found that many metals plate out as a smoother , more uniform , better-looking , and more adherent surface when plated from a bath containing the metal as a complex ion .
Thus , complexes such as [ Ag ( CN ) ] and [ Au ( CN ) ] are used extensively in the electroplating industry .
In 1965 , scientists at Michigan State University discovered that there was a platinum complex that inhibited cell division in certain microorganisms .
Later work showed that the complex was cis -diamminedichloroplatinum ( II ) , [ Pt ( NH ) ( Cl ) ] , and that the trans isomer was not effective .
The inhibition of cell division indicated that this square planar compound could be an anticancer agent .
In 1978 , the US Food and Drug Administration approved this compound , known as cisplatin , for use in the treatment of certain forms of cancer .
Since that time , many similar platinum compounds have been developed for the treatment of cancer .
In all cases , these are the cis isomers and never the trans isomers .
The diammine ( NH ) portion is retained with other groups , replacing the dichloro [ ( Cl ) ] portion .
The newer drugs include carboplatin , oxaliplatin , and satraplatin .
The observed geometries of coordination complexes are not consistent with hybridized orbitals on the central metal overlapping with ligand orbitals , as would be predicted by valence bond theory .
The observed colors indicate that the d orbitals often occur at different energy levels rather than all being degenerate , that is , of equal energy , as are the three p orbitals .
To explain the stabilities , structures , colors , and magnetic properties of transition metal complexes , a different bonding model has been developed .
Just as valence bond theory explains many aspects of bonding in main group chemistry , crystal field theory is useful in understanding and predicting the behavior of transition metal complexes .
To explain the observed behavior of transition metal complexes ( such as how colors arise ) , a model involving electrostatic interactions between the electrons from the ligands and the electrons in the unhybridized d orbitals of the central metal atom has been developed .
This electrostatic model is crystal field theory ( CFT ) .
It allows us to understand , interpret , and predict the colors , magnetic behavior , and some structures of coordination compounds of transition metals .
CFT focuses on the nonbonding electrons on the central metal ion in coordination complexes not on the metal-ligand bonds .
Like valence bond theory , CFT tells only part of the story of the behavior of complexes .
However , it tells the part that valence bond theory does not .
In its pure form , CFT ignores any covalent bonding between ligands and metal ions .
Both the ligand and the metal are treated as infinitesimally small point charges .
All electrons are negative , so the electrons donated from the ligands will repel the electrons of the central metal .
Let us consider the behavior of the electrons in the unhybridized d orbitals in an octahedral complex .
The five d orbitals consist of lobe-shaped regions and are arranged in space , as shown in .
In an octahedral complex , the six ligands coordinate along the axes .
In an uncomplexed metal ion in the gas phase , the electrons are distributed among the five d orbitals in accord with Hund 's rule because the orbitals all have the same energy .
However , when ligands coordinate to a metal ion , the energies of the d orbitals are no longer the same .
In octahedral complexes , the lobes in two of the five d orbitals , the and orbitals , point toward the ligands .
These two orbitals are called the e orbitals ( the symbol actually refers to the symmetry of the orbitals , but we will use it as a convenient name for these two orbitals in an octahedral complex ) .
The other three orbitals , the d , d , and d orbitals , have lobes that point between the ligands and are called the t orbitals ( again , the symbol really refers to the symmetry of the orbitals ) .
As six ligands approach the metal ion along the axes of the octahedron , their point charges repel the electrons in the d orbitals of the metal ion .
However , the repulsions between the electrons in the e orbitals ( the and orbitals ) and the ligands are greater than the repulsions between the electrons in the t orbitals ( the d , d , and d orbitals ) and the ligands .
This is because the lobes of the e orbitals point directly at the ligands , whereas the lobes of the t orbitals point between them .
Thus , electrons in the e orbitals of the metal ion in an octahedral complex have higher potential energies than those of electrons in the t orbitals .
The difference in energy may be represented as shown in .
The difference in energy between the e and the t orbitals is called the crystal field splitting and is symbolized by Δoct , where oct stands for octahedral .
The magnitude of Δ depends on many factors , including the nature of the six ligands located around the central metal ion , the charge on the metal , and whether the metal is using 3 d , 4 d , or 5 d orbitals .
Different ligands produce different crystal field splittings .
Thus , the Δ value for an octahedral complex with iodide ligands ( I ) is much smaller than the Δ value for the same metal with cyanide ligands ( CN ) .
Electrons in the d orbitals follow the aufbau ( “ filling up ” ) principle , which says that the orbitals will be filled to give the lowest total energy , just as in main group chemistry .
When two electrons occupy the same orbital , the like charges repel each other .
The energy needed to pair up two electrons in a single orbital is called the pairing energy ( P ) .
Electrons will always singly occupy each orbital in a degenerate set before pairing .
P is similar in magnitude to Δ .
When electrons fill the d orbitals , the relative magnitudes of Δ and P determine which orbitals will be occupied .
In [ Fe ( CN ) ] , the strong field of six cyanide ligands produces a large Δ .
Under these conditions , the electrons require less energy to pair than they require to be excited to the e orbitals ( Δ > P ) .
The six 3 d electrons of the Fe ion pair in the three t orbitals .
Complexes in which the electrons are paired because of the large crystal field splitting are called low-spin complexes because the number of unpaired electrons ( spins ) is minimized .
In [ Fe ( H O ) ] , on the other hand , the weak field of the water molecules produces only a small crystal field splitting ( Δ < P ) .
Because it requires less energy for the electrons to occupy the e orbitals than to pair together , there will be an electron in each of the five 3 d orbitals before pairing occurs .
For the six d electrons on the iron ( II ) center in [ Fe ( H O ) ] , there will be one pair of electrons and four unpaired electrons .
A similar line of reasoning shows why the [ Fe ( CN ) ] ion is a low-spin complex with only one unpaired electron , whereas both the [ Fe ( H O ) ] and [ FeF ] ions are high-spin complexes with five unpaired electrons .
Predict the number of unpaired electrons .
( a ) K [ CrI ] ( b ) [ Cu ( en ) ( H O ) ] Cl ( c ) Na [ Co ( NO ) ] The complexes are octahedral .
( a ) Cr has a d configuration .
These electrons will all be unpaired .
( b ) Cu is d , so there will be one unpaired electron .
( c ) Co has d valence electrons , so the crystal field splitting will determine how many are paired .
Nitrite is a strong-field ligand , so the complex will be low spin .
Six electrons will go in the t orbitals , leaving 0 unpaired .
The size of the crystal field splitting only influences the arrangement of electrons when there is a choice between pairing electrons and filling the higher-energy orbitals .
For which d -electron configurations will there be a difference between highand low-spin configurations in octahedral complexes ?
Answer : d , d , d , and d CFT is applicable to molecules in geometries other than octahedral .
In octahedral complexes , remember that the lobes of the e set point directly at the ligands .
For tetrahedral complexes , the d orbitals remain in place , but now we have only four ligands located between the axes .
None of the orbitals points directly at the tetrahedral ligands .
However , the e set ( along the Cartesian axes ) overlaps with the ligands less than does the t set .
By analogy with the octahedral case , predict the energy diagram for the d orbitals in a tetrahedral crystal field .
To avoid confusion , the octahedral e set becomes a tetrahedral e set , and the octahedral t set becomes a t set .
Since CFT is based on electrostatic repulsion , the orbitals closer to the ligands will be destabilized and raised in energy relative to the other set of orbitals .
The splitting is less than for octahedral complexes because the overlap is less , so Δ is usually small Explain how many unpaired electrons a tetrahedral d ion will have .
Answer : 4 ; because Δ is small , all tetrahedral complexes are high spin and the electrons go into the t The other common geometry is square planar .
It is possible to consider a square planar geometry as an octahedral structure with a pair of trans ligands removed .
The removed ligands are assumed to be on the z -axis .
This changes the distribution of the d orbitals , as orbitals on or near the z -axis become more stable , and those on or near the xor y -axes become less stable .
This results in the octahedral t and the e sets splitting and gives a more complicated pattern with no simple Δ .
The basic pattern is : orbitals before pairing Experimental evidence of magnetic measurements supports the theory of highand low-spin complexes .
Remember that molecules such as O that contain unpaired electrons are paramagnetic .
Paramagnetic substances are attracted to magnetic fields .
Many transition metal complexes have unpaired electrons and hence are paramagnetic .
Molecules such as N and ions such as Na and [ Fe ( CN ) ] that contain no unpaired electrons are diamagnetic .
Diamagnetic substances have a slight tendency to be repelled by magnetic fields .
When an electron in an atom or ion is unpaired , the magnetic moment due to its spin makes the entire atom or ion paramagnetic .
The size of the magnetic moment of a system containing unpaired electrons is related directly to the number of such electrons : the greater the number of unpaired electrons , the larger the magnetic moment .
Therefore , the observed magnetic moment is used to determine the number of unpaired electrons present .
The measured magnetic moment of low-spin d [ Fe ( CN ) ] confirms that iron is diamagnetic , whereas high-spin d [ Fe ( H O ) ] has four unpaired electrons with a magnetic moment that confirms this arrangement .
When atoms or molecules absorb light at the proper frequency , their electrons are excited to higher-energy orbitals .
For many main group atoms and molecules , the absorbed photons are in the ultraviolet range of the electromagnetic spectrum , which can not be detected by the human eye .
For coordination compounds , the energy difference between the d orbitals often allows photons in the visible range to be absorbed .
The human eye perceives a mixture of all the colors , in the proportions present in sunlight , as white light .
Complementary colors , those located across from each other on a color wheel , are also used in color vision .
The eye perceives a mixture of two complementary colors , in the proper proportions , as white light .
Likewise , when a color is missing from white light , the eye sees its complement .
For example , when red photons are absorbed from white light , the eyes see the color green .
When violet photons are removed from white light , the eyes see lemon yellow .
The blue color of the [ Cu ( NH ) ] ion results because this ion absorbs orange and red light , leaving the complementary colors of blue and green .
The octahedral complex [ Ti ( H O ) ] has a single d electron .
To excite this electron from the ground state t orbital to the e orbital , this complex absorbs light from 450 to 600 nm .
The maximum absorbance corresponds to Δ and occurs at 499 nm .
Calculate the value of Δ in Joules and predict what color the solution will appear .
A complex that appears green , absorbs photons of what wavelengths ?
Answer : red , 620–800 nm Small changes in the relative energies of the orbitals that electrons are transitioning between can lead to drastic shifts in the color of light absorbed .
Therefore , the colors of coordination compounds depend on many factors .
As shown in , different aqueous metal ions can have different colors .
In addition , different oxidation states of one metal can produce different colors , as shown for the vanadium complexes in the link below .
The specific ligands coordinated to the metal center also influence the color of coordination complexes .
For example , the iron ( II ) complex [ Fe ( H O ) ] SO appears blue-green because the high-spin complex absorbs photons in the red wavelengths .
In contrast , the low-spin iron ( II ) complex K [ Fe ( CN ) ] appears pale yellow because it absorbs higher-energy violet photons .
In general , strong-field ligands cause a large split in the energies of d orbitals of the central metal atom ( large Δ ) .
Transition metal coordination compounds with these ligands are yellow , orange , or red because they absorb higherenergy violet or blue light .
On the other hand , coordination compounds of transition metals with weak-field ligands are often blue-green , blue , or indigo because they absorb lower-energy yellow , orange , or red light .
A coordination compound of the Cu ion has a d configuration , and all the e orbitals are filled .
To excite an electron to a higher level , such as the 4 p orbital , photons of very high energy are necessary .
This energy corresponds to very short wavelengths in the ultraviolet region of the spectrum .
No visible light is absorbed , so the eye sees no change , and the compound appears white or colorless .
A solution containing [ Cu ( CN ) ] , for example , is colorless .
On the other hand , octahedral Cu complexes have a vacancy in the e orbitals , and electrons can be excited to this level .
The wavelength ( energy ) of the light absorbed corresponds to the visible part of the spectrum , and Cu complexes are almost always colored—blue , blue-green violet , or yellow .
Although CFT successfully describes many properties of coordination complexes , molecular orbital explanations ( beyond the introductory scope provided here ) are required to understand fully the behavior of coordination complexes .
All living things on earth are formed mostly of carbon compounds .
The prevalence of carbon compounds in living things has led to the epithet “ carbon-based ” life .
The truth is we know of no other kind of life .
Early chemists regarded substances isolated from organisms ( plants and animals ) as a different type of matter that could not be synthesized artificially , and these substances were thus known as organic compounds .
The widespread belief called vitalism held that organic compounds were formed by a vital force present only in living organisms .
The German chemist Friedrich Wohler was one of the early chemists to refute this aspect of vitalism , when , in 1828 , he reported the synthesis of urea , a component of many body fluids , from nonliving materials .
Since then , it has been recognized that organic molecules obey the same natural laws as inorganic substances , and the category of organic compounds has evolved to include both natural and synthetic compounds that contain carbon .
Some carbon-containing compounds are not classified as organic , for example , carbonates and cyanides , and simple oxides , such as CO and CO .
Although a single , precise definition has yet to be identified by the chemistry community , most agree that a defining trait of organic molecules is the presence of carbon as the principal element , bonded to hydrogen and other carbon atoms .
Today , organic compounds are key components of plastics , soaps , perfumes , sweeteners , fabrics , pharmaceuticals , and many other substances that we use every day .
The value to us of organic compounds ensures that organic chemistry is an important discipline within the general field of chemistry .
In this chapter , we discuss why the element carbon gives rise to a vast number and variety of compounds , how those compounds are classified , and the role of organic compounds in representative biological and industrial settings .
The number of potential organic compounds has been estimated at 10 —an astronomically high number .
The existence of so many organic molecules is a consequence of the ability of carbon atoms to form up to four strong bonds to other carbon atoms , resulting in chains and rings of many different sizes , shapes , and complexities .
The simplest organic compounds contain only the elements carbon and hydrogen , and are called hydrocarbons .
Even though they are composed of only two types of atoms , there is a wide variety of hydrocarbons because they may consist of varying lengths of chains , branched chains , and rings of carbon atoms , or combinations of these structures .
In addition , hydrocarbons may differ in the types of carbon-carbon bonds present in their molecules .
Many hydrocarbons are found in plants , animals , and their fossils ; other hydrocarbons have been prepared in the laboratory .
We use hydrocarbons every day , mainly as fuels , such as natural gas , acetylene , propane , butane , and the principal components of gasoline , diesel fuel , and heating oil .
The familiar plastics polyethylene , polypropylene , and polystyrene are also hydrocarbons .
We can distinguish several types of hydrocarbons by differences in the bonding between carbon atoms .
This leads to differences in geometries and in the hybridization of the carbon orbitals .
Alkanes , or saturated hydrocarbons , contain only single covalent bonds between carbon atoms .
Each of the carbon atoms in an alkane has sp hybrid orbitals and is bonded to four other atoms , each of which is either carbon or hydrogen .
The Lewis structures and models of methane , ethane , and pentane are illustrated in .
Carbon chains are usually drawn as straight lines in Lewis structures , but one has to remember that Lewis structures are not intended to indicate the geometry of molecules .
Notice that the carbon atoms in the structural models ( the ball-andstick and space-filling models ) of the pentane molecule do not lie in a straight line .
Because of the sp hybridization , the bond angles in carbon chains are close to 109.5° , giving such chains in an alkane a zigzag shape .
The structures of alkanes and other organic molecules may also be represented in a less detailed manner by condensed structural formulas ( or simply , condensed formulas ) .
Instead of the usual format for chemical formulas in which each element symbol appears just once , a condensed formula is written to suggest the bonding in the molecule .
These formulas have the appearance of a Lewis structure from which most or all of the bond symbols have been removed .
Condensed structural formulas for ethane and pentane are shown at the bottom of , and several additional examples are provided in the exercises at the end of this chapter .
A common method used by organic chemists to simplify the drawings of larger molecules is to use a skeletal structure ( also called a line-angle structure ) .
In this type of structure , carbon atoms are not symbolized with a C , but represented by each end of a line or bend in a line .
Hydrogen atoms are not drawn if they are attached to a carbon .
Other atoms besides carbon and hydrogen are represented by their elemental symbols .
shows three different ways to draw the same structure .
Draw the skeletal structures for these two molecules : Each carbon atom is converted into the end of a line or the place where lines intersect .
Since we know that carbon atoms tend to make four bonds , each carbon atom will have the number of hydrogen atoms that are required for four bonds .
This compound contains 16 hydrogen atoms for a molecular formula of C H .
Location of the hydrogen atoms : Identify the chemical formula of the molecule represented here : All alkanes are composed of carbon and hydrogen atoms , and have similar bonds , structures , and formulas ; noncyclic alkanes all have a formula of C H .
The number of carbon atoms present in an alkane has no limit .
Greater numbers of atoms in the molecules will lead to stronger intermolecular attractions ( dispersion forces ) and correspondingly different physical properties of the molecules .
Properties such as melting point and boiling point usually change smoothly and predictably as the number of carbon and hydrogen atoms in the molecules change .
Answer : C H Hydrocarbons with the same formula , including alkanes , can have different structures .
Constitutional isomers have the same molecular formula but different spatial arrangements of the atoms in their molecules .
The n -butane molecule contains an unbranched chain , meaning that no carbon atom is bonded to more than two other carbon atoms .
We use the term normal , or the prefix n , to refer to a chain of carbon atoms without branching .
The compound 2–methylpropane has a branched chain ( the carbon atom in the center of the Lewis structure is bonded to three other carbon atoms ) Identifying isomers from Lewis structures is not as easy as it looks .
Lewis structures that look different may actually represent the same isomers .
For example , the three structures in all represent the same molecule , n -butane , and hence are not different isomers .
They are identical because each contains an unbranched chain of four carbon atoms .
The International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry ( IUPAC ) has devised a system of nomenclature that begins with the names of the alkanes and can be adjusted from there to account for more complicated structures .
The nomenclature for alkanes is based on two rules : To name an alkane , first identify the longest chain of carbon atoms in its structure .
A two-carbon chain is called ethane ; a three-carbon chain , propane ; and a four-carbon chain , butane .
Longer chains are named as follows : pentane ( five-carbon chain ) , hexane ( 6 ) , heptane ( 7 ) , octane ( 8 ) , nonane ( 9 ) , and decane ( 10 ) .
These prefixes can be seen in the names of the alkanes described in .
Add prefixes to the name of the longest chain to indicate the positions and names of substituents .
Substituents are branches or functional groups that replace hydrogen atoms on a chain .
The position of a substituent or branch is identified by the number of the carbon atom it is bonded to in the chain .
We number the carbon atoms in the chain by counting from the end of the chain nearest the substituents .
Multiple substituents are named individually and placed in alphabetical order at the front of the name .
When more than one substituent is present , either on the same carbon atom or on different carbon atoms , the substituents are listed alphabetically .
Because the carbon atom numbering begins at the end closest to a substituent , the longest chain of carbon atoms is numbered in such a way as to produce the lowest number for the substituents .
The ending -o replaces -ide at the end of the name of an electronegative substituent ( in ionic compounds , the negatively charged ion ends with -ide like chloride ; in organic compounds , such atoms are treated as substituents and the -o ending is used ) .
The number of substituents of the same type is indicated by the prefixes di ( two ) , tri ( three ) , tetra ( four ) , and so on ( for example , difluoroindicates two fluoride substituents ) .
Name the molecule whose structure is shown here : The four-carbon chain is numbered from the end with the chlorine atom .
This puts the substituents on positions 1 and 2 ( numbering from the other end would put the substituents on positions 3 and 4 ) .
Four carbon atoms means that the base name of this compound will be butane .
The bromine at position 2 will be described by adding 2-bromo- ; this will come at the beginning of the name , since bromocomes before chloroalphabetically .
The chlorine at position 1 will be described by adding 1-chloro- , resulting in the name of the molecule being 2-bromo-1-chlorobutane .
Name the following molecule : We call a substituent that contains one less hydrogen than the corresponding alkane an alkyl group .
The name of an alkyl group is obtained by dropping the suffix -ane of the alkane name and adding -yl : Answer : 3,3-dibromo-2-iodopentane The open bonds in the methyl and ethyl groups indicate that these alkyl groups are bonded to another atom .
Name the molecule whose structure is shown here : The longest carbon chain runs horizontally across the page and contains six carbon atoms ( this makes the base of the name hexane , but we will also need to incorporate the name of the branch ) .
In this case , we want to number from right to left ( as shown by the blue numbers ) so the branch is connected to carbon 3 ( imagine the numbers from left to right—this would put the branch on carbon 4 , violating our rules ) .
The branch attached to position 3 of our chain contains two carbon atoms ( numbered in red ) —so we take our name for two carbons ethand attach -yl at the end to signify we are describing a branch .
Putting all the pieces together , this molecule is 3-ethylhexane .
Name the following molecule : Answer : 4-propyloctane Some hydrocarbons can form more than one type of alkyl group when the hydrogen atoms that would be removed have different “ environments ” in the molecule .
This diversity of possible alkyl groups can be identified in the following way : The four hydrogen atoms in a methane molecule are equivalent ; they all have the same environment .
They are equivalent because each is bonded to a carbon atom ( the same carbon atom ) that is bonded to three hydrogen atoms .
( It may be easier to see the equivalency in the ball and stick models in .
Removal of any one of the four hydrogen atoms from methane forms a methyl group .
Likewise , the six hydrogen atoms in ethane are equivalent and removing any one of these hydrogen atoms produces an ethyl group .
Each of the six hydrogen atoms is bonded to a carbon atom that is bonded to two other hydrogen atoms and a carbon atom .
The two purple hydrogen atoms in propane are of a second type .
They differ from the six hydrogen atoms of the first type in that they are bonded to a carbon atom bonded to two other carbon atoms .
The green hydrogen atom in 2-methylpropane differs from the other nine hydrogen atoms in that molecule and from the purple hydrogen atoms in propane .
The green hydrogen atom in 2-methylpropane is bonded to a carbon atom bonded to three other carbon atoms .
Two different alkyl groups can be formed from each of these molecules , depending on which hydrogen atom is removed .
The names and structures of these and several other alkyl groups are listed in .
Note that alkyl groups do not exist as stable independent entities .
They are always a part of some larger molecule .
The location of an alkyl group on a hydrocarbon chain is indicated in the same way as any other substituent : Alkanes are relatively stable molecules , but heat or light will activate reactions that involve the breaking of C–H or C–C single bonds .
Combustion is one such reaction : Alkanes burn in the presence of oxygen , a highly exothermic oxidation-reduction reaction that produces carbon dioxide and water .
As a consequence , alkanes are excellent fuels .
For example , methane , CH , is the principal component of natural gas .
Butane , C H , used in camping stoves and lighters is an alkane .
Gasoline is a liquid mixture of continuousand branched-chain alkanes , each containing from five to nine carbon atoms , plus various additives to improve its performance as a fuel .
Kerosene , diesel oil , and fuel oil are primarily mixtures of alkanes with higher molecular masses .
The main source of these liquid alkane fuels is crude oil , a complex mixture that is separated by fractional distillation .
Fractional distillation takes advantage of differences in the boiling points of the components of the mixture ( see ) .
You may recall that boiling point is a function of intermolecular interactions , which was discussed in the chapter on solutions and colloids .
In a substitution reaction , another typical reaction of alkanes , one or more of the alkane ’ s hydrogen atoms is replaced with a different atom or group of atoms .
No carbon-carbon bonds are broken in these reactions , and the hybridization of the carbon atoms does not change .
For example , the reaction between ethane and molecular chlorine depicted here is a substitution reaction : The C–Cl portion of the chloroethane molecule is an example of a functional group , the part or moiety of a molecule that imparts a specific chemical reactivity .
The types of functional groups present in an organic molecule are major determinants of its chemical properties and are used as a means of classifying organic compounds as detailed in the remaining sections of this chapter .
Organic compounds that contain one or more double or triple bonds between carbon atoms are described as unsaturated .
You have likely heard of unsaturated fats .
These are complex organic molecules with long chains of carbon atoms , which contain at least one double bond between carbon atoms .
Unsaturated hydrocarbon molecules that contain one or more double bonds are called alkenes .
Carbon atoms linked by a double bond are bound together by two bonds , one σ bond and one π bond .
Double and triple bonds give rise to a different geometry around the carbon atom that participates in them , leading to important differences in molecular shape and properties .
The differing geometries are responsible for the different properties of unsaturated versus saturated fats .
Ethene , C H , is the simplest alkene .
Each carbon atom in ethene , commonly called ethylene , has a trigonal planar structure .
The second member of the series is propene ( propylene ) ; the butene isomers follow in the series .
Four carbon atoms in the chain of butene allows for the formation of isomers based on the position of the double bond , as well as a new form of isomerism .
Ethylene ( the common industrial name for ethene ) is a basic raw material in the production of polyethylene and other important compounds .
Over 135 million tons of ethylene were produced worldwide in 2010 for use in the polymer , petrochemical , and plastic industries .
Ethylene is produced industrially in a process called cracking , in which the long hydrocarbon chains in a petroleum mixture are broken into smaller molecules .
The name of an alkene is derived from the name of the alkane with the same number of carbon atoms .
The presence of the double bond is signified by replacing the suffix -ane with the suffix -ene .
The location of the double bond is identified by naming the smaller of the numbers of the carbon atoms participating in the double bond : Molecules of 1-butene and 2-butene are structural isomers ; the arrangement of the atoms in these two molecules differs .
As an example of arrangement differences , the first carbon atom in 1-butene is bonded to two hydrogen atoms ; the first carbon atom in 2-butene is bonded to three hydrogen atoms .
The compound 2-butene and some other alkenes also form a second type of isomer called a geometric isomer .
In a set of geometric isomers , the same types of atoms are attached to each other in the same order , but the geometries of the two molecules differ .
Geometric isomers of alkenes differ in the orientation of the groups on either side of a bond .
Carbon atoms are free to rotate around a single bond but not around a double bond ; a double bond is rigid .
This makes it possible to have two isomers of 2-butene , one with both methyl groups on the same side of the double bond and one with the methyl groups on opposite sides .
When structures of butene are drawn with 120° bond angles around the sp -hybridized carbon atoms participating in the double bond , the isomers are apparent .
The 2-butene isomer in which the two methyl groups are on the same side is called a cis -isomer ; the one in which the two methyl groups are on opposite sides is called a trans -isomer .
The different geometries produce different physical properties , such as boiling point , that may make separation of the isomers possible : Alkenes are much more reactive than alkanes because the moiety is a reactive functional group .
A π bond , being a weaker bond , is disrupted much more easily than a σ bond .
Thus , alkenes undergo a characteristic reaction in which the π bond is broken and replaced by two σ bonds .
This reaction is called an addition reaction .
The hybridization of the carbon atoms in the double bond in an alkene changes from sp to sp during an addition reaction .
We begin counting at the end of the chain closest to the double bond—in this case , from the left—the double bond spans carbons 2 and 3 , so the name becomes 2-pentene .
Since there are two carboncontaining groups attached to the two carbon atoms in the double bond—and they are on the same side of the double bond—this molecule is the cisisomer , making the name of the starting alkene cis -2-pentene .
The product of the halogenation reaction will have two chlorine atoms attached to the carbon atoms that were a part of the carbon-carbon double bond : This molecule is now a substituted alkane and will be named as such .
The base of the name will be pentane .
We will count from the end that numbers the carbon atoms where the chlorine atoms are attached as 2 and 3 , making the name of the product 2,3-dichloropentane .
Provide names for the reactant and product of the reaction shown : Answer : reactant : cis-3-hexene product : 3,4-dichlorohexane Hydrocarbon molecules with one or more triple bonds are called alkynes ; they make up another series of unsaturated hydrocarbons .
Two carbon atoms joined by a triple bond are bound together by one σ bond and two π bonds .
The sp -hybridized carbons involved in the triple bond have bond angles of 180° , giving these types of bonds a linear , rodlike shape .
The simplest member of the alkyne series is ethyne , C H , commonly called acetylene .
The Lewis structure for ethyne , a linear molecule , is : The IUPAC nomenclature for alkynes is similar to that for alkenes except that the suffix -yne is used to indicate a triple bond in the chain .
For example , is called 1-butyne .
Describe the geometry and hybridization of the carbon atoms in the following molecule : Carbon atoms 1 and 4 have four single bonds and are thus tetrahedral with sp hybridization .
Carbon atoms 2 and 3 are involved in the triple bond , so they have linear geometries and would be classified as sp hybrids .
Since the functional group has two π bonds , alkynes typically react even more readily , and react with twice as much reagent in addition reactions .
The reaction of acetylene with bromine is a typical example : Acetylene and the other alkynes also burn readily .
An acetylene torch takes advantage of the high heat of combustion for acetylene .
Benzene , C H , is the simplest member of a large family of hydrocarbons , called aromatic hydrocarbons .
These compounds contain ring structures and exhibit bonding that must be described using the resonance hybrid concept of valence bond theory or the delocalization concept of molecular orbital theory .
( To review these concepts , refer to the earlier chapters on chemical bonding ) .
The resonance structures for benzene , C H , are : Valence bond theory describes the benzene molecule and other planar aromatic hydrocarbon molecules as hexagonal rings of sp -hybridized carbon atoms with the unhybridized p orbital of each carbon atom perpendicular to the plane of the ring .
Three valence electrons in the sp hybrid orbitals of each carbon atom and the valence electron of each hydrogen atom form the framework of σ bonds in the benzene molecule .
The fourth valence electron of each carbon atom is shared with an adjacent carbon atom in their unhybridized p orbitals to yield the π bonds .
Benzene does not , however , exhibit the characteristics typical of an alkene .
Each of the six bonds between its carbon atoms is equivalent and exhibits properties that are intermediate between those of a C–C single bond and a double bond .
To represent this unique bonding , structural formulas for benzene and its derivatives are typically drawn with single bonds between the carbon atoms and a circle within the ring as shown in .
There are many derivatives of benzene .
The hydrogen atoms can be replaced by many different substituents .
Aromatic compounds more readily undergo substitution reactions than addition reactions ; replacement of one of the hydrogen atoms with another substituent will leave the delocalized double bonds intact .
The following are typical examples of substituted benzene derivatives : Toluene and xylene are important solvents and raw materials in the chemical industry .
Styrene is used to produce the polymer polystyrene .
One possible isomer created by a substitution reaction that replaces a hydrogen atom attached to the aromatic ring of toluene with a chlorine atom is shown here .
Answer : By the end of this section , you will be able to : Describe the structure and properties of alcohols Describe the structure and properties of ethers Name and draw structures for alcohols and ethers In this section , we will learn about alcohols and ethers .
Incorporation of an oxygen atom into carbonand hydrogen-containing molecules leads to new functional groups and new families of compounds .
When the oxygen atom is attached by single bonds , the molecule is either an alcohol or ether .
Alcohols are derivatives of hydrocarbons in which an –OH group has replaced a hydrogen atom .
Although all alcohols have one or more hydroxyl ( –OH ) functional groups , they do not behave like bases such as NaOH and KOH .
NaOH and KOH are ionic compounds that contain OH ions .
Alcohols are covalent molecules ; the –OH group in an alcohol molecule is attached to a carbon atom by a covalent bond .
Ethanol , CH CH OH , also called ethyl alcohol , is a particularly important alcohol for human use .
Ethanol is the alcohol produced by some species of yeast that is found in wine , beer , and distilled drinks .
Examples include 1,2-ethanediol ( ethylene glycol , used in antifreeze ) and 1,2,3-propanetriol ( glycerine , used as a solvent for cosmetics and medicines ) : The name of an alcohol comes from the hydrocarbon from which it was derived .
The final -e in the name of the hydrocarbon is replaced by -ol , and the carbon atom to which the –OH group is bonded is indicated by a number placed before the name .
Consider the following example .
How should it be named ?
The carbon chain contains five carbon atoms .
If the hydroxyl group was not present , we would have named this molecule pentane .
To address the fact that the hydroxyl group is present , we change the ending of the name to -ol .
In this case , since the –OH is attached to carbon 2 in the chain , we would name this molecule 2-pentanol .
Name the following molecule : Answer : 2-methyl-2-pentanol Ethers are compounds that contain the functional group –O– .
Ethers do not have a designated suffix like the other types of molecules we have named so far .
In the IUPAC system , the oxygen atom and the smaller carbon branch are named as an alkoxy substituent and the remainder of the molecule as the base chain , as in alkanes .
As shown in the following compound , the red symbols represent the smaller alkyl group and the oxygen atom , which would be named “ methoxy. ” The larger carbon branch would be ethane , making the molecule methoxyethane .
Many ethers are referred to with common names instead of the IUPAC system names .
Common : The groups attached to the oxygen atom are both ethyl groups , so the common name would be diethyl ether .
Provide the IUPAC and common name for the ether shown : Answer : IUPAC : 2-methoxypropane ; common : isopropylmethyl ether Ethers can be obtained from alcohols by the elimination of a molecule of water from two molecules of the alcohol .
For example , when ethanol is treated with a limited amount of sulfuric acid and heated to 140 °C , diethyl ether and water are formed : In the general formula for ethers , R—O—R , the hydrocarbon groups ( R ) may be the same or different .
Diethyl ether , the most widely used compound of this class , is a colorless , volatile liquid that is highly flammable .
It was first used in 1846 as an anesthetic , but better anesthetics have now largely taken its place .
Diethyl ether and other ethers are presently used primarily as solvents for gums , fats , waxes , and resins .
Tertiary -butyl methyl ether , C H OCH ( abbreviated MTBE—italicized portions of names are not counted when ranking the groups alphabetically—so butyl comes before methyl in the common name ) , is used as an additive for gasoline .
MTBE belongs to a group of chemicals known as oxygenates due to their capacity to increase the oxygen content of gasoline .
The trigonal planar carbon in the carbonyl group can attach to two other substituents leading to several subfamilies ( aldehydes , ketones , carboxylic acids and esters ) described in this section .
Both aldehydes and ketones contain a carbonyl group , a functional group with a carbon-oxygen double bond .
The names for aldehyde and ketone compounds are derived using similar nomenclature rules as for alkanes and alcohols , and include the class-identifying suffixes -al and -one , respectively : In an aldehyde , the carbonyl group is bonded to at least one hydrogen atom .
In a ketone , the carbonyl group is bonded to two carbon atoms : As text , an aldehyde group is represented as –CHO ; a ketone is represented as –C ( O ) – or –CO– .
In both aldehydes and ketones , the geometry around the carbon atom in the carbonyl group is trigonal planar ; the carbon atom exhibits sp hybridization .
Two of the sp orbitals on the carbon atom in the carbonyl group are used to form σ bonds to the other carbon or hydrogen atoms in a molecule .
The remaining sp hybrid orbital forms a σ bond to the oxygen atom .
The unhybridized p orbital on the carbon atom in the carbonyl group overlaps a p orbital on the oxygen atom to form the π bond in the double bond .
Like the bond in carbon dioxide , the bond of a carbonyl group is polar ( recall that oxygen is significantly more electronegative than carbon , and the shared electrons are pulled toward the oxygen atom and away from the carbon atom ) .
Many of the reactions of aldehydes and ketones start with the reaction between a Lewis base and the carbon atom at the positive end of the polar bond to yield an unstable intermediate that subsequently undergoes one or more structural rearrangements to form the final product .
The importance of molecular structure in the reactivity of organic compounds is illustrated by the reactions that produce aldehydes and ketones .
We can prepare a carbonyl group by oxidation of an alcohol—for organic molecules , oxidation of a carbon atom is said to occur when a carbon-hydrogen bond is replaced by a carbon-oxygen bond .
The reverse reaction—replacing a carbon-oxygen bond by a carbon-hydrogen bond—is a reduction of that carbon atom .
Recall that oxygen is generally assigned a –2 oxidation number unless it is elemental or attached to a fluorine .
Hydrogen is generally assigned an oxidation number of +1 unless it is attached to a metal .
Since carbon does not have a specific rule , its oxidation number is determined algebraically by factoring the atoms it is attached to and the overall charge of the molecule or ion .
In general , a carbon atom attached to an oxygen atom will have a more positive oxidation number and a carbon atom attached to a hydrogen atom will have a more negative oxidation number .
This should fit nicely with your understanding of the polarity of C–O and C–H bonds .
The other reagents and possible products of these reactions are beyond the scope of this chapter , so we will focus only on the changes to the carbon atoms : Methane represents the completely reduced form of an organic molecule that contains one carbon atom .
For CH , the carbon atom carries a –4 oxidation number ( the hydrogen atoms are assigned oxidation numbers of +1 and the carbon atom balances that by having an oxidation number of –4 ) .
An alcohol with its –OH group attached to two other carbon atoms will form a ketone .
If three carbons are attached to the carbon bonded to the –OH , the molecule will not have a C–H bond to be replaced , so it will not be susceptible to oxidation .
Formaldehyde , an aldehyde with the formula HCHO , is a colorless gas with a pungent and irritating odor .
It is sold in an aqueous solution called formalin , which contains about 37 % formaldehyde by weight .
Formaldehyde causes coagulation of proteins , so it kills bacteria ( and any other living organism ) and stops many of the biological processes that cause tissue to decay .
Thus , formaldehyde is used for preserving tissue specimens and embalming bodies .
It is also used to sterilize soil or other materials .
Formaldehyde is used in the manufacture of Bakelite , a hard plastic having high chemical and electrical resistance .
Dimethyl ketone , CH COCH , commonly called acetone , is the simplest ketone .
It is made commercially by fermenting corn or molasses , or by oxidation of 2-propanol .
Acetone is a colorless liquid .
Among its many uses are as a solvent for lacquer ( including fingernail polish ) , cellulose acetate , cellulose nitrate , acetylene , plastics , and varnishes ; as a paint and varnish remover ; and as a solvent in the manufacture of pharmaceuticals and chemicals .
The odor of vinegar is caused by the presence of acetic acid , a carboxylic acid , in the vinegar .
The odor of ripe bananas and many other fruits is due to the presence of esters , compounds that can be prepared by the reaction of a carboxylic acid with an alcohol .
Because esters do not have hydrogen bonds between molecules , they have lower vapor pressures than the alcohols and carboxylic acids from which they are derived ( see ) .
Both carboxylic acids and esters contain a carbonyl group with a second oxygen atom bonded to the carbon atom in the carbonyl group by a single bond .
In a carboxylic acid , the second oxygen atom also bonds to a hydrogen atom .
In an ester , the second oxygen atom bonds to another carbon atom .
The hydrogen atom in the functional group of a carboxylic acid will react with a base to form an ionic salt : Carboxylic acids are weak acids ( see the chapter on acids and bases ) , meaning they are not 100 % ionized in water .
Generally only about 1 % of the molecules of a carboxylic acid dissolved in water are ionized at any given time .
The remaining molecules are undissociated in solution .
We prepare carboxylic acids by the oxidation of aldehydes or alcohols whose –OH functional group is located on the carbon atom at the end of the chain of carbon atoms in the alcohol : Esters are produced by the reaction of acids with alcohols .
For example , the ester ethyl acetate , CH CO CH CH , is formed when acetic acid reacts with ethanol : The simplest carboxylic acid is formic acid , HCO H , known since 1670 .
Its name comes from the Latin word formicus , which means “ ant ” ; it was first isolated by the distillation of red ants .
It is partially responsible for the pain and irritation of ant and wasp stings , and is responsible for a characteristic odor of ants that can be sometimes detected in their nests .
Acetic acid , CH CO H , constitutes 3–6 % vinegar .
Cider vinegar is produced by allowing apple juice to ferment without oxygen present .
Yeast cells present in the juice carry out the fermentation reactions .
The fermentation reactions change the sugar present in the juice to ethanol , then to acetic acid .
Pure acetic acid has a penetrating odor and produces painful burns .
It is an excellent solvent for many organic and some inorganic compounds , and it is essential in the production of cellulose acetate , a component of many synthetic fibers such as rayon .
The distinctive and attractive odors and flavors of many flowers , perfumes , and ripe fruits are due to the presence of one or more esters .
Palmitic and stearic acids are saturated acids that contain no double or triple bonds .
By the end of this section , you will be able to : Describe the structure and properties of an amine Describe the structure and properties of an amide Amines are molecules that contain carbon-nitrogen bonds .
The nitrogen atom in an amine has a lone pair of electrons and three bonds to other atoms , either carbon or hydrogen .
Various nomenclatures are used to derive names for amines , but all involve the class-identifying suffix –ine as illustrated here for a few simple examples : In some amines , the nitrogen atom replaces a carbon atom in an aromatic hydrocarbon .
Pyridine is one such heterocyclic amine .
A heterocyclic compound contains atoms of two or more different elements in its ring structure .
Like ammonia , amines are weak bases due to the lone pair of electrons on their nitrogen atoms : The basicity of an amine ’ s nitrogen atom plays an important role in much of the compound ’ s chemistry .
Amine functional groups are found in a wide variety of compounds , including natural and synthetic dyes , polymers , vitamins , and medications such as penicillin and codeine .
They are also found in many molecules essential to life , such as amino acids , hormones , neurotransmitters , and DNA .
Amides are molecules that contain nitrogen atoms connected to the carbon atom of a carbonyl group .
Like amines , various nomenclature rules may be used to name amides , but all include use of the class-specific suffix -amide : Amides can be produced when carboxylic acids react with amines or ammonia in a process called amidation .
It is through this reaction that amino acids ( molecules containing both amine and carboxylic acid substituents ) link together in a polymer to form proteins .
The table here summarizes the structures discussed in this chapter : The chemical reactions that we have considered in previous chapters involve changes in the electronic structure of the species involved , that is , the arrangement of the electrons around atoms , ions , or molecules .
Nuclear structure , the numbers of protons and neutrons within the nuclei of the atoms involved , remains unchanged during chemical reactions .
The chapter on atoms , molecules , and ions introduced the basic idea of nuclear structure , that the nucleus of an atom is composed of protons neutrons .
Recall that the number of protons in the nucleus is called the atomic and , with the exception of number ( Z ) of the element , and the sum of the number of protons and the number of neutrons is the mass number ( A ) .
Atoms with the same atomic number but different mass numbers are isotopes of the same element .
For example , Protons and neutrons , collectively called nucleons , are packed together tightly in a nucleus .
With a radius of about 10 meters , a nucleus is quite small compared to the radius of the entire atom , which is about 10 meters .
Nuclei are extremely dense compared to bulk matter , averaging 1.8 10 grams per cubic centimeter .
For example , water has a density of 1 gram per cubic centimeter , and iridium , one of the densest elements known , has a density of 22.6 g/cm .
If the earth ’ s density were equal to the average nuclear density , the earth ’ s radius would be only about 200 meters ( earth ’ s actual radius is approximately 6.4 10 meters , 30,000 times larger ) .
demonstrates just how great nuclear densities can be in the natural world .
Neutron stars form when the core of a very massive star undergoes gravitational collapse , causing the star ’ s outer layers to explode in a supernova .
Composed almost completely of neutrons , they are the densestknown stars in the universe , with densities comparable to the average density of an atomic nucleus .
A neutron star in a faraway galaxy has a mass equal to 2.4 solar masses ( 1 solar mass = = mass of the sun = 1.99 10 kg ) and a diameter of 26 km .
( a ) What is the density of this neutron star ?
( b ) How does this neutron star ’ s density compare to the density of a uranium nucleus , which has a diameter of about 15 fm ( 1 fm = 10 m ) ?
We can treat both the neutron star and the U-235 nucleus as spheres .
Find the density of a neutron star with a mass of 1.97 solar masses and a diameter of 13 km , and compare it to the density of a hydrogen nucleus , which has a diameter of 1.75 fm ( 1 fm = 1 10 m ) .
Answer : The density of the neutron star is 3.4 10 kg/m .
The density of a hydrogen nucleus is 6.0 10 kg/m .
The neutron star is 5.7 times denser than the hydrogen nucleus .
To hold positively charged protons together in the very small volume of a nucleus requires very strong attractive forces because the positively charged protons repel one another strongly at such short distances .
The force of attraction that holds the nucleus together is the strong nuclear force .
( The strong force is one of the four fundamental forces that are known to exist .
The others are the electromagnetic force , the gravitational force , and the nuclear weak force . )
This force acts between protons , between neutrons , and between protons and neutrons .
It is very different from the electrostatic force that holds negatively charged electrons around a positively charged nucleus ( the attraction between opposite charges ) .
Over distances less than 10 meters and within the nucleus , the strong nuclear force is much stronger than electrostatic repulsions between protons ; over larger distances and outside the nucleus , it is essentially nonexistent .
As a simple example of the energy associated with the strong nuclear force , consider the helium atom composed of two protons , two neutrons , and two electrons .
The total mass of these six subatomic particles may be calculated as : atom is 4.0026 amu , less than the However , mass spectrometric measurements reveal that the mass of an combined masses of its six constituent subatomic particles .
This difference between the calculated and experimentally measured masses is known as the mass defect of the atom .
In the case of helium , the mass defect indicates a “ loss ” in mass of 4.0331 amu – 4.0026 amu = 0.0305 amu .
The loss in mass accompanying the formation of an atom from protons , neutrons , and electrons is due to the conversion of that mass into energy that is evolved as the atom forms .
The nuclear binding energy is the energy produced when the atoms ’ nucleons are bound together ; this is also the energy needed to break a nucleus into its constituent protons and neutrons .
In comparison to chemical bond energies , nuclear binding energies are vastly greater , as we will learn in this section .
Consequently , the energy changes associated with nuclear reactions are vastly greater than are those for chemical reactions .
The conversion between mass and energy is most identifiably represented by the mass-energy equivalence equation as stated by Albert Einstein : where E is energy , m is mass of the matter being converted , and c is the speed of light in a vacuum .
This equation can be used to find the amount of energy that results when matter is converted into energy .
Using this mass-energy equivalence equation , the nuclear binding energy of a nucleus may be calculated from its mass defect , as demonstrated in .
Determine the binding energy in The mass defect for a joules per nuclide using the mass-energy equivalence equation .
To accommodate the requested energy units , the mass defect must be expressed in kilograms ( recall that 1 J = 1 kg m /s ) .
( a ) First , express the mass defect in g/mol .
The mass defect is therefore 0.0305 g/mol .
To accommodate the units of the other terms in the mass-energy equation , the mass must be expressed in kg , since 1 J = 1 kg m /s .
Converting grams into kilograms yields a mass defect of 3.05 10 kg/mol .
Substituting this quantity into the mass-energy equivalence equation yields : Note that this tremendous amount of energy is associated with the conversion of a very small amount of matter ( about 30 mg , roughly the mass of typical drop of water ) .
( b ) The binding energy for a single nucleus is computed from the molar binding energy using Avogadro ’ s number : ( c ) Recall that 1 eV = 1.602 10 J .
Using the binding energy computed in part ( b ) : What is the binding energy for the nuclide ( atomic mass : 18.9984 amu ) in MeV per nucleus ?
Answer : 148.4 MeV Because the energy changes for breaking and forming bonds are so small compared to the energy changes for breaking or forming nuclei , the changes in mass during all ordinary chemical reactions are virtually undetectable .
As described in the chapter on thermochemistry , the most energetic chemical reactions exhibit enthalpies on the order of thousands of kJ/mol , which is equivalent to mass differences in the nanogram range ( 10 g ) .
On the other hand , nuclear binding energies are typically on the order of billions of kJ/mol , corresponding to mass differences in the milligram range ( 10 g ) .
A nucleus is stable if it can not be transformed into another configuration without adding energy from the outside .
Of the thousands of nuclides that exist , about 250 are stable .
A plot of the number of neutrons versus the number of protons for stable nuclei reveals that the stable isotopes fall into a narrow band .
This region is known as the band of stability ( also called the belt , zone , or valley of stability ) .
The straight line in represents nuclei that have a 1:1 ratio of protons to neutrons ( n : p ratio ) .
Note that the lighter stable nuclei , in general , have equal numbers of protons and neutrons .
For example , nitrogen-14 has seven protons and seven neutrons .
Heavier stable nuclei , however , have increasingly more neutrons than protons .
For example : iron-56 has 30 neutrons and 26 protons , an n : p ratio of 1.15 , whereas the stable nuclide lead-207 has 125 neutrons and 82 protons , an n : p ratio equal to 1.52 .
This is because larger nuclei have more proton-proton repulsions , and require larger numbers of neutrons to provide compensating strong forces to overcome these electrostatic repulsions and hold the nucleus together .
The nuclei that are to the left or to the right of the band of stability are unstable and exhibit radioactivity .
They change spontaneously ( decay ) into other nuclei that are either in , or closer to , the band of stability .
These nuclear decay reactions convert one unstable isotope ( or radioisotope ) into another , more stable , isotope .
We will discuss the nature and products of this radioactive decay in subsequent sections of this chapter .
Several observations may be made regarding the relationship between the stability of a nucleus and its structure .
Nuclei with even numbers of protons , neutrons , or both are more likely to be stable ( see ) .
Nuclei with certain numbers of nucleons , known as magic numbers , are stable against nuclear decay .
These numbers of protons or neutrons ( 2 , 8 , 20 , 28 , 50 , 82 , and 126 ) make complete shells in the nucleus .
These are similar in concept to the stable electron shells observed for the noble gases .
Nuclei that have magic numbers of both protons and neutrons , are called “ double magic ” and are particularly stable .
These trends in such as nuclear stability may be rationalized by considering a quantum mechanical model of nuclear energy states analogous to that used to describe electronic states earlier in this textbook .
The details of this model are beyond the scope of this chapter .
and The relative stability of a nucleus is correlated with its binding energy per nucleon , the total binding energy for the nucleus divided by the number or nucleons in the nucleus .
For instance , we saw in that the binding energy for a nucleus is 28.4 MeV .
The binding energy per nucleon for a nucleus is therefore : In , we learn how to calculate the binding energy per nucleon of a nuclide on the curve shown in .
lies near the top of the binding energy curve and is one of the most ( atomic mass of The iron nuclide stable nuclides .
What is the binding energy per nucleon ( in MeV ) for the nuclide 55.9349 amu ) ?
What is the binding energy per nucleon in ( atomic mass , 18.9984 amu ) ?
To describe a nuclear reaction , we use an equation that identifies the nuclides involved in the reaction , their mass numbers and atomic numbers , and the other particles involved in the reaction .
Many entities can be involved in nuclear reactions .
The most common are protons , neutrons , alpha particles , beta particles , positrons , and gamma rays , as shown in .
Protons also represented by the symbol and neutrons are the constituents of atomic nuclei , and have been described previously .
Alpha particles are high-energy helium nuclei .
Beta particles also represented also represented by the symbol are high-energy electrons , and gamma rays are photons of very high-energy electromagnetic by the symbol radiation .
Positrons also represented by the symbol are positively charged electrons ( “ anti-electrons ” ) .
The subscripts and superscripts are necessary for balancing nuclear equations , but are usually optional in other circumstances .
For example , an alpha particle is a helium nucleus ( He ) with a charge of +2 and a mass number of 4 , This works because , in general , the ion charge is not important in the balancing of nuclear so it is symbolized equations .
Note that positrons are exactly like electrons , except they have the opposite charge .
They are the most common example of antimatter , particles with the same mass but the opposite state of another property ( for example , charge ) than ordinary matter .
Gamma rays are a type of high energy electromagnetic radiation produced when a nucleus undergoes a transition from a higher to a lower energy state , similar to how a photon is produced by an electronic transition from a higher to a lower energy level .
Due to the much larger energy differences between nuclear energy shells , gamma rays emanating from a nucleus have energies that are typically millions of times larger than electromagnetic radiation emanating from electronic transitions .
A balanced chemical reaction equation reflects the fact that during a chemical reaction , bonds break and form , and atoms are rearranged , but the total numbers of atoms of each element are conserved and do not change .
A balanced nuclear reaction equation indicates that there is a rearrangement during a nuclear reaction , but of nucleons ( subatomic particles within the atoms ’ nuclei ) rather than atoms .
Nuclear reactions also follow conservation laws , and they are balanced in two ways : The sum of the mass numbers of the reactants equals the sum of the mass numbers of the products .
The sum of the charges of the reactants equals the sum of the charges of the products .
If the atomic number and the mass number of all but one of the particles in a nuclear reaction are known , we can identify the particle by balancing the reaction .
For instance , we could determine that reaction of we can identify a nuclide by balancing the nuclear reaction .
if we knew that a proton , is a product of the nuclear was one of the two products .
shows how and The reaction of an α particle with magnesium-25 element .
Identify the new nuclide produced .
The nuclear reaction can be written as : produces a proton and a nuclide of another where A is the mass number and Z is the atomic number of the new nuclide , X .
Because the sum of the mass numbers of the reactants must equal the sum of the mass numbers of the products : Similarly , the charges must balance , so : Check the periodic table : The element with nuclear charge = +13 is aluminum .
Thus , the product is The nuclide What is the equation for this reaction ?
combines with an electron and produces a new nucleus and no other massive particles .
Answer : Following are the equations of several nuclear reactions that have important roles in the history of nuclear chemistry : The first naturally occurring unstable element that was isolated , polonium , was discovered by the Polish scientist Marie Curie and her husband Pierre in 1898 .
It decays , emitting α particles : The first nuclide to be prepared by artificial means was an isotope of oxygen , O .
During the beginning of the twentieth century , many radioactive substances were discovered , the properties of radiation were investigated and quantified , and a solid understanding of radiation and nuclear decay was developed .
The spontaneous change of an unstable nuclide into another is radioactive decay .
The unstable nuclide is called the parent nuclide ; the nuclide that results from the decay is known as the daughter nuclide .
The daughter nuclide may be stable , or it may decay itself .
We now know that α particles are high-energy helium nuclei , β particles are highenergy electrons , and γ radiation compose high-energy electromagnetic radiation .
We classify different types of radioactive decay by the radiation produced .
Alpha ( α ) decay is the emission of an α particle from the nucleus .
For example , polonium-210 undergoes α decay : Alpha decay occurs primarily in heavy nuclei ( A > 200 , Z > 83 ) .
Because the loss of an α particle gives a daughter nuclide with a mass number four units smaller and an atomic number two units smaller than those of the parent nuclide , the daughter nuclide has a larger n : p ratio than the parent nuclide .
If the parent nuclide undergoing α decay lies below the band of stability ( refer to ) , the daughter nuclide will lie closer to the band .
Beta ( β ) decay is the emission of an electron from a nucleus .
Iodine-131 is an example of a nuclide that undergoes β decay : Beta decay , which can be thought of as the conversion of a neutron into a proton and a β particle , is observed in nuclides with a large n : p ratio .
The beta particle ( electron ) emitted is from the atomic nucleus and is not one of the electrons surrounding the nucleus .
Such nuclei lie above the band of stability .
Emission of an electron does not change the mass number of the nuclide but does increase the number of its protons and decrease the number of its neutrons .
Consequently , the n : p ratio is decreased , and the daughter nuclide lies closer to the band of stability than did the parent nuclide .
Gamma emission ( γ emission ) is observed when a nuclide is formed in an excited state and then decays to its ground state with the emission of a γ ray , a quantum of high-energy electromagnetic radiation .
The presence of a nucleus in an excited state is often indicated by an asterisk ( * ) .
Cobalt-60 emits γ radiation and is used in many applications including cancer treatment : There is no change in mass number or atomic number during the emission of a γ ray unless the γ emission accompanies one of the other modes of decay .
Positron emission ( β decay ) is the emission of a positron from the nucleus .
Oxygen-15 is an example of a nuclide that undergoes positron emission : Positron emission is observed for nuclides in which the n : p ratio is low .
These nuclides lie below the band of stability .
Positron decay is the conversion of a proton into a neutron with the emission of a positron .
The n : p ratio increases , and the daughter nuclide lies closer to the band of stability than did the parent nuclide .
Electron capture occurs when one of the inner electrons in an atom is captured by the atom ’ s nucleus .
For example , potassium-40 undergoes electron capture : Electron capture occurs when an inner shell electron combines with a proton and is converted into a neutron .
The loss of an inner shell electron leaves a vacancy that will be filled by one of the outer electrons .
As the outer electron drops into the vacancy , it will emit energy .
In most cases , the energy emitted will be in the form of an X-ray .
Like positron emission , electron capture occurs for “ proton-rich ” nuclei that lie below the band of stability .
Electron capture has the same effect on the nucleus as does positron emission : The atomic number is decreased by one and the mass number does not change .
This increases the n : p ratio , and the daughter nuclide lies closer to the band of stability than did the parent nuclide .
Whether electron capture or positron emission occurs is difficult to predict .
The choice is primarily due to kinetic factors , with the one requiring the smaller activation energy being the one more likely to occur .
summarizes these types of decay , along with their equations and changes in atomic and mass numbers .
The naturally occurring radioactive isotopes of the heaviest elements fall into chains of successive disintegrations , or decays , and all the species in one chain constitute a radioactive family , or radioactive decay series .
Three of these series include most of the naturally radioactive elements of the periodic table .
They are the uranium series , the actinide series , and the thorium series .
The neptunium series is a fourth series , which is no longer significant on the earth because of the short half-lives of the species involved .
Each series is characterized by a parent ( first member ) that has a long half-life and a series of daughter nuclides that ultimately lead to a stable end-product—that is , a nuclide on the band of stability .
In all three series , the end-product is a stable isotope of lead .
The neptunium series , previously thought to terminate with bismuth-209 , terminates with thallium-205 .
Radioactive decay follows first-order kinetics .
Since first-order reactions have already been covered in detail in the kinetics chapter , we will now apply those concepts to nuclear decay reactions .
Each radioactive nuclide has a characteristic , constant half-life ( t ) , the time required for half of the atoms in a sample to decay .
For example , cobalt-60 , an isotope that emits gamma rays used to treat cancer , has a half-life of 5.27 years ( nuclei decay every 5.27 years , both the amount of ) .
In a given cobalt-60 source , since half of the material and the intensity of the radiation emitted is cut in half every 5.27 years .
( Note that for a given substance , the intensity of radiation that it produces is directly proportional to the rate of decay of the substance and the amount of the substance . )
This is as expected for a process following first-order kinetics .
Thus , a cobalt-60 source that is used for cancer treatment must be replaced regularly to continue to be effective .
Since nuclear decay follows first-order kinetics , we can adapt the mathematical relationships used for first-order chemical reactions .
We generally substitute the number of nuclei , N , for the concentration .
If the rate is stated in nuclear decays per second , we refer to it as the activity of the radioactive sample .
The rate for radioactive decay is : decay rate = λN with λ = the decay constant for the particular radioisotope The decay constant , λ , which is the same as a rate constant discussed in the kinetics chapter .
applies these calculations to find the rates of radioactive decay for specific nuclides .
decays with a half-life of 5.27 years to produce ( a ) What is the decay constant for the radioactive disintegration of cobalt-60 ?
( b ) Calculate the fraction of a sample of the ( c ) How long does it take for a sample of amount remains ?
isotope that will remain after 15 years .
Or put another way , 13.8 % of the The fraction of originally present will remain after 15 years .
( c ) 2.00 % of the original amount of time for first-order kinetics , we have : is equal to 0.0200 N .
Substituting this into the equation for Radon-222 , of 0.750 g to decay into other elements , leaving only 0.100 g of radon-222 ?
has a half-life of 3.823 days .
For example : the half-life of 10 years ; is 3.82 days ; and element-111 ( Rg for roentgenium ) is 1.5 10 seconds .
The half-lives of a number of radioactive isotopes important to medicine are shown in , and others are listed in .
is 24,000 years ; Several radioisotopes have half-lives and other properties that make them useful for purposes of “ dating ” the origin of objects such as archaeological artifacts , formerly living organisms , or geological formations .
This process is radiometric dating and has been responsible for many breakthrough scientific discoveries about the geological history of the earth , the evolution of life , and the history of human civilization .
We will explore some of the most common types of radioactive dating and how the particular isotopes work for each type .
The radioactivity of carbon-14 provides a method for dating objects that were a part of a living organism .
This method of radiometric dating , which is also called radiocarbon dating or carbon-14 dating , is accurate for dating carbon-containing substances that are up to about 30,000 years old , and can provide reasonably accurate dates up to a maximum of about 50,000 years old .
The natural abundance of depends on the All isotopes of carbon react with oxygen to produce CO molecules .
The ratio of in the atmosphere is approximately 1 ratio of part per trillion ; until recently , this has generally been constant over time , as seen is gas samples found trapped in ice .
into plants is a regular part of the photosynthesis process , which means The incorporation of ratio in the atmosphere .
But when the that the is a stable isotope and does not undergo plant dies , it no longer traps carbon through photosynthesis .
Because radioactive decay , its concentration in the plant does not change .
However , carbon-14 decays by β emission with a half-life of 5730 years : ratio found in a living plant is the same as the and to ratio gradually decreases after the plant dies .
The decrease in the ratio with time provides a Thus , the measure of the time that has elapsed since the death of the plant ( or other organism that ate the plant ) .
visually depicts this process .
ratio in a wooden object found in an For example , with the half-life of archaeological dig is half what it is in a living tree , this indicates that the wooden object is 5730 years old .
Highly ratios can be obtained from very small samples ( as little as a milligram ) by the accurate determinations of use of a mass spectrometer .
being 5730 years , if the A tiny piece of paper ( produced from formerly living plant matter ) taken from the Dead Sea Scrolls has an activity of 10.8 disintegrations per minute per gram of carbon .
If the initial C-14 activity was 13.6 disintegrations/min/g of C , estimate the age of the Dead Sea Scrolls .
The decay constant can be determined from the half-life of C-14 , 5730 years : Substituting and solving , we have : Therefore , the Dead Sea Scrolls are approximately 1900 years old .
More accurate dates of the reigns of ancient Egyptian pharaohs have been determined recently using plants that were preserved in their tombs .
Samples of seeds and plant matter from King Tutankhamun ’ s tomb have a C-14 decay rate of 9.07 disintegrations/min/g of C. How long ago did King Tut ’ s reign come to an end ?
Answer : about 3350 years ago , or approximately 1340 BC in the atmosphere caused by combustion of fossil fuels ( in which essentially all of the ratio .
The accuracy of a There have been some significant , well-documented changes to the ratio in a living plant being the same now as straightforward application of this technique depends on the it was in an earlier era , but this is not always valid .
Due to the increasing accumulation of CO molecules ( largely has decayed ) , in the atmosphere may be changing .
This manmade increase in in the atmosphere the ratio of ratio to decrease , and this in turn affects the ratio in currently living organisms on the earth .
causes the Fortunately , however , we can use other data , such as tree dating via examination of annual growth rings , to calculate correction factors .
With these correction factors , accurate dates can be determined .
In general , radioactive dating only works for about 10 half-lives ; therefore , the limit for carbon-14 dating is about 57,000 years .
Radioactive dating can also use other radioactive nuclides with longer half-lives to date older events .
For example , uranium-238 ( which decays in a series of steps into lead-206 ) can be used for establishing the age of rocks ( and the approximate age of the oldest rocks on earth ) .
Since U-238 has a half-life of 4.5 billion years , it takes that amount of time for half of the original U-238 to decay into Pb-206 .
In a sample of rock that does not contain appreciable amounts of Pb-208 , the most abundant isotope of lead , we can assume that lead was not present when the rock was formed .
Therefore , by measuring and analyzing the ratio of U-238 : Pb-206 , we can determine the age of the rock .
This assumes that all of the lead-206 present came from the decay of uranium-238 .
If there is additional lead-206 present , which is indicated by the presence of other lead isotopes in the sample , it is necessary to make an adjustment .
Potassium-argon dating uses a similar method .
K-40 decays by positron emission and electron capture to form Ar-40 with a half-life of 1.25 billion years .
If a rock sample is crushed and the amount of Ar-40 gas that escapes is measured , determination of the Ar-40 : K-40 ratio yields the age of the rock .
Other methods , such as rubidium-strontium dating ( Rb-87 decays into Sr-87 with a half-life of 48.8 billion years ) , operate on the same principle .
To estimate the lower limit for the earth ’ s age , scientists determine the age of various rocks and minerals , making the assumption that the earth is older than the oldest rocks and minerals in its crust .
As of 2014 , the oldest known rocks on earth are the Jack Hills zircons from Australia , found by uranium-lead dating to be almost 4.4 billion years old .
An igneous rock contains 9.58 10 g of U-238 and 2.51 10 g of Pb-206 , and much , much smaller amounts of Pb-208 .
Determine the approximate time at which the rock formed .
The sample of rock contains very little Pb-208 , the most common isotope of lead , so we can safely assume that all the Pb-206 in the rock was produced by the radioactive decay of U-238 .
When the rock formed , it contained all of the U-238 currently in it , plus some U-238 that has since undergone radioactive decay .
U-238 decays into Pb-206 with a half-life of 4.5 10 y , so the decay constant λ is : Substituting and solving , we have : Therefore , the rock is approximately 1.7 billion years old .
A sample of rock contains 6.14 10 g of Rb-87 and 3.51 10 g of Sr-87 .
Calculate the age of the rock .
( The half-life of the β decay of Rb-87 is 4.7 10 y . )
A slew of new discoveries in the 1930s and 1940s , along with World War II , combined to usher in the Nuclear Age in the mid-twentieth century .
Nuclear transmutation is the conversion of one nuclide into another .
It can occur by the radioactive decay of a nucleus , or the reaction of a nucleus with another particle .
The first manmade nucleus was produced in Ernest Rutherford ’ s laboratory in 1919 by a transmutation reaction , the bombardment of one type of nuclei with other nuclei or with neutrons .
Rutherford bombarded nitrogen atoms with high-speed α particles from a natural radioactive isotope of radium and observed protons resulting from the reaction : The and nuclei that are produced are stable , so no further ( nuclear ) changes occur .
To reach the kinetic energies necessary to produce transmutation reactions , devices called particle accelerators are used .
These devices use magnetic and electric fields to increase the speeds of nuclear particles .
In all accelerators , the particles move in a vacuum to avoid collisions with gas molecules .
When neutrons are required for transmutation reactions , they are usually obtained from radioactive decay reactions or from various nuclear reactions occurring in nuclear reactors .
The Chemistry in Everyday Life feature that follows discusses a famous particle accelerator that made worldwide news .
Prior to 1940 , the heaviest-known element was uranium , whose atomic number is 92 .
Now , many artificial elements have been synthesized and isolated , including several on such a large scale that they have had a profound effect on society .
One of these—element 93 , neptunium ( Np ) —was first made in 1940 by McMillan and Abelson by bombarding uranium-238 with neutrons .
The reaction creates unstable uranium-239 , with a half-life of 23.5 minutes , which then decays into neptunium-239 .
Neptunium-239 is also radioactive , with a half-life of 2.36 days , and it decays into plutonium-239 .
The nuclear reactions are : Plutonium is now mostly formed in nuclear reactors as a byproduct during the decay of uranium .
Some of the neutrons that are released during U-235 decay combine with U-238 nuclei to form uranium-239 ; this undergoes β decay to form neptunium-239 , which in turn undergoes β decay to form plutonium-239 as illustrated in the preceding three equations .
It is possible to summarize these equations as : Heavier isotopes of plutonium—Pu-240 , Pu-241 , and Pu-242—are also produced when lighter plutonium nuclei capture neutrons .
Some of this highly radioactive plutonium is used to produce military weapons , and the rest presents a serious storage problem because they have half-lives from thousands to hundreds of thousands of years .
Although they have not been prepared in the same quantity as plutonium , many other synthetic nuclei have been produced .
Nuclear medicine has developed from the ability to convert atoms of one type into other types of atoms .
Radioactive isotopes of several dozen elements are currently used for medical applications .
The radiation produced by their decay is used to image or treat various organs or portions of the body , among other uses .
The elements beyond element 92 ( uranium ) are called transuranium elements .
As of this writing , 22 transuranium elements have been produced and officially recognized by IUPAC ; several other elements have formation claims that are waiting for approval .
Some of these elements are shown in .
Sometimes neutrons are also produced .
This decomposition is called fission , the breaking of a large nucleus into smaller pieces .
The breaking is rather random with the formation of a large number of different products .
Fission usually does not occur naturally , but is induced by bombardment with neutrons .
Since then , fission has been observed in many other isotopes , including most actinide isotopes that have an odd number of neutrons .
A typical nuclear fission reaction is shown in .
Among the products of Meitner , Hahn , and Strassman ’ s fission reaction were barium , krypton , lanthanum , and cerium , all of which have nuclei that are more stable than uranium-235 .
Since then , hundreds of different isotopes have been observed among the products of fissionable substances .
A few of the many reactions that occur for U-235 , and a graph showing the distribution of its fission products and their yields , are shown in .
Similar fission reactions have been observed with other uranium isotopes , as well as with a variety of other isotopes such as those of plutonium .
A tremendous amount of energy is produced by the fission of heavy elements .
For instance , when one mole of U-235 undergoes fission , the products weigh about 0.2 grams less than the reactants ; this “ lost ” mass is converted into a very large amount of energy , about 1.8 10 kJ per mole of U-235 .
Nuclear fission reactions produce incredibly large amounts of energy compared to chemical reactions .
The fission of 1 kilogram of uranium-235 , for example , produces about 2.5 million times as much energy as is produced by burning 1 kilogram of coal .
As described earlier , when undergoing fission U-235 produces two “ medium-sized ” nuclei , and two or three neutrons .
These neutrons may then cause the fission of other uranium-235 atoms , which in turn provide more neutrons that can cause fission of even more nuclei , and so on .
If this occurs , we have a nuclear chain reaction ( see ) .
On the other hand , if too many neutrons escape the bulk material without interacting with a nucleus , then no chain reaction will occur .
Material that can sustain a nuclear fission chain reaction is said to be fissile or fissionable .
( Technically , fissile material can undergo fission with neutrons of any energy , whereas fissionable material requires high-energy neutrons . )
Nuclear fission becomes self-sustaining when the number of neutrons produced by fission equals or exceeds the number of neutrons absorbed by splitting nuclei plus the number that escape into the surroundings .
The amount of a fissionable material that will support a self-sustaining chain reaction is a critical mass .
An amount of fissionable material that can not sustain a chain reaction is a subcritical mass .
An amount of material in which there is an increasing rate of fission is known as a supercritical mass .
The critical mass depends on the type of material : its purity , the temperature , the shape of the sample , and how the neutron reactions are controlled .
An atomic bomb contains several pounds of fissionable material , a source of neutrons , and an explosive device for compressing it quickly into a small volume .
When fissionable material is in small pieces , the proportion of neutrons that escape through the relatively large surface area is great , and a chain reaction does not take place .
When the small pieces of fissionable material are brought together quickly to form a body with a mass larger than the critical mass , the relative number of escaping neutrons decreases , and a chain reaction and explosion result .
or Chain reactions of fissionable materials can be controlled and sustained without an explosion in a nuclear reactor .
Any nuclear reactor that produces power via the fission of uranium or plutonium by bombardment with neutrons must have at least five components : nuclear fuel consisting of fissionable material , a nuclear moderator , reactor coolant , control rods , and a shield and containment system .
We will discuss these components in greater detail later in the section .
The reactor works by separating the fissionable nuclear material such that a critical mass can not be formed , controlling both the flux and absorption of neutrons to allow shutting down the fission reactions .
In a nuclear reactor used for the production of electricity , the energy released by fission reactions is trapped as thermal energy and used to boil water and produce steam .
The steam is used to turn a turbine , which powers a generator for the production of electricity .
Nuclear fuel consists of a fissionable isotope , such as uranium-235 , which must be present in sufficient quantity to provide a self-sustaining chain reaction .
In the United States , uranium ores contain from 0.05–0.3 % of the uranium oxide U O ; the uranium in the ore is about 99.3 % nonfissionable U-238 with only 0.7 % fissionable U-235 .
Nuclear reactors require a fuel with a higher concentration of U-235 than is found in nature ; it is normally enriched to have about 5 % of uranium mass as U-235 .
At this concentration , it is not possible to achieve the supercritical mass necessary for a nuclear explosion .
Uranium can be enriched by gaseous diffusion ( the only method currently used in the US ) , using a gas centrifuge , or by laser separation .
In the gaseous diffusion enrichment plant where U-235 fuel is prepared , UF ( uranium hexafluoride ) gas at low pressure moves through barriers that have holes just barely large enough for UF to pass through .
The slightly lighter UF molecules diffuse through the barrier slightly faster than the heavier UF molecules .
This process is repeated through hundreds of barriers , gradually increasing the concentration of UF to the level needed by the nuclear reactor .
The basis for this process , Graham ’ s law , is described in the chapter on gases .
The enriched UF gas is collected , cooled until it solidifies , and then taken to a fabrication facility where it is made into fuel assemblies .
Each fuel assembly consists of fuel rods that contain many thimble-sized , ceramic-encased , enriched uranium ( usually UO ) fuel pellets .
Modern nuclear reactors may contain as many as 10 million fuel pellets .
The amount of energy in each of these pellets is equal to that in almost a ton of coal or 150 gallons of oil .
Neutrons produced by nuclear reactions move too fast to cause fission ( refer back to ) .
They must first be slowed to be absorbed by the fuel and produce additional nuclear reactions .
A nuclear moderator is a substance that slows the neutrons to a speed that is low enough to cause fission .
Early reactors used high-purity graphite as a or light water ( ordinary H O ) , whereas moderator .
Modern reactors in the US exclusively use heavy water some reactors in other countries use other materials , such as carbon dioxide , beryllium , or graphite .
A nuclear reactor coolant is used to carry the heat produced by the fission reaction to an external boiler and turbine , where it is transformed into electricity .
Two overlapping coolant loops are often used ; this counteracts the transfer of radioactivity from the reactor to the primary coolant loop .
All nuclear power plants in the US use water as a coolant .
Other coolants include molten sodium , lead , a lead-bismuth mixture , or molten salts .
Nuclear reactors use control rods to control the fission rate of the nuclear fuel by adjusting the number of slow neutrons present to keep the rate of the chain reaction at a safe level .
Control rods are made of boron , cadmium , hafnium , or other elements that are able to absorb neutrons .
Conversely , if the control rods are removed , fewer neutrons are absorbed , and the fission rate and energy production increase .
In an emergency , the chain reaction can be shut down by fully inserting all of the control rods into the nuclear core between the fuel rods .
During its operation , a nuclear reactor produces neutrons and other radiation .
Even when shut down , the decay products are radioactive .
In addition , an operating reactor is thermally very hot , and high pressures result from the circulation of water or another coolant through it .
Thus , a reactor must withstand high temperatures and pressures , and must protect operating personnel from the radiation .
Nuclear power plants are designed in such a way that they can not form a supercritical mass of fissionable material and therefore can not create a nuclear explosion .
But as history has shown , failures of systems and safeguards can cause catastrophic accidents , including chemical explosions and nuclear meltdowns ( damage to the reactor core from overheating ) .
The following Chemistry in Everyday Life feature explores three infamous meltdown incidents .
The energy produced by a reactor fueled with enriched uranium results from the fission of uranium as well as from the fission of plutonium produced as the reactor operates .
As discussed previously , the plutonium forms from the combination of neutrons and the uranium in the fuel .
In any nuclear reactor , only about 0.1 % of the mass of the fuel is converted into energy .
The other 99.9 % remains in the fuel rods as fission products and unused fuel .
All of the fission products absorb neutrons , and after a period of several months to a few years , depending on the reactor , the fission products must be removed by changing the fuel rods .
Otherwise , the concentration of these fission products would increase and absorb more neutrons until the reactor could no longer operate .
Spent fuel rods contain a variety of products , consisting of unstable nuclei ranging in atomic number from 25 to 60 , some transuranium elements , including plutonium and americium , and unreacted uranium isotopes .
The unstable nuclei and the transuranium isotopes give the spent fuel a dangerously high level of radioactivity .
The long-lived isotopes require thousands of years to decay to a safe level .
The ultimate fate of the nuclear reactor as a significant source of energy in the United States probably rests on whether or not a politically and scientifically satisfactory technique for processing and storing the components of spent fuel rods can be developed .
The process of converting very light nuclei into heavier nuclei is also accompanied by the conversion of mass into large amounts of energy , a process called fusion .
The principal source of energy in the sun is a net fusion reaction in which four hydrogen nuclei fuse and produce one helium nucleus and two positrons .
This is a net reaction of a more complicated series of events : A helium nucleus has a mass that is 0.7 % less than that of four hydrogen nuclei ; this lost mass is converted into energy during the fusion .
This reaction produces about 3.6 10 kJ of energy per mole of produced .
This is somewhat larger than the energy produced by the nuclear fission of one mole of U-235 ( 1.8 10 kJ ) , and over 3 million times larger than the energy produced by the ( chemical ) combustion of one mole of octane ( 5471 kJ ) .
and a triton , It has been determined that the nuclei of the heavy isotopes of hydrogen , a deuteron , fusion at extremely high temperatures ( thermonuclear fusion ) .
They form a helium nucleus and a neutron : undergo This change proceeds with a mass loss of 0.0188 amu , corresponding to the release of 1.69 10 kilojoules per mole formed .
The very high temperature is necessary to give the nuclei enough kinetic energy to overcome the of very strong repulsive forces resulting from the positive charges on their nuclei so they can collide .
Useful fusion reactions require very high temperatures for their initiation—about 15,000,000 K or more .
At these temperatures , all molecules dissociate into atoms , and the atoms ionize , forming plasma .
These conditions occur in an extremely large number of locations throughout the universe—stars are powered by fusion .
Humans have already figured out how to create temperatures high enough to achieve fusion on a large scale in thermonuclear weapons .
A thermonuclear weapon such as a hydrogen bomb contains a nuclear fission bomb that , when exploded , gives off enough energy to produce the extremely high temperatures necessary for fusion to occur .
Another much more beneficial way to create fusion reactions is in a fusion reactor , a nuclear reactor in which fusion reactions of light nuclei are controlled .
Because no solid materials are stable at such high temperatures , mechanical devices can not contain the plasma in which fusion reactions occur .
Two techniques to contain plasma at the density and temperature necessary for a fusion reaction are currently the focus of intensive research efforts : containment by a magnetic field and by the use of focused laser beams .
A number of large projects are working to attain one of the biggest goals in science : getting hydrogen fuel to ignite and produce more energy than the amount supplied to achieve the extremely high temperatures and pressures that are required for fusion .
At the time of this writing , there are no self-sustaining fusion reactors operating in the world , although small-scale controlled fusion reactions have been run for very brief periods .
By the end of this section , you will be able to : List common applications of radioactive isotopes Radioactive isotopes have the same chemical properties as stable isotopes of the same element , but they emit radiation , which can be detected .
If we replace one ( or more ) atom ( s ) with radioisotope ( s ) in a compound , we can track them by monitoring their radioactive emissions .
This type of compound is called a radioactive tracer ( or radioactive label ) .
Radioisotopes are used to follow the paths of biochemical reactions or to determine how a substance is distributed within an organism .
Radioactive tracers are also used in many medical applications , including both diagnosis and treatment .
They are used to measure engine wear , analyze the geological formation around oil wells , and much more .
Radioisotopes have revolutionized medical practice ( see ) , where they are used extensively .
Over 10 million nuclear medicine procedures and more than 100 million nuclear medicine tests are performed annually in the , thallium-201 United States .
Four typical examples of radioactive tracers used in medicine are technetium-99 , iodine-131 .
Damaged tissues in the heart , liver , and lungs absorb certain compounds of technetium-99 preferentially .
After it is injected , the location of the technetium compound , and hence the damaged tissue , can be determined by detecting the γ rays emitted by the Tc-99 isotope .
Thallium-201 becomes concentrated in healthy heart tissue , so the two isotopes , Tc-99 and Tl-201 , are used together to study heart tissue .
Iodine-131 concentrates in the thyroid gland , the liver , and some parts of the brain .
It can therefore be used to monitor goiter and treat thyroid conditions , such as Grave ’ s disease , as well as liver and brain tumors .
Salt solutions containing compounds of sodium-24 are injected into the bloodstream to help locate obstructions to the flow of blood .
, and sodium-24 Radioisotopes used in medicine typically have short half-lives—for example , the ubiquitous Tc-99m has a half-life of 6.01 hours .
This makes Tc-99m essentially impossible to store and prohibitively expensive to transport , so it is made on-site instead .
Hospitals and other medical facilities use Mo-99 ( which is primarily extracted from U-235 fission products ) to generate Tc-99 .
Mo-99 undergoes β decay with a half-life of 66 hours , and the Tc-99 is then chemically extracted .
A few micrograms of Mo-99 can produce enough Tc-99 to perform as many as 10,000 tests .
Radioisotopes can also be used , typically in higher doses than as a tracer , as treatment .
Radiation therapy is the use of high-energy radiation to damage the DNA of cancer cells , which kills them or keeps them from dividing .
A cancer patient may receive external beam radiation therapy delivered by a machine outside the body , or internal radiation therapy ( brachytherapy ) from a radioactive substance that has been introduced into the body .
Note that chemotherapy is similar to internal radiation therapy in that the cancer treatment is injected into the body , but differs in that chemotherapy uses chemical rather than radioactive substances to kill the cancer cells .
Cobalt-60 is a synthetic radioisotope produced by the neutron activation of Co-59 , which then undergoes β decay to form Ni-60 , along with the emission of γ radiation .
The overall process is : The overall decay scheme for this is shown graphically in .
Radioisotopes are used in diverse ways to study the mechanisms of chemical reactions in plants and animals .
These include labeling fertilizers in studies of nutrient uptake by plants and crop growth , investigations of digestive and milk-producing processes in cows , and studies on the growth and metabolism of animals and plants .
For example , the radioisotope C-14 was used to elucidate the details of how photosynthesis occurs .
The overall reaction is : but the process is much more complex , proceeding through a series of steps in which various organic compounds are produced .
In studies of the pathway of this reaction , plants were exposed to CO containing a high concentration of .
At regular intervals , the plants were analyzed to determine which organic compounds contained carbon-14 and how much of each compound was present .
From the time sequence in which the compounds appeared and the amount of each present at given time intervals , scientists learned more about the pathway of the reaction .
Commercial applications of radioactive materials are equally diverse .
They include determining the thickness of films and thin metal sheets by exploiting the penetration power of various types of radiation .
Flaws in metals used for structural purposes can be detected using high-energy gamma rays from cobalt-60 in a fashion similar to the way X-rays are used to examine the human body .
In one form of pest control , flies are controlled by sterilizing male flies with γ radiation so that females breeding with them do not produce offspring .
Many foods are preserved by radiation that kills microorganisms that cause the foods to spoil .
Americium-241 , an α emitter with a half-life of 458 years , is used in tiny amounts in ionization-type smoke detectors .
The α emissions from Am-241 ionize the air between two electrode plates in the ionizing chamber .
A battery supplies a potential that causes movement of the ions , thus creating a small electric current .
When smoke enters the chamber , the movement of the ions is impeded , reducing the conductivity of the air .
This causes a marked drop in the current , triggering an alarm .
All radioactive nuclides emit high-energy particles or electromagnetic waves .
When this radiation encounters living cells , it can cause heating , break chemical bonds , or ionize molecules .
The most serious biological damage results when these radioactive emissions fragment or ionize molecules .
For example , alpha and beta particles emitted from nuclear decay reactions possess much higher energies than ordinary chemical bond energies .
When these particles strike and penetrate matter , they produce ions and molecular fragments that are extremely reactive .
The damage this does to biomolecules in living organisms can cause serious malfunctions in normal cell processes , taxing the organism ’ s repair mechanisms and possibly causing illness or even death .
Energy absorbed from nonionizing radiation speeds up the movement of atoms and molecules , which is equivalent to heating the sample .
Although biological systems are sensitive to heat ( as we might know from touching a hot stove or spending a day at the beach in the sun ) , a large amount of nonionizing radiation is necessary before dangerous levels are reached .
Ionizing radiation , however , may cause much more severe damage by breaking bonds or removing electrons in biological molecules , disrupting their structure and function .
( This is true of any substance with unpaired electrons , known as a free radical . )
This hydroxyl radical can react with all kinds of biological molecules ( DNA , proteins , enzymes , and so on ) , causing damage to the molecules and disrupting physiological processes .
Examples of direct and indirect damage are shown in .
Radiation can harm either the whole body ( somatic damage ) or eggs and sperm ( genetic damage ) .
Its effects are more pronounced in cells that reproduce rapidly , such as the stomach lining , hair follicles , bone marrow , and embryos .
This is why patients undergoing radiation therapy often feel nauseous or sick to their stomach , lose hair , have bone aches , and so on , and why particular care must be taken when undergoing radiation therapy during pregnancy .
Different types of radiation have differing abilities to pass through material .
A very thin barrier , such as a sheet or two of paper , or the top layer of skin cells , usually stops alpha particles .
Because of this , alpha particle sources are usually not dangerous if outside the body , but are quite hazardous if ingested or inhaled ( see the Chemistry in Everyday Life feature on Radon Exposure ) .
Beta particles will pass through a hand , or a thin layer of material like paper or wood , but are stopped by a thin layer of metal .
Gamma radiation is very penetrating and can pass through a thick layer of most materials .
Some high-energy gamma radiation is able to pass through a few feet of concrete .
Certain dense , high atomic number elements ( such as lead ) can effectively attenuate gamma radiation with thinner material and are used for shielding .
The ability of various kinds of emissions to cause ionization varies greatly , and some particles have almost no tendency to produce ionization .
Alpha particles have about twice the ionizing power of fast-moving neutrons , about 10 times that of β particles , and about 20 times that of γ rays and X-rays .
Several different devices are used to detect and measure radiation , including Geiger counters , scintillation counters ( scintillators ) , and radiation dosimeters .
Probably the best-known radiation instrument , the Geiger counter ( also called the Geiger-Müller counter ) detects and measures radiation .
Radiation causes the ionization of the gas in a Geiger-Müller tube .
The rate of ionization is proportional to the amount of radiation .
A scintillation counter contains a scintillator—a material that emits light ( luminesces ) when excited by ionizing radiation—and a sensor that converts the light into an electric signal .
Radiation dosimeters also measure ionizing radiation and are often used to determine personal radiation exposure .
Commonly used types are electronic , film badge , thermoluminescent , and quartz fiber dosimeters .
A variety of units are used to measure various aspects of radiation .
The SI unit for rate of radioactive decay is the becquerel ( Bq ) , with 1 Bq = 1 disintegration per second .
The curie ( Ci ) and millicurie ( mCi ) are much larger units and are frequently used in medicine ( 1 curie = 1 Ci = 3.7 10 disintegrations per second ) .
The SI unit for measuring radiation dose is the gray ( Gy ) , with 1 Gy = 1 J of energy absorbed per kilogram of tissue .
In medical applications , the radiation absorbed dose ( rad ) is more often used ( 1 rad = 0.01 Gy ; 1 rad results in the absorption of 0.01 J/kg of tissue ) .
The SI unit measuring tissue damage caused by radiation is the sievert ( Sv ) .
This takes into account both the energy and the biological effects of the type of radiation involved in the radiation dose .
The roentgen equivalent for man ( rem ) is the unit for radiation damage that is used most frequently in medicine ( 100 rem = 1 Sv ) .
These are related by : with RBE approximately 10 for α radiation , 2 ( + ) for protons and neutrons , and 1 for β and γ radiation .
summarizes the units used for measuring radiation .
Cobalt-60 ( t = 5.26 y ) is used in cancer therapy since the γ rays it emits can be focused in small areas where the cancer is located .
A 5.00-g sample of Co-60 is available for cancer treatment .
( a ) What is its activity in Bq ?
( b ) What is its activity in Ci ?
Its nucleus contains one proton and two neutrons , and the atomic mass of tritium is 3.016 amu .
What is the activity of a sample containing 1.00mg of tritium ( a ) in Bq and ( b ) in Ci ?
Answer : ( a ) 3.56 10 Bq ; ( b ) 0.962 Ci The effects of radiation depend on the type , energy , and location of the radiation source , and the length of exposure .
A short-term , sudden dose of a large amount of radiation can cause a wide range of health effects , from changes in blood chemistry to death .
Short-term exposure to tens of rems of radiation will likely cause very noticeable symptoms or illness ; a dose of about 500 rems is estimated to have a 50 % probability of causing the death of the victim within 30 days of exposure .
Exposure to radioactive emissions has a cumulative effect on the body during a person ’ s lifetime , which is another reason why it is important to avoid any unnecessary exposure to radiation .
Health effects of shortterm exposure to radiation are shown in .
It is impossible to avoid some exposure to ionizing radiation .
We are constantly exposed to background radiation from a variety of natural sources , including cosmic radiation , rocks , medical procedures , consumer products , and even our own atoms .
We can minimize our exposure by blocking or shielding the radiation , moving farther from the source , and limiting the time of exposure .
