As noted in the figure caption , the chapter-opening image is of the Whirlpool Galaxy , which we examine in the first section of this chapter .
Galaxies are as immense as atoms are small , yet the same laws of physics describe both , along with all the rest of nature—an indication of the underlying unity in the universe .
The laws of physics are surprisingly few , implying an underlying simplicity to nature ’ s apparent complexity .
In this text , you learn about the laws of physics .
Physics is devoted to the understanding of all natural phenomena .
In physics , we try to understand physical phenomena at all scales—from the world of subatomic particles to the entire universe .
Despite the breadth of the subject , the various subfields of physics share a common core .
The same basic training in physics will prepare you to work in any area of physics and the related areas of science and engineering .
In this section , we investigate the scope of physics ; the scales of length , mass , and time over which the laws of physics have been shown to be applicable ; and the process by which science in general , and physics in particular , operates .
Take another look at the chapter-opening image .
The Whirlpool Galaxy contains billions of individual stars as well as huge clouds of gas and dust .
Its companion galaxy is also visible to the right .
This pair of galaxies lies a staggering billion trillion miles from our own galaxy ( which is called the Milky Way ) .
The stars and planets that make up the Whirlpool Galaxy might seem to be the furthest thing from most people ’ s everyday lives , but the Whirlpool is a great starting point to think about the forces that hold the universe together .
The forces that cause the Whirlpool Galaxy to act as it does are thought to be the same forces we contend with here on Earth , whether we are planning to send a rocket into space or simply planning to raise the walls for a new home .
The gravity that causes the stars of the Whirlpool Galaxy to rotate and revolve is thought to be the same as what causes water to flow over hydroelectric dams here on Earth .
When you look up at the stars , realize the forces out there are the same as the ones here on Earth .
Through a study of physics , you may gain a greater understanding of the interconnectedness of everything we can see and know in this universe .
Think , now , about all the technological devices you use on a regular basis .
Computers , smartphones , global positioning systems ( GPSs ) , MP3 players , and satellite radio might come to mind .
Then , think about the most exciting modern technologies you have heard about in the news , such as trains that levitate above tracks , “ invisibility cloaks ” that bend light around them , and microscopic robots that fight cancer cells in our bodies .
All these groundbreaking advances , commonplace or unbelievable , rely on the principles of physics .
Aside from playing a significant role in technology , professionals such as engineers , pilots , physicians , physical therapists , electricians , and computer programmers apply physics concepts in their daily work .
For example , a pilot must understand how wind forces affect a flight path ; a physical therapist must understand how the muscles in the body experience forces as they move and bend .
As you will learn in this text , the principles of physics are propelling new , exciting technologies , and these principles are applied in a wide range of careers .
The underlying order of nature makes science in general , and physics in particular , interesting and enjoyable to study .
For example , what do a bag of chips and a car battery have in common ?
Both contain energy that can be converted to other forms .
The law of conservation of energy ( which says that energy can change form but is never lost ) ties together such topics as food calories , batteries , heat , light , and watch springs .
Understanding this law makes it easier to learn about the various forms energy takes and how they relate to one another .
Apparently unrelated topics are connected through broadly applicable physical laws , permitting an understanding beyond just the memorization of lists of facts .
Science consists of theories and laws that are the general truths of nature , as well as the body of knowledge they encompass .
Scientists are continuously trying to expand this body of knowledge and to perfect the expression of the laws that describe it .
Physics , which comes from the Greek phúsis , meaning “ nature , ” is concerned with describing the interactions of energy , matter , space , and time to uncover the fundamental mechanisms that underlie every phenomenon .
This concern for describing the basic phenomena in nature essentially defines the scope of physics .
Physics aims to understand the world around us at the most basic level .
It emphasizes the use of a small number of quantitative laws to do this , which can be useful to other fields pushing the performance boundaries of existing technologies .
Consider a smartphone .
Physics describes how electricity interacts with the various circuits inside the device .
This knowledge helps engineers select the appropriate materials and circuit layout when building a smartphone .
Knowledge of the physics underlying these devices is required to shrink their size or increase their processing speed .
Or , think about a GPS .
Physics describes the relationship between the speed of an object , the distance over which it travels , and the time it takes to travel that distance .
When you use a GPS in a vehicle , it relies on physics equations to determine the travel time from one location to another .
Knowledge of physics is useful in everyday situations as well as in nonscientific professions .
It can help you understand how microwave ovens work , why metals should not be put into them , and why they might affect pacemakers .
Physics allows you to understand the hazards of radiation and to evaluate these hazards rationally and more easily .
Physics also explains the reason why a black car radiator helps remove heat in a car engine , and it explains why a white roof helps keep the inside of a house cool .
Similarly , the operation of a car ’ s ignition system as well as the transmission of electrical signals throughout our body ’ s nervous system are much easier to understand when you think about them in terms of basic physics .
Physics is a key element of many important disciplines and contributes directly to others .
Chemistry , for example—since it deals with the interactions of atoms and molecules—has close ties to atomic and molecular physics .
Most branches of engineering are concerned with designing new technologies , processes , or structures within the constraints set by the laws of physics .
In architecture , physics is at the heart of structural stability and is involved in the acoustics , heating , lighting , and cooling of buildings .
Parts of geology rely heavily on physics , such as radioactive dating of rocks , earthquake analysis , and heat transfer within Earth .
Some disciplines , such as biophysics and geophysics , are hybrids of physics and other disciplines .
Physics has many applications in the biological sciences .
On the microscopic level , it helps describe the properties of cells and their environments .
On the macroscopic level , it explains the heat , work , and power associated with the human body and its various organ systems .
Physics is involved in medical diagnostics , such as radiographs , magnetic resonance imaging , and ultrasonic blood flow measurements .
Medical therapy sometimes involves physics directly ; for example , cancer radiotherapy uses ionizing radiation .
Physics also explains sensory phenomena , such as how musical instruments make sound , how the eye detects color , and how lasers transmit information .
It is not necessary to study all applications of physics formally .
What is most useful is knowing the basic laws of physics and developing skills in the analytical methods for applying them .
The study of physics also can improve your problemsolving skills .
Furthermore , physics retains the most basic aspects of science , so it is used by all the sciences , and the study of physics makes other sciences easier to understand .
From the discussion so far , it should be clear that to accomplish your goals in any of the various fields within the natural sciences and engineering , a thorough grounding in the laws of physics is necessary .
The reason for this is simply that the laws of physics govern everything in the observable universe at all measurable scales of length , mass , and time .
Now , that is easy enough to say , but to come to grips with what it really means , we need to get a little bit quantitative .
The order of magnitude of a number is the power of 10 that most closely approximates it .
Thus , the order of magnitude refers to the scale ( or size ) of a value .
Each power of 10 represents a different order of magnitude .
For example , the order of magnitude of 800 is 10 because which rounds to 3 .
Similarly , the order of magnitude of 450 is 10 because which rounds to 3 as well .
Thus , we say the numbers 800 and 450 are of the same order of magnitude : 10 .
However , the order of magnitude of 250 is 10 because which rounds to 2 .
Thus , if the first factor is less than then we round it down to 1 and the order of magnitude is simply whatever power of 10 is required to write the number in scientific notation .
On the other hand , if the first factor is greater than then we round it up to 10 and the order of magnitude is one power of 10 higher than the power needed to write the number in scientific notation .
For example , the number 800 can be written in scientific notation as Because 8 is bigger than we say the order of magnitude of 800 is The number 450 can be written as so its order of magnitude is also 10 because 4.5 is greater than 3 .
However , 250 written in scientific notation is and 2.5 is less than 3 , so its order of magnitude is The order of magnitude of a number is designed to be a ballpark estimate for the scale ( or size ) of its value .
It is simply a way of rounding numbers consistently to the nearest power of 10 .
This makes doing rough mental math with very big and very small numbers easier .
For example , the diameter of a hydrogen atom is on the order of 10 m , whereas the diameter of the Sun is on the order of 10 m , so it would take roughly hydrogen atoms to stretch across the diameter of the Sun .
This is much easier to do in your head than using the more precise values of for a hydrogen atom diameter and for the Sun ’ s diameter , to find that it would take hydrogen atoms to stretch across the Sun ’ s diameter .
In addition to being easier , the rough estimate is also nearly as informative as the precise calculation .
The vastness of the universe and the breadth over which physics applies are illustrated by the wide range of examples of known lengths , masses , and times ( given as orders of magnitude ) in .
Examining this table will give you a feeling for the range of possible topics in physics and numerical values .
A good way to appreciate the vastness of the ranges of values in is to try to answer some simple comparative questions , such as the following : How many hydrogen atoms does it take to stretch across the diameter of the Sun ?
( Answer : 10 m/10 m = 10 hydrogen atoms ) How many protons are there in a bacterium ?
( Answer : 10 kg/10 kg = 10 protons ) How many floating-point operations can a supercomputer do in 1 day ?
( Answer : 10 s/10 s = 10 floating-point operations ) In studying , take some time to come up with similar questions that interest you and then try answering them .
Doing this can breathe some life into almost any table of numbers .
Visit to explore interactively the vast range of length scales in our universe .
Scroll down and up the scale to view hundreds of organisms and objects , and click on the individual objects to learn more about each one .
How did we come to know the laws governing natural phenomena ?
What we refer to as the laws of nature are concise descriptions of the universe around us .
They are human statements of the underlying laws or rules that all natural processes follow .
Such laws are intrinsic to the universe ; humans did not create them and can not change them .
We can only discover and understand them .
Their discovery is a very human endeavor , with all the elements of mystery , imagination , struggle , triumph , and disappointment inherent in any creative effort .
The cornerstone of discovering natural laws is observation ; scientists must describe the universe as it is , not as we imagine it to be .
A model is a representation of something that is often too difficult ( or impossible ) to display directly .
Although a model is justified by experimental tests , it is only accurate in describing certain aspects of a physical system .
An example is the Bohr model of single-electron atoms , in which the electron is pictured as orbiting the nucleus , analogous to the way planets orbit the Sun .
We can not observe electron orbits directly , but the mental image helps explain some of the observations we can make , such as the emission of light from hot gases ( atomic spectra ) .
However , other observations show that the picture in the Bohr model is not really what atoms look like .
The model is “ wrong , ” but is still useful for some purposes .
Physicists use models for a variety of purposes .
For example , models can help physicists analyze a scenario and perform a calculation or models can be used to represent a situation in the form of a computer simulation .
Ultimately , however , the results of these calculations and simulations need to be double-checked by other means—namely , observation and experimentation .
The word theory means something different to scientists than what is often meant when the word is used in everyday conversation .
To a scientist , a theory is a testable explanation for patterns in nature supported by scientific evidence and verified multiple times by various groups of researchers .
Some theories include models to help visualize phenomena whereas others do not .
Newton ’ s theory of gravity , for example , does not require a model or mental image , because we can observe the objects directly with our own senses .
The kinetic theory of gases , on the other hand , is a model in which a gas is viewed as being composed of atoms and molecules .
Atoms and molecules are too small to be observed directly with our senses—thus , we picture them mentally to understand what the instruments tell us about the behavior of gases .
Although models are meant only to describe certain aspects of a physical system accurately , a theory should describe all aspects of any system that falls within its domain of applicability .
In particular , any experimentally testable implication of a theory should be verified .
If an experiment ever shows an implication of a theory to be false , then the theory is either thrown out or modified suitably ( for example , by limiting its domain of applicability ) .
A law uses concise language to describe a generalized pattern in nature supported by scientific evidence and repeated experiments .
Often , a law can be expressed in the form of a single mathematical equation .
Laws and theories are similar in that they are both scientific statements that result from a tested hypothesis and are supported by scientific evidence .
For example , the theory of evolution and the theory of relativity can not be expressed concisely enough to be considered laws .
The biggest difference between a law and a theory is that a theory is much more complex and dynamic .
A law describes a single action whereas a theory explains an entire group of related phenomena .
Less broadly applicable statements are usually called principles ( such as Pascal ’ s principle , which is applicable only in fluids ) , but the distinction between laws and principles often is not made carefully .
The models , theories , and laws we devise sometimes imply the existence of objects or phenomena that are as yet unobserved .
These predictions are remarkable triumphs and tributes to the power of science .
It is the underlying order in the universe that enables scientists to make such spectacular predictions .
However , if experimentation does not verify our predictions , then the theory or law is wrong , no matter how elegant or convenient it is .
Laws can never be known with absolute certainty because it is impossible to perform every imaginable experiment to confirm a law for every possible scenario .
Physicists operate under the assumption that all scientific laws and theories are valid until a counterexample is observed .
If a good-quality , verifiable experiment contradicts a well-established law or theory , then the law or theory must be modified or overthrown completely .
The study of science in general , and physics in particular , is an adventure much like the exploration of an uncharted ocean .
Discoveries are made ; models , theories , and laws are formulated ; and the beauty of the physical universe is made more sublime for the insights gained .
As we saw previously , the range of objects and phenomena studied in physics is immense .
Giving numerical values for physical quantities and equations for physical principles allows us to understand nature much more deeply than qualitative descriptions alone .
To comprehend these vast ranges , we must also have accepted units in which to express them .
We shall find that even in the potentially mundane discussion of meters , kilograms , and seconds , a profound simplicity of nature appears : all physical quantities can be expressed as combinations of only seven base physical quantities .
We define a physical quantity either by specifying how it is measured or by stating how it is calculated from other measurements .
For example , we might define distance and time by specifying methods for measuring them , such as using a meter stick and a stopwatch .
Then , we could define average speed by stating that it is calculated as the total distance traveled divided by time of travel .
Measurements of physical quantities are expressed in terms of units , which are standardized values .
For example , the length of a race , which is a physical quantity , can be expressed in units of meters ( for sprinters ) or kilometers ( for distance runners ) .
Without standardized units , it would be extremely difficult for scientists to express and compare measured values in a meaningful way .
Two major systems of units are used in the world : SI units ( for the French Système International d ’ Unités ) , also known as the metric system , and English units ( also known as the customary or imperial system ) .
English units were historically used in nations once ruled by the British Empire and are still widely used in the United States .
English units may also be referred to as the foot–pound–second ( fps ) system , as opposed to the centimeter–gram–second ( cgs ) system .
You may also encounter the term SAE units , named after the Society of Automotive Engineers .
Products such as fasteners and automotive tools ( for example , wrenches ) that are measured in inches rather than metric units are referred to as SAE fasteners or SAE wrenches .
Virtually every other country in the world ( except the United States ) now uses SI units as the standard .
The metric system is also the standard system agreed on by scientists and mathematicians .
In any system of units , the units for some physical quantities must be defined through a measurement process .
These are called the base quantities for that system and their units are the system ’ s base units .
All other physical quantities can then be expressed as algebraic combinations of the base quantities .
Each of these physical quantities is then known as a derived quantity and each unit is called a derived unit .
The choice of base quantities is somewhat arbitrary , as long as they are independent of each other and all other quantities can be derived from them .
Typically , the goal is to choose physical quantities that can be measured accurately to a high precision as the base quantities .
The reason for this is simple .
Since the derived units can be expressed as algebraic combinations of the base units , they can only be as accurate and precise as the base units from which they are derived .
Based on such considerations , the International Standards Organization recommends using seven base quantities , which form the International System of Quantities ( ISQ ) .
These are the base quantities used to define the SI base units .
lists these seven ISQ base quantities and the corresponding SI base units .
You are probably already familiar with some derived quantities that can be formed from the base quantities in .
For example , the geometric concept of area is always calculated as the product of two lengths .
Volume mass density ( or just density ) is mass per volume , which is expressed in terms of SI base units such as kilograms per cubic meter ( kg/m ) .
Angles can also be thought of as derived quantities because they can be defined as the ratio of the arc length subtended by two radii of a circle to the radius of the circle .
This is how the radian is defined .
Depending on your background and interests , you may be able to come up with other derived quantities , such as the mass flow rate ( kg/s ) or volume flow rate ( m /s ) of a fluid , electric charge mass flux density and so on .
We will see many more examples throughout this text .
For now , the point is that every physical quantity can be derived from the seven base quantities in , and the units of every physical quantity can be derived from the seven SI base units .
For the most part , we use SI units in this text .
Whenever non-SI units are discussed , they are tied to SI units through conversions .
For example , 1 L is Check out a comprehensive source of information on at the National Institute of Standards and Technology ( NIST ) Reference on Constants , Units , and Uncertainty .
The initial chapters in this textbook are concerned with mechanics , fluids , and waves .
In these subjects all pertinent physical quantities can be expressed in terms of the base units of length , mass , and time .
Therefore , we now turn to a discussion of these three base units , leaving discussion of the others until they are needed later .
The SI unit for time , the second ( abbreviated s ) , has a long history .
For many years it was defined as 1/86,400 of a mean solar day .
More recently , a new standard was adopted to gain greater accuracy and to define the second in terms of a nonvarying or constant physical phenomenon ( because the solar day is getting longer as a result of the very gradual slowing of Earth ’ s rotation ) .
Cesium atoms can be made to vibrate in a very steady way , and these vibrations can be readily observed and counted .
In 1967 , the second was redefined as the time required for 9,192,631,770 of these vibrations to occur .
Note that this may seem like more precision than you would ever need , but it isn ’ t—GPSs rely on the precision of atomic clocks to be able to give you turn-by-turn directions on the surface of Earth , far from the satellites broadcasting their location .
The SI unit for length is the meter ( abbreviated m ) ; its definition has also changed over time to become more precise .
The meter was first defined in 1791 as 1/10,000,000 of the distance from the equator to the North Pole .
This measurement was improved in 1889 by redefining the meter to be the distance between two engraved lines on a platinum–iridium bar now kept near Paris .
By 1960 , it had become possible to define the meter even more accurately in terms of the wavelength of light , so it was again redefined as 1,650,763.73 wavelengths of orange light emitted by krypton atoms .
In 1983 , the meter was given its current definition ( in part for greater accuracy ) as the distance light travels in a vacuum in 1/299,792,458 of a second .
This change came after knowing the speed of light to be exactly 299,792,458 m/s .
The length of the meter will change if the speed of light is someday measured with greater accuracy .
The SI unit for mass is the kilogram ( abbreviated kg ) ; it is defined to be the mass of a platinum–iridium cylinder kept with the old meter standard at the International Bureau of Weights and Measures near Paris .
Exact replicas of the standard kilogram are also kept at the U.S. National Institute of Standards and Technology ( NIST ) , located in Gaithersburg , Maryland , outside of Washington , DC , and at other locations around the world .
Scientists at NIST are currently investigating two complementary methods of redefining the kilogram ( see ) .
The determination of all other masses can be traced ultimately to a comparison with the standard mass .
There is currently an effort to redefine the SI unit of mass in terms of more fundamental processes by 2018 .
You can explore the history of mass standards and the contenders in the quest to devise a new one at the the Physical Measurement Laboratory .
of SI units are part of the metric system , which is convenient for scientific and engineering calculations because the units are categorized by factors of 10. lists the metric prefixes and symbols used to denote various factors of 10 in SI units .
For example , a centimeter is one-hundredth of a meter ( in symbols , 1 cm = 10 m ) and a kilometer is a thousand meters ( 1 km = 10 m ) .
Similarly , a megagram is a million grams ( 1 Mg = 10 g ) , a nanosecond is a billionth of a second ( 1 ns = 10 s ) , and a terameter is a trillion meters ( 1 Tm = 10 m ) .
As we have seen , the base SI unit of mass is the kilogram ( kg ) , but metric prefixes need to be applied to the gram ( g ) , because we are not allowed to “ double-up ” prefixes .
As we see in the next section , metric systems have the advantage that conversions of units involve only powers of 10 .
There are 100 cm in 1 m , 1000 m in 1 km , and so on .
In nonmetric systems , such as the English system of units , the relationships are not as simple—there are 12 in .
in 1 ft , 5280 ft in 1 mi , and so on .
Another advantage of metric systems is that the same unit can be used over extremely large ranges of values simply by scaling it with an appropriate metric prefix .
The prefix is chosen by the order of magnitude of physical quantities commonly found in the task at hand .
For example , distances in meters are suitable in construction , whereas distances in kilometers are appropriate for air travel , and nanometers are convenient in optical design .
With the metric system there is no need to invent new units for particular applications .
Instead , we rescale the units with which we are already familiar .
Restate the mass using a metric prefix such that the resulting numerical value is bigger than one but less than 1000 .
Since we are not allowed to “ double-up ” prefixes , we first need to restate the mass in grams by replacing the prefix symbol k with a factor of 10 ( see ) .
Then , we should see which two prefixes in are closest to the resulting power of 10 when the number is written in scientific notation .
We use whichever of these two prefixes gives us a number between one and 1000 .
Replacing the k in kilogram with a factor of 10 , we find that From , we see that 10 is between “ peta- ” ( 10 ) and “ exa- ” ( 10 ) .
It is easy to make silly arithmetic errors when switching from one prefix to another , so it is always a good idea to check that our final answer matches the number we started with .
An easy way to do this is to put both numbers in scientific notation and count powers of 10 , including the ones hidden in prefixes .
If we did not make a mistake , the powers of 10 should match up .
In this problem , we started with so we have 13 + 3 = 16 powers of 10 .
Our final answer in scientific notation is Pg , so we have 1 + 15 = 16 powers of 10 .
So , everything checks out .
If this mass arose from a calculation , we would also want to check to determine whether a mass this large makes any sense in the context of the problem .
For this , might be helpful .
Check Your Understanding Restate using a metric prefix such that the resulting number is bigger than one but less than 1000 .
It is often necessary to convert from one unit to another .
For example , if you are reading a European cookbook , some quantities may be expressed in units of liters and you need to convert them to cups .
Or perhaps you are reading walking directions from one location to another and you are interested in how many miles you will be walking .
In this case , you may need to convert units of feet or meters to miles .
Let ’ s consider a simple example of how to convert units .
Suppose we want to convert 80 m to kilometers .
The first thing to do is to list the units you have and the units to which you want to convert .
In this case , we have units in meters and we want to convert to kilometers .
Next , we need to determine a conversion factor relating meters to kilometers .
A conversion factor is a ratio that expresses how many of one unit are equal to another unit .
For example , there are 12 in .
in 1 ft , 1609 m in 1 mi , 100 cm in 1 m , 60 s in 1 min , and so on .
Refer to for a more complete list of conversion factors .
In this case , we know that there are 1000 m in 1 km .
Now we can set up our unit conversion .
We write the units we have and then multiply them by the conversion factor so the units cancel out , as shown : Note that the unwanted meter unit cancels , leaving only the desired kilometer unit .
You can use this method to convert between any type of unit .
The distance from the university to home is 10 mi and it usually takes 20 min to drive this distance .
Calculate the average speed in meters per second ( m/s ) .
( Note : Average speed is distance traveled divided by time of travel . )
First we calculate the average speed using the given units , then we can get the average speed into the desired units by picking the correct conversion factors and multiplying by them .
The correct conversion factors are those that cancel the unwanted units and leave the desired units in their place .
In this case , we want to convert miles to meters , so we need to know the fact that there are 1609 m in 1 mi .
We also want to convert minutes to seconds , so we use the conversion of 60 s in 1 min .
Calculate average speed .
Average speed is distance traveled divided by time of travel .
( Take this definition as a given for now .
Average speed and other motion concepts are covered in later chapters . )
If the unit conversion factor was written upside down , the units do not cancel correctly in the equation .
We see the “ miles ” in the numerator in 0.50 mi/min cancels the “ mile ” in the denominator in the first conversion factor .
Also , the “ min ” in the denominator in 0.50 mi/min cancels the “ min ” in the numerator in the second conversion factor .
Check that the units of the final answer are the desired units .
Check Your Understanding Light travels about 9 Pm in a year .
Given that a year is about what is the speed of light in meters per second ?
The density of iron is under standard conditions .
Convert this to kg/m .
We need to convert grams to kilograms and cubic centimeters to cubic meters .
The conversion factors we need are and However , we are dealing with cubic centimeters so we have to use the second conversion factor three times ( that is , we need to cube it ) .
The idea is still to multiply by the conversion factors in such a way that they cancel the units we want to get rid of and introduce the units we want to keep .
Remember , it ’ s always important to check the answer .
Be sure to cancel the units in the unit conversion correctly .
We see that the gram ( “ g ” ) in the numerator in 7.86 g/cm cancels the “ g ” in the denominator in the first conversion factor .
Also , the three factors of “ cm ” in the denominator in 7.86 g/cm cancel with the three factors of “ cm ” in the numerator that we get by cubing the second conversion factor .
Check that the units of the final answer are the desired units .
The problem asked for us to convert to kilograms per cubic meter .
After the cancellations just described , we see the only units we have left are “ kg ” in the numerator and three factors of “ m ” in the denominator ( that is , one factor of “ m ” cubed , or “ m ” ) .
Therefore , the units on the final answer are correct .
Check Your Understanding We know from that the diameter of Earth is on the order of 10 m , so the order of magnitude of its surface area is 10 m .
What is that in square kilometers ( that is , km ) ?
( Try doing this both by converting 10 m to km and then squaring it and then by converting 10 m directly to square kilometers .
You should get the same answer both ways . )
Unit conversions may not seem very interesting , but not doing them can be costly .
One famous example of this situation was seen with the Mars Climate Orbiter .
This probe was launched by NASA on December 11 , 1998 .
On September 23 , 1999 , while attempting to guide the probe into its planned orbit around Mars , NASA lost contact with it .
Subsequent investigations showed a piece of software called SM_FORCES ( or “ small forces ” ) was recording thruster performance data in the English units of pound-seconds ( lb-s ) .
However , other pieces of software that used these values for course corrections expected them to be recorded in the SI units of newton-seconds ( N-s ) , as dictated in the software interface protocols .
This error caused the probe to follow a very different trajectory from what NASA thought it was following , which most likely caused the probe either to burn up in the Martian atmosphere or to shoot out into space .
This failure to pay attention to unit conversions cost hundreds of millions of dollars , not to mention all the time invested by the scientists and engineers who worked on the project .
Check Your Understanding Given that 1 lb ( pound ) is 4.45 N , were the numbers being output by SM_FORCES too big or too small ?
The dimension of any physical quantity expresses its dependence on the base quantities as a product of symbols ( or powers of symbols ) representing the base quantities .
lists the base quantities and the symbols used for their dimension .
For example , a measurement of length is said to have dimension L or L , a measurement of mass has dimension M or M , and a measurement of time has dimension T or T .
Like units , dimensions obey the rules of algebra .
Thus , area is the product of two lengths and so has dimension L , or length squared .
Similarly , volume is the product of three lengths and has dimension L , or length cubed .
Speed has dimension length over time , L/T or LT .
Volumetric mass density has dimension M/L or ML , or mass over length cubed .
In general , the dimension of any physical quantity can be written as for some powers and g .
Physicists often call dimensionless quantities pure numbers .
Physicists often use square brackets around the symbol for a physical quantity to represent the dimensions of that quantity .
In particular , the expressions on each side of the equality in an equation must have the same dimensions .
The arguments of any of the standard mathematical functions such as trigonometric functions ( such as sine and cosine ) , logarithms , or exponential functions that appear in the equation must be dimensionless .
These functions require pure numbers as inputs and give pure numbers as outputs .
If either of these rules is violated , an equation is not dimensionally consistent and can not possibly be a correct statement of physical law .
This simple fact can be used to check for typos or algebra mistakes , to help remember the various laws of physics , and even to suggest the form that new laws of physics might take .
This last use of dimensions is beyond the scope of this text , but is something you will undoubtedly learn later in your academic career .
Suppose we need the formula for the area of a circle for some computation .
Like many people who learned geometry too long ago to recall with any certainty , two expressions may pop into our mind when we think of circles : and One expression is the circumference of a circle of radius r and the other is its area .
But which is which ?
One natural strategy is to look it up , but this could take time to find information from a reputable source .
Besides , even if we think the source is reputable , we shouldn ’ t trust everything we read .
It is nice to have a way to doublecheck just by thinking about it .
Also , we might be in a situation in which we can not look things up ( such as during a test ) .
Thus , the strategy is to find the dimensions of both expressions by making use of the fact that dimensions follow the rules of algebra .
If either expression does not have the same dimensions as area , then it can not possibly be the correct equation for the area of a circle .
We know the dimension of area is L .
Now , the dimension of the expression is since the constant is a pure number and the radius is a length .
Therefore , has the dimension of area .
Similarly , the dimension of the expression is since the constants and are both dimensionless and the radius is a length .
We see that has the dimension of length , which means it can not possibly be an area .
We rule out because it is not dimensionally consistent with being an area .
We see that is dimensionally consistent with being an area , so if we have to choose between these two expressions , is the one to choose .
This may seem like kind of a silly example , but the ideas are very general .
As long as we know the dimensions of the individual physical quantities that appear in an equation , we can check to see whether the equation is dimensionally consistent .
On the other hand , knowing that true equations are dimensionally consistent , we can match expressions from our imperfect memories to the quantities for which they might be expressions .
Check Your Understanding Suppose we want the formula for the volume of a sphere .
The two expressions commonly mentioned in elementary discussions of spheres are and One is the volume of a sphere of radius r and the other is its surface area .
Which one is the volume ?
( a ) is dimensionally consistent : the following equations There are no trigonometric , logarithmic , or exponential functions to worry about in this equation , so we need only look at the dimensions of each term appearing in the equation .
There are three terms , one in the left expression and two in the expression on the right , so we look at each in turn : All three terms have the same dimension , so this equation is dimensionally consistent .
The technical term for an equation like this is nonsense .
This equation has a trigonometric function in it , so first we should check that the argument of the sine function is dimensionless : The argument is dimensionless .
So far , so good .
Now we need to check the dimensions of each of the two terms ( that is , the left expression and the right expression ) in the equation : The two terms have different dimensions—meaning , the equation is not dimensionally consistent .
This equation is another example of “ nonsense. ” If we are trusting people , these types of dimensional checks might seem unnecessary .
But , rest assured , any textbook on a quantitative subject such as physics ( including this one ) almost certainly contains some equations with typos .
Checking equations routinely by dimensional analysis save us the embarrassment of using an incorrect equation .
Also , checking the dimensions of an equation we obtain through algebraic manipulation is a great way to make sure we did not make a mistake ( or to spot a mistake , if we made one ) .
Check Your Understanding Is the equation v = at dimensionally consistent ?
One further point that needs to be mentioned is the effect of the operations of calculus on dimensions .
We have seen that dimensions obey the rules of algebra , just like units , but what happens when we take the derivative of one physical quantity with respect to another or integrate a physical quantity over another ?
On many occasions , physicists , other scientists , and engineers need to make estimates for a particular quantity .
Other terms sometimes used are guesstimates , order-of-magnitude approximations , back-of-the-envelope calculations , or Fermi calculations .
( The physicist Enrico Fermi mentioned earlier was famous for his ability to estimate various kinds of data with surprising precision . )
Will that piece of equipment fit in the back of the car or do we need to rent a truck ?
How long will this download take ?
About how large a current will there be in this circuit when it is turned on ?
How many houses could a proposed power plant actually power if it is built ?
Note that estimating does not mean guessing a number or a formula at random .
Rather , estimation means using prior experience and sound physical reasoning to arrive at a rough idea of a quantity ’ s value .
Because the process of determining a reliable approximation usually involves the identification of correct physical principles and a good guess about the relevant variables , estimating is very useful in developing physical intuition .
Estimates also allow us perform “ sanity checks ” on calculations or policy proposals by helping us rule out certain scenarios or unrealistic numbers .
They allow us to challenge others ( as well as ourselves ) in our efforts to learn truths about the world .
Many estimates are based on formulas in which the input quantities are known only to a limited precision .
As you develop physics problem-solving skills ( which are applicable to a wide variety of fields ) , you also will develop skills at estimating .
You develop these skills by thinking more quantitatively and by being willing to take risks .
As with any skill , experience helps .
Familiarity with dimensions ( see ) and units ( see and ) , and the scales of base quantities ( see ) also helps .
To make some progress in estimating , you need to have some definite ideas about how variables may be related .
The following strategies may help you in practicing the art of estimation : Get big lengths from smaller lengths .
When estimating lengths , remember that anything can be a ruler .
Thus , imagine breaking a big thing into smaller things , estimate the length of one of the smaller things , and multiply to get the length of the big thing .
For example , to estimate the height of a building , first count how many floors it has .
Then , estimate how big a single floor is by imagining how many people would have to stand on each other ’ s shoulders to reach the ceiling .
Last , estimate the height of a person .
The product of these three estimates is your estimate of the height of the building .
It helps to have memorized a few length scales relevant to the sorts of problems you find yourself solving .
For example , knowing some of the length scales in might come in handy .
Sometimes it also helps to do this in reverse—that is , to estimate the length of a small thing , imagine a bunch of them making up a bigger thing .
For example , to estimate the thickness of a sheet of paper , estimate the thickness of a stack of paper and then divide by the number of pages in the stack .
These same strategies of breaking big things into smaller things or aggregating smaller things into a bigger thing can sometimes be used to estimate other physical quantities , such as masses and times .
Get areas and volumes from lengths .
When dealing with an area or a volume of a complex object , introduce a simple model of the object such as a sphere or a box .
Then , estimate the linear dimensions ( such as the radius of the sphere or the length , width , and height of the box ) first , and use your estimates to obtain the volume or area from standard geometric formulas .
If you happen to have an estimate of an object ’ s area or volume , you can also do the reverse ; that is , use standard geometric formulas to get an estimate of its linear dimensions .
Get masses from volumes and densities .
When estimating masses of objects , it can help first to estimate its volume and then to estimate its mass from a rough estimate of its average density ( recall , density has dimension mass over length cubed , so mass is density times volume ) .
For this , it helps to remember that the density of air is around 1 kg/ m , the density of water is 10 kg/m , and the densest everyday solids max out at around 10 kg/m .
Asking yourself whether an object floats or sinks in either air or water gets you a ballpark estimate of its density .
You can also do this the other way around ; if you have an estimate of an object ’ s mass and its density , you can use them to get an estimate of its volume .
If all else fails , bound it .
For physical quantities for which you do not have a lot of intuition , sometimes the best you can do is think something like : Well , it must be bigger than this and smaller than that .
For example , suppose you need to estimate the mass of a moose .
Maybe you have a lot of experience with moose and know their average mass offhand .
If so , great .
But for most people , the best they can do is to think something like : It must be bigger than a person ( of order 10 kg ) and less than a car ( of order 10 kg ) .
If you need a single number for a subsequent calculation , you can take the geometric mean of the upper and lower bound—that is , you multiply them together and then take the square root .
For the moose mass example , this would be The tighter the bounds , the better .
Also , no rules are unbreakable when it comes to estimation .
If you think the value of the quantity is likely to be closer to the upper bound than the lower bound , then you may want to bump up your estimate from the geometric mean by an order or two of magnitude .
One “ sig .
fig. ” is fine .
There is no need to go beyond one significant figure when doing calculations to obtain an estimate .
In most cases , the order of magnitude is good enough .
The goal is just to get in the ballpark figure , so keep the arithmetic as simple as possible .
Ask yourself : Does this make any sense ?
Last , check to see whether your answer is reasonable .
How does it compare with the values of other quantities with the same dimensions that you already know or can look up easily ?
Then , check for arithmetic errors .
Then , rethink the logic you used to arrive at your answer .
If everything checks out , you may have just proved that some slick new idea is actually bogus .
Estimate the total mass of the oceans on Earth .
We know the density of water is about 10 kg/m , so we start with the advice to “ get masses from densities and volumes. ” Thus , we need to estimate the volume of the planet ’ s oceans .
Using the advice to “ get areas and volumes from lengths , ” we can estimate the volume of the oceans as surface area times average depth , or V = AD .
We know the diameter of Earth from and we know that most of Earth ’ s surface is covered in water , so we can estimate the surface area of the oceans as being roughly equal to the surface area of the planet .
By following the advice to “ get areas and volumes from lengths ” again , we can approximate Earth as a sphere and use the formula for the surface area of a sphere of diameter d —that is , to estimate the surface area of the oceans .
Now we just need to estimate the average depth of the oceans .
To verify our answer to the best of our ability , we first need to answer the question : Does this make any sense ?
From , we see the mass of Earth ’ s atmosphere is on the order of 10 kg and the mass of Earth is on the order of 10 kg .
It is reassuring that our estimate of 10 kg for the mass of Earth ’ s oceans falls somewhere between these two .
So , yes , it does seem to make sense .
It just so happens that we did a search on the Web for “ mass of oceans ” and the top search results all said which is the same order of magnitude as our estimate .
Now , rather than having to trust blindly whoever first put that number up on a website ( most of the other sites probably just copied it from them , after all ) , we can have a little more confidence in it .
Check Your Understanding says the mass of the atmosphere is 10 kg .
Assuming the density of the atmosphere is 1 kg/m , estimate the height of Earth ’ s atmosphere .
Do you think your answer is an underestimate or an overestimate ?
How many piano tuners are there in New York City ?
How many leaves are on that tree ?
If you are studying photosynthesis or thinking of writing a smartphone app for piano tuners , then the answers to these questions might be of great interest to you .
Otherwise , you probably couldn ’ t care less what the answers are .
However , these are exactly the sorts of estimation problems that people in various tech industries have been asking potential employees to evaluate their quantitative reasoning skills .
If building physical intuition and evaluating quantitative claims do not seem like sufficient reasons for you to practice estimation problems , how about the fact that being good at them just might land you a high-paying job ?
out For simulation , titled “ Estimation. ” estimating volumes , practice lengths , relative check areas , and this shows two instruments used to measure the mass of an object .
The digital scale has mostly replaced the double-pan balance in physics labs because it gives more accurate and precise measurements .
But what exactly do we mean by accurate and precise ?
Aren ’ t they the same thing ?
In this section we examine in detail the process of making and reporting a measurement .
Science is based on observation and experiment—that is , on measurements .
Accuracy is how close a measurement is to the accepted reference value for that measurement .
For example , let ’ s say we want to measure the length of standard printer paper .
The packaging in which we purchased the paper states that it is 11.0 in .
We then measure the length of the paper three times and obtain the following measurements : 11.1 in. , 11.2 in. , and 10.9 in .
These measurements are quite accurate because they are very close to the reference value of 11.0 in .
In contrast , if we had obtained a measurement of 12 in. , our measurement would not be very accurate .
Notice that the concept of accuracy requires that an accepted reference value be given .
The precision of measurements refers to how close the agreement is between repeated independent measurements ( which are repeated under the same conditions ) .
Consider the example of the paper measurements .
The precision of the measurements refers to the spread of the measured values .
One way to analyze the precision of the measurements is to determine the range , or difference , between the lowest and the highest measured values .
In this case , the lowest value was 10.9 in .
and the highest value was 11.2 in .
Thus , the measured values deviated from each other by , at most , 0.3 in .
These measurements were relatively precise because they did not vary too much in value .
However , if the measured values had been 10.9 in. , 11.1 in. , and 11.9 in. , then the measurements would not be very precise because there would be significant variation from one measurement to another .
Notice that the concept of precision depends only on the actual measurements acquired and does not depend on an accepted reference value .
The measurements in the paper example are both accurate and precise , but in some cases , measurements are accurate but not precise , or they are precise but not accurate .
Let ’ s consider an example of a GPS attempting to locate the position of a restaurant in a city .
Think of the restaurant location as existing at the center of a bull ’ s-eye target and think of each GPS attempt to locate the restaurant as a black dot .
In ( a ) , we see the GPS measurements are spread out far apart from each other , but they are all relatively close to the actual location of the restaurant at the center of the target .
This indicates a low-precision , high-accuracy measuring system .
However , in ( b ) , the GPS measurements are concentrated quite closely to one another , but they are far away from the target location .
This indicates a high-precision , low-accuracy measuring system .
The precision of a measuring system is related to the uncertainty in the measurements whereas the accuracy is related to the discrepancy from the accepted reference value .
Uncertainty is a quantitative measure of how much your measured values deviate from one another .
There are many different methods of calculating uncertainty , each of which is appropriate to different situations .
Some examples include taking the range ( that is , the biggest less the smallest ) or finding the standard deviation of the measurements .
Discrepancy ( or “ measurement error ” ) is the difference between the measured value and a given standard or expected value .
If the measurements are not very precise , then the uncertainty of the values is high .
If the measurements are not very accurate , then the discrepancy of the values is high .
Recall our example of measuring paper length ; we obtained measurements of 11.1 in. , 11.2 in. , and 10.9 in. , and the accepted value was 11.0 in .
We might average the three measurements to say our best guess is 11.1 in .
; in this case , our discrepancy is 11.1 – 11.0 = 0.1 in. , which provides a quantitative measure of accuracy .
We might calculate the uncertainty in our best guess by using the range of our measured values : 0.3 in .
Then we would say the length of the paper is 11.1 in .
plus or minus 0.3 in .
The uncertainty in a measurement , A , is often denoted as δA ( read “ delta A ” ) , so the measurement result would be recorded as A ± δA .
Returning to our paper example , the measured length of the paper could be expressed as 11.1 ± 0.3 in .
Since the discrepancy of 0.1 in .
is less than the uncertainty of 0.3 in. , we might say the measured value agrees with the accepted reference value to within experimental uncertainty .
At any rate , the uncertainty in a measurement must be calculated to quantify its precision .
If a reference value is known , it makes sense to calculate the discrepancy as well to quantify its accuracy .
Another method of expressing uncertainty is as a percent of the measured value .
If a measurement A is expressed with uncertainty δA , the percent uncertainty is defined as A grocery store sells 5-lb bags of apples .
Let ’ s say we purchase four bags during the course of a month and weigh the bags each time .
We obtain the following measurements : Week 1 weight : 4.8 lb Week 2 weight : 5.3 lb Week 3 weight : 4.9 lb Week 4 weight : 5.4 lb We then determine the average weight of the 5-lb bag of apples is 5.1 ± 0.2 lb .
What is the percent uncertainty of the bag ’ s weight ?
First , observe that the average value of the bag ’ s weight , A , is 5.1 lb .
The uncertainty in this value , We can use the following equation to determine the percent uncertainty of the weight : is 0.2 lb .
Substitute the values into the equation : We can conclude the average weight of a bag of apples from this store is 5.1 lb ± 4 % .
Notice the percent uncertainty is dimensionless because the units of weight in lb canceled those in A = 5.1 lb when we took the ratio .
Check Your Understanding A high school track coach has just purchased a new stopwatch .
Why or why not ?
Uncertainty exists in anything calculated from measured quantities .
For example , the area of a floor calculated from measurements of its length and width has an uncertainty because the length and width have uncertainties .
How big is the uncertainty in something you calculate by multiplication or division ?
If the measurements going into the calculation have small uncertainties ( a few percent or less ) , then the method of adding percents can be used for multiplication or division .
This method states the percent uncertainty in a quantity calculated by multiplication or division is the sum of the percent uncertainties in the items used to make the calculation .
For example , if a floor has a length of 4.00 m and a width of 3.00 m , with uncertainties of 2 % and 1 % , respectively , then the area of the floor is 12.0 m and has an uncertainty of 3 % .
( Expressed as an area , this is 0.36 m [ ] , which we round to 0.4 m since the area of the floor is given to a tenth of a square meter . )
An important factor in the precision of measurements involves the precision of the measuring tool .
In general , a precise measuring tool is one that can measure values in very small increments .
For example , a standard ruler can measure length to the nearest millimeter whereas a caliper can measure length to the nearest 0.01 mm .
The caliper is a more precise measuring tool because it can measure extremely small differences in length .
The more precise the measuring tool , the more precise the measurements .
When we express measured values , we can only list as many digits as we measured initially with our measuring tool .
For example , if we use a standard ruler to measure the length of a stick , we may measure it to be 36.7 cm .
We can ’ t express this value as 36.71 cm because our measuring tool is not precise enough to measure a hundredth of a centimeter .
It should be noted that the last digit in a measured value has been estimated in some way by the person performing the measurement .
For example , the person measuring the length of a stick with a ruler notices the stick length seems to be somewhere in between 36.6 cm and 36.7 cm , and he or she must estimate the value of the last digit .
Using the method of significant figures , the rule is that the last digit written down in a measurement is the first digit with some uncertainty .
To determine the number of significant digits in a value , start with the first measured value at the left and count the number of digits through the last digit written on the right .
For example , the measured value 36.7 cm has three digits , or three significant figures .
Significant figures indicate the precision of the measuring tool used to measure a value .
Special consideration is given to zeros when counting significant figures .
The zeros in 0.053 are not significant because they are placeholders that locate the decimal point .
There are two significant figures in 0.053 .
The zeros in 10.053 are not placeholders ; they are significant .
This number has five significant figures .
The zeros in 1300 may or may not be significant , depending on the style of writing numbers .
They could mean the number is known to the last digit or they could be placeholders .
So 1300 could have two , three , or four significant figures .
To avoid this ambiguity , we should write 1300 in scientific notation as or depending on whether it has two , three , or four significant figures .
Zeros are significant except when they serve only as placeholders .
When combining measurements with different degrees of precision , the number of significant digits in the final answer can be no greater than the number of significant digits in the least-precise measured value .
There are two different rules , one for multiplication and division and the other for addition and subtraction .
For multiplication and division , the result should have the same number of significant figures as the quantity with the least number of significant figures entering into the calculation .
For example , the area of a circle can be calculated from its radius using A = πr .
For addition and subtraction , the answer can contain no more decimal places than the least-precise measurement .
Suppose we buy 7.56 kg of potatoes in a grocery store as measured with a scale with precision 0.01 kg , then we drop off 6.052 kg of potatoes at your laboratory as measured by a scale with precision 0.001 kg .
Then , we go home and add 13.7 kg of potatoes as measured by a bathroom scale with precision 0.1 kg .
How many kilograms of potatoes do we now have and how many significant figures are appropriate in the answer ?
The mass is found by simple addition and subtraction : Next , we identify the least-precise measurement : 13.7 kg .
This measurement is expressed to the 0.1 decimal place , so our final answer must also be expressed to the 0.1 decimal place .
Thus , the answer is rounded to the tenths place , giving us 15.2 kg .
In this text , most numbers are assumed to have three significant figures .
Furthermore , consistent numbers of significant figures are used in all worked examples .
An answer given to three digits is based on input good to at least three digits , for example .
If the input has fewer significant figures , the answer will also have fewer significant figures .
Care is also taken that the number of significant figures is reasonable for the situation posed .
In some topics , particularly in optics , more accurate numbers are needed and we use more than three significant figures .
Finally , if a number is exact , such as the two in the formula for the circumference of a circle , C = 2π r , it does not affect the number of significant figures in a calculation .
Likewise , conversion factors such as 100 cm/1 m are considered exact and do not affect the number of significant figures in a calculation .
Problem-solving skills are clearly essential to success in a quantitative course in physics .
More important , the ability to apply broad physical principles—usually represented by equations—to specific situations is a very powerful form of knowledge .
It is much more powerful than memorizing a list of facts .
Analytical skills and problem-solving abilities can be applied to new situations whereas a list of facts can not be made long enough to contain every possible circumstance .
Such analytical skills are useful both for solving problems in this text and for applying physics in everyday life .
As you are probably well aware , a certain amount of creativity and insight is required to solve problems .
No rigid procedure works every time .
Creativity and insight grow with experience .
With practice , the basics of problem solving become almost automatic .
One way to get practice is to work out the text ’ s examples for yourself as you read .
Another is to work as many end-of-section problems as possible , starting with the easiest to build confidence and then progressing to the more difficult .
After you become involved in physics , you will see it all around you , and you can begin to apply it to situations you encounter outside the classroom , just as is done in many of the applications in this text .
Although there is no simple step-by-step method that works for every problem , the following three-stage process facilitates problem solving and makes it more meaningful .
The three stages are strategy , solution , and significance .
This process is used in examples throughout the book .
Here , we look at each stage of the process in turn .
Strategy is the beginning stage of solving a problem .
The idea is to figure out exactly what the problem is and then develop a strategy for solving it .
Some general advice for this stage is as follows : Examine the situation to determine which physical principles are involved .
It often helps to draw a simple sketch at the outset .
You often need to decide which direction is positive and note that on your sketch .
When you have identified the physical principles , it is much easier to find and apply the equations representing those principles .
Although finding the correct equation is essential , keep in mind that equations represent physical principles , laws of nature , and relationships among physical quantities .
Without a conceptual understanding of a problem , a numerical solution is meaningless .
Make a list of what is given or can be inferred from the problem as stated ( identify the “ knowns ” ) .
Many problems are stated very succinctly and require some inspection to determine what is known .
Drawing a sketch can be very useful at this point as well .
Formally identifying the knowns is of particular importance in applying physics to realworld situations .
For example , the word stopped means the velocity is zero at that instant .
Also , we can often take initial time and position as zero by the appropriate choice of coordinate system .
Identify exactly what needs to be determined in the problem ( identify the unknowns ) .
In complex problems , especially , it is not always obvious what needs to be found or in what sequence .
Making a list can help identify the unknowns .
Determine which physical principles can help you solve the problem .
Since physical principles tend to be expressed in the form of mathematical equations , a list of knowns and unknowns can help here .
It is easiest if you can find equations that contain only one unknown—that is , all the other variables are known—so you can solve for the unknown easily .
If the equation contains more than one unknown , then additional equations are needed to solve the problem .
In some problems , several unknowns must be determined to get at the one needed most .
In such problems it is especially important to keep physical principles in mind to avoid going astray in a sea of equations .
You may have to use two ( or more ) different equations to get the final answer .
The solution stage is when you do the math .
Substitute the knowns ( along with their units ) into the appropriate equation and obtain numerical solutions complete with units .
That is , do the algebra , calculus , geometry , or arithmetic necessary to find the unknown from the knowns , being sure to carry the units through the calculations .
This step is clearly important because it produces the numerical answer , along with its units .
Notice , however , that this stage is only one-third of the overall problem-solving process .
After having done the math in the solution stage of problem solving , it is tempting to think you are done .
But , always remember that physics is not math .
Rather , in doing physics , we use mathematics as a tool to help us understand nature .
So , after you obtain a numerical answer , you should always assess its significance : Check your units .
If the units of the answer are incorrect , then an error has been made and you should go back over your previous steps to find it .
One way to find the mistake is to check all the equations you derived for dimensional consistency .
However , be warned that correct units do not guarantee the numerical part of the answer is also correct .
Check the answer to see whether it is reasonable .
Does it make sense ?
This step is extremely important : –the goal of physics is to describe nature accurately .
To determine whether the answer is reasonable , check both its magnitude and its sign , in addition to its units .
The magnitude should be consistent with a rough estimate of what it should be .
It should also compare reasonably with magnitudes of other quantities of the same type .
The sign usually tells you about direction and should be consistent with your prior expectations .
Your judgment will improve as you solve more physics problems , and it will become possible for you to make finer judgments regarding whether nature is described adequately by the answer to a problem .
This step brings the problem back to its conceptual meaning .
If you can judge whether the answer is reasonable , you have a deeper understanding of physics than just being able to solve a problem mechanically .
Check to see whether the answer tells you something interesting .
What does it mean ?
This is the flip side of the question : Does it make sense ?
Ultimately , physics is about understanding nature , and we solve physics problems to learn a little something about how nature operates .
Therefore , assuming the answer does make sense , you should always take a moment to see if it tells you something about the world that you find interesting .
Even if the answer to this particular problem is not very interesting to you , what about the method you used to solve it ?
Could the method be adapted to answer a question that you do find interesting ?
In many ways , it is in answering questions such as these that science progresses .
Vectors are essential to physics and engineering .
Many fundamental physical quantities are vectors , including displacement , velocity , force , and electric and magnetic vector fields .
Scalar products of vectors define other fundamental scalar physical quantities , such as energy .
Vector products of vectors define still other fundamental vector physical quantities , such as torque and angular momentum .
In other words , vectors are a component part of physics in much the same way as sentences are a component part of literature .
In introductory physics , vectors are Euclidean quantities that have geometric representations as arrows in one dimension ( in a line ) , in two dimensions ( in a plane ) , or in three dimensions ( in space ) .
They can be added , subtracted , or multiplied .
In this chapter , we explore elements of vector algebra for applications in mechanics and in electricity and magnetism .
Vector operations also have numerous generalizations in other branches of physics .
Many familiar physical quantities can be specified completely by giving a single number and the appropriate unit .
Scalar is a synonym of “ number. ” Time , mass , distance , length , volume , temperature , and energy are examples of scalar quantities .
Scalar quantities that have the same physical units can be added or subtracted according to the usual rules of algebra for numbers .
For example , a class ending 10 min earlier than 50 min lasts .
Similarly , a 60-cal serving of corn followed by a 200-cal serving of donuts gives of energy .
When we multiply a scalar quantity by a number , we obtain the same scalar quantity but with a larger ( or smaller ) value .
For example , if yesterday ’ s breakfast had 200 cal of energy and today ’ s breakfast has four times as much energy as it had yesterday , then today ’ s breakfast has of energy .
Two scalar quantities can also be multiplied or divided by each other to form a derived scalar quantity .
For example , if a train covers a distance of 100 km in 1.0 h , its speed is 100.0 km/1.0 h = 27.8 m/s , where the speed is a derived scalar quantity obtained by dividing distance by time .
Many physical quantities , however , can not be described completely by just a single number of physical units .
Physical quantities specified completely by giving a number of units ( magnitude ) and a direction are called vector quantities .
Examples of vector quantities include displacement , velocity , position , force , and torque .
In the language of mathematics , physical vector quantities are represented by mathematical objects called vectors .
We can add or subtract two vectors , and we can multiply a vector by a scalar or by another vector , but we can not divide by a vector .
The operation of division by a vector is not defined .
Let ’ s examine vector algebra using a graphical method to be aware of basic terms and to develop a qualitative understanding .
In practice , however , when it comes to solving physics problems , we use analytical methods , which we ’ ll see in the next section .
Analytical methods are more simple computationally and more accurate than graphical methods .
From now on , to distinguish between a vector and a scalar quantity , we adopt the common convention that a letter in bold type with an arrow above it denotes a vector , and a letter without an arrow denotes a scalar .
For example , a distance of 2.0 km , which is a scalar quantity , is denoted by d = 2.0 km , whereas a displacement of 2.0 km in some direction , which is a vector quantity , is denoted by .
Suppose you tell a friend on a camping trip that you have discovered a terrific fishing hole 6 km from your tent .
It is unlikely your friend would be able to find the hole easily unless you also communicate the direction in which it can be found with respect to your campsite .
Displacement is a general term used to describe a change in position , such as during a trip from the tent to the fishing hole .
Displacement is an example of a vector quantity .
If you walk from the tent ( location A ) to the hole ( location B ) , as shown in , the vector , representing your displacement , is drawn as the arrow that originates at point A and ends at point B .
The arrowhead marks the end of the vector .
The direction of the displacement vector is the direction of the arrow .
The length of the arrow represents the magnitude D of vector .
Here , D = 6 km .
Since the magnitude of a vector is its length , which is a positive number , the magnitude is also indicated by placing the absolute value notation around the symbol that denotes the vector ; so , we can write equivalently that .
To solve a vector problem graphically , we need to draw the vector to scale .
For example , if we assume 1 unit of distance ( 1 km ) is represented in the drawing by a line segment of length u = 2 cm , then the total displacement in this example is represented by a vector of length , as shown in .
Notice that here , to avoid confusion , we used to denote the magnitude of the actual displacement and d = 12 cm to denote the length of its representation in the drawing .
is not equal to vector Suppose your friend walks from the campsite at A to the fishing pond at B and then walks back : from the fishing pond at B to the campsite at A .
The magnitude of the displacement vector from A to B is the same as the magnitude of the displacement vector from B to A ( it equals 6 km in both cases ) , so we can write .
However , vector .
In , vector would be represented by a vector with an origin at point B and an end at point A , indicating vector .
We say that vector , where the minus sign indicates the antiparallel direction .
Two vectors that have identical directions are said to be parallel vectors —meaning , they are parallel to each other .
Two points to the southwest , which is exactly opposite to the direction of vector is antiparallel to vector because these two vectors have different directions : parallel vectors and are equal , denoted by , if and only if they have equal magnitudes .
Two vectors with directions perpendicular to each other are said to be orthogonal vectors .
These relations between vectors are illustrated in .
and write Check Your Understanding Two motorboats named Alice and Bob are moving on a lake .
Given the information about their velocity vectors in each of the following situations , indicate whether their velocity vectors are equal or otherwise .
( a ) Alice moves north at 6 knots and Bob moves west at 6 knots .
( b ) Alice moves west at 6 knots and Bob moves west at 3 knots .
( c ) Alice moves northeast at 6 knots and Bob moves south at 3 knots .
( d ) Alice moves northeast at 6 knots and Bob moves southwest at 6 knots .
( e ) Alice moves northeast at 2 knots and Bob moves closer to the shore northeast at 2 knots .
Vectors can be multiplied by scalars , added to other vectors , or subtracted from other vectors .
We can illustrate these vector concepts using an example of the fishing trip seen in .
What is his displacement vector when he reaches point C ?
We know that if he walks all the way to B , his displacement vector relative to A is , which has magnitude and a direction of northeast .
If he walks only a 0.75 fraction of the total distance , maintaining the northeasterly direction , at point C he must be away from the campsite at A .
So , his displacement vector at the rest point C has magnitude and is parallel to the displacement vector .
All of this can be stated succinctly in the form of the following vector equation : In a vector equation , both sides of the equation are vectors .
The previous equation is an example of a vector multiplied by a positive scalar ( number ) .
The result , , of such a multiplication is a new vector with a direction parallel to the direction of the original vector In general , when a vector is multiplied by a positive scalar , the result is a new vector that is parallel to : .
The magnitude of this new vector is obtained by multiplying the magnitude of the original vector , as expressed by the scalar equation : In a scalar equation , both sides of the equation are numbers .
is a scalar equation because the magnitudes of vectors are scalar quantities ( and positive numbers ) .
If the scalar is negative in the vector equation , then the magnitude of the new vector is still given by , but the direction of the new vector is antiparallel to the direction of .
These principles are illustrated in ( a ) by two examples where the length of vector is 1.5 units .
When , the new vector has length ( twice as long as the original vector ) and is parallel to the original vector .
When , the new vector has length ( twice as long as the original vector ) and is antiparallel to the original vector .
when he finds the box at point D ?
So , he turns back and retraces his steps in the direction toward the campsite and finds the box lying on the path at some point D only 1.2 km away from point C ( see ( b ) ) .
What is his displacement vector from point D to the hole ?
We have already established that at rest point C his displacement vector is .
Starting at point C , he walks southwest ( toward the campsite ) , which means his new displacement vector from point C to point D is antiparallel to vectors : vector finds his box ) : .
This means his displacement vector from point D to the fishing hole : is the difference of two Notice that a difference of two vectors is nothing more than a vector sum of two vectors because the second term in is vector .
When we substitute into , we obtain the second displacement vector : ( which is antiparallel to This result means your friend walked from the point where he finds his tackle box to the fishing hole .
When vectors and lie along a line ( that is , in one dimension ) , such as in the camping example , their resultant and their difference both lie along the same direction .
We can illustrate the addition or subtraction of vectors by drawing the corresponding vectors to scale in one dimension , as shown in .
To illustrate the resultant when and are two parallel vectors , we draw them along one line by placing the origin of one vector at the end of the other vector in head-to-tail fashion ( see ( b ) ) .
The magnitude of this resultant is the sum of their magnitudes : R = A + B .
The direction of the resultant is parallel to both vectors .
When vector is antiparallel to vector , we draw them along one line in either head-to-head fashion ( ( c ) ) or tail-totail fashion .
The magnitude of the vector difference , then , is the absolute value of the difference of their magnitudes .
The direction of the difference vector is parallel to the direction of the longer vector .
When adding many vectors in one dimension , it is convenient to use the concept of a unit vector .
A unit vector , which is denoted by a letter symbol with a hat , such as , has a magnitude of one and does not have any physical unit so that .
The only role of a unit vector is to specify direction .
For example , instead of saying vector has a magnitude of 6.0 km and a direction of northeast , we can introduce a unit vector that points to the northeast and say succinctly that .
Then the southwesterly direction is simply given by the unit vector .
In this way , the displacement of 6.0 km in the southwesterly direction is expressed by the vector A long measuring stick rests against a wall in a physics laboratory with its 200-cm end at the floor .
A ladybug lands on the 100-cm mark and crawls randomly along the stick .
It first walks 15 cm toward the floor , then it walks 56 cm toward the wall , then it walks 3 cm toward the floor again .
Then , after a brief stop , it continues for 25 cm toward the floor and then , again , it crawls up 19 cm toward the wall before coming to a complete rest .
Find the vector of its total displacement and its final resting position on the stick .
If we choose the direction along the stick toward the floor as the direction of unit vector , then the direction toward the floor is and the direction toward the wall is .
The ladybug makes a total of five displacements : The total displacement is the resultant of all its displacement vectors .
The resultant of all the displacement vectors is In this calculation , we use the distributive law given by .
The result reads that the total displacement vector points away from the 100-cm mark ( initial landing site ) toward the end of the meter stick that touches the wall .
The end that touches the wall is marked 0 cm , so the final position of the ladybug is at the ( 100 – 32 ) cm = 68-cm mark .
Check Your Understanding A cave diver enters a long underwater tunnel .
When her displacement with respect to the entry point is 20 m , she accidentally drops her camera , but she doesn ’ t notice it missing until she is some 6 m farther into the tunnel .
She swims back 10 m but can not find the camera , so she decides to end the dive .
How far from the entry point is she ?
Taking the positive direction out of the tunnel , what is her displacement vector relative to the entry point ?
When vectors lie in a plane—that is , when they are in two dimensions—they can be multiplied by scalars , added to other vectors , or subtracted from other vectors in accordance with the general laws expressed by , , , and .
However , the addition rule for two vectors in a plane becomes more complicated than the rule for vector addition in one dimension .
We have to use the laws of geometry to construct resultant vectors , followed by trigonometry to find vector magnitudes and directions .
This geometric approach is commonly used in navigation .
In this section , we need to have at hand two rulers , a triangle , a protractor , a pencil , and an eraser for drawing vectors to scale by geometric constructions .
For a geometric construction of the sum of two vectors in a plane , we follow the parallelogram rule .
Suppose two vectors and are at the arbitrary positions shown in .
Translate either one of them in parallel to the beginning of the other vector , so that after the translation , both vectors have their origins at the same point .
Now , at the end of vector we draw a line parallel to vector and at the end of vector we draw a line parallel to vector ( the dashed lines in ) .
In this way , we obtain a parallelogram .
From the origin of the two vectors we draw a diagonal that is the resultant of the two vectors : ( ( a ) ) .
The other diagonal of this parallelogram is the vector difference of the two vectors , as shown in ( b ) .
Notice that the end of the difference vector is placed at the end of vector .
When using a geometric construction to find magnitudes and , we have to use trigonometry laws for triangles , which may lead to complicated algebra .
There are two ways to circumvent this algebraic complexity .
One way is to use the method of components , which we examine in the next section .
The other way is to draw the vectors to scale , as is done in navigation , and read approximate vector lengths and angles ( directions ) from the graphs .
In this section we examine the second approach .
If we need to add three or more vectors , we repeat the parallelogram rule for the pairs of vectors until we find the resultant of all of the resultants .
For three vectors , for example , we first find the resultant of vector 1 and vector 2 , and then we find the resultant of this resultant and vector 3 .
The order in which we select the pairs of vectors does not matter because the operation of vector addition is commutative and associative ( see and ) .
Before we state a general rule that follows from repetitive applications of the parallelogram rule , let ’ s look at the following example .
Suppose you plan a vacation trip in Florida .
Your route may be represented by five displacement vectors , , , and , which are indicated by the red vectors in .
What is your total displacement when you reach Gainesville ?
The total displacement is the vector sum of all five displacement vectors , which may be found by using the parallelogram rule four times .
When we use the parallelogram rule four times , the resultant we obtain is exactly this green vector connecting Tallahassee with Gainesville : .
Drawing the resultant vector of many vectors can be generalized by using the following tail-to-head geometric construction .
Suppose we want to draw the resultant vector of four vectors , , , and ( ( a ) ) .
We select any one of the vectors as the first vector and make a parallel translation of a second vector to a position where the origin ( “ tail ” ) of the second vector coincides with the end ( “ head ” ) of the first vector .
Then , we select a third vector and make a parallel translation of the third vector to a position where the origin of the third vector coincides with the end of the second vector .
We repeat this procedure until all the vectors are in a head-to-tail arrangement like the one shown in .
We draw the resultant vector by connecting the origin ( “ tail ” ) of the first vector with the end ( “ head ” ) of the last vector .
The end of the resultant vector is at the end of the last vector .
Because the addition of vectors is associative and commutative , we obtain the same resultant vector regardless of which vector we choose to be first , second , third , or fourth in this construction .
The three displacement vectors , , and in are specified by their magnitudes A = 10.0 , B = 7.0 , and C = 8.0 , respectively , and by their respective direction angles with the horizontal direction , , and .
The physical units of the magnitudes are centimeters .
Choose a convenient scale and use a ruler and a protractor to find the following vector sums : ( a ) , ( b ) ( c ) .
In geometric construction , to find a vector means to find its magnitude and its direction angle with the horizontal direction .
The strategy is to draw to scale the vectors that appear on the right-hand side of the equation and construct the resultant vector .
Then , use a ruler and a protractor to read the magnitude of the resultant and the direction angle .
For parts ( a ) and ( b ) we use the parallelogram rule .
For ( c ) we use the tail-to-head method .
For parts ( a ) and ( b ) , we attach the origin of vector to the origin of vector , as shown in , and construct a parallelogram .
The shorter diagonal of this parallelogram is the sum .
The longer of the diagonals is the difference .
We use a ruler to measure the lengths of the diagonals , and a protractor to measure the angles with the horizontal .
For the resultant , we obtain R = 5.8 cm and .
For the difference , we obtain D = 16.2 cm and , which are shown in .
For ( c ) , we can start with vector and draw the remaining vectors tail-to-head as shown in .
In vector addition , the order in which we draw the vectors is unimportant , but drawing the vectors to scale is very important .
Next , we draw vector from the origin of the first vector to the end of the last vector and place the arrowhead at the end of .
We use a ruler to measure the length of , and find that its magnitude is S = 36.9 cm .
We use a protractor and find that its direction angle is .
This solution is shown in .
Check Your Understanding Using the three displacement vectors , , and in , choose a convenient scale , and use a ruler and a protractor to find vector given by the vector equation .
Observe the addition of vectors in a plane by visiting this and this .
Vectors are usually described in terms of their components in a coordinate system .
Even in everyday life we naturally invoke the concept of orthogonal projections in a rectangular coordinate system .
For example , if you ask someone for directions to a particular location , you will more likely be told to go 40 km east and 30 km north than 50 km in the direction north of east .
In a rectangular ( Cartesian ) xy -coordinate system in a plane , a point in a plane is described by a pair of coordinates ( x , y ) .
In a similar fashion , a vector in a plane is described by a pair of its vector coordinates .
The x -coordinate of vector is called its x -component and the y -coordinate of vector is called its y -component .
The vector x -component is a vector denoted by .
In the Cartesian system , the x and y vector components of a vector are the orthogonal projections of this vector onto the x and y -axes , respectively .
In this way , following the parallelogram rule for vector addition , each vector on a Cartesian plane can be expressed as the vector sum of its vector components : .
The vector y -component is a vector denoted by As illustrated in , vector is the diagonal of the rectangle where the x -component to the x -axis and the y -component component is the side parallel to the y -axis .
Unit vectors of the axes , and the positive direction on the y -axis and , define two orthogonal directions in the plane .
As shown in and The vectors defined by are the vector components of vector .
The numbers and that define the vector components in are the scalar components of vector .
If you move the pointer to an icon located at point ( 2.0 cm , 4.5 cm ) , what is the displacement vector of the pointer ?
The origin of the xy -coordinate system is the lower left-side corner of the computer monitor .
Therefore , the unit on the y -axis points vertically vector upward .
The origin of the displacement vector is located at point b ( 6.0 , 1.6 ) and the end of the displacement vector is located at point e ( 2.0 , 4.5 ) .
Substitute the coordinates of these points into to find the scalar components and of the displacement vector .
Finally , substitute the coordinates into to write the displacement vector in the vector component form .
We identify , , , and , where the physical unit is 1 cm .
The scalar x and y -components of the displacement vector are The vector component form of the displacement vector is This solution is shown in .
Notice that the physical unit—here , 1 cm—can be placed either with each component immediately before the unit vector or globally for both components , as in .
Often , the latter way is more convenient because it is simpler .
The vector x -component of because the magnitude of the unit vector is .
Notice , too , that the direction of the x -component is , which is antiparallel to the direction of the + x -axis ; hence , the x -component vector points to the left , as shown in .
The scalar x -component of vector is .
the displacement vector has the magnitude Similarly , the vector y -component of the displacement vector has magnitude because the magnitude of the unit vector is .
The direction of the y -component is , which is parallel to the direction of the + y -axis .
Therefore , the y -component vector points up , as seen in .
The scalar y -component of vector is .
The displacement vector is the resultant of its two vector components .
The vector component form of the displacement vector tells us that the mouse pointer has been moved on the monitor 4.0 cm to the left and 2.9 cm upward from its initial position .
Choose the rectangular coordinate system with the origin at the lower left-side corner of the paper and find the displacement vector of the fly .
Illustrate your solution by graphing .
When we know the scalar components and of a vector , we can find its magnitude A and its direction angle .
The direction angle —or direction , for short—is the angle the vector forms with the positive direction on the x -axis .
The angle is measured in the counterclockwise direction from the + x -axis to the vector .
Because the lengths A , , and form a right triangle , they are related by the Pythagorean theorem : This equation works even if the scalar components of a vector are negative .
For vectors in the fourth quadrant , angle is negative , which means that for these vectors , direction angle is measured clockwise from the positive x -axis .
Similarly , for vectors in the second quadrant , angle is negative .
When the vector lies in either the second or third quadrant , where component is negative , the direction angle is .
You move a mouse pointer on the display monitor from its initial position at point ( 6.0 cm , 1.6 cm ) to an icon located at point ( 2.0 cm , 4.5 cm ) .
What are the magnitude and direction of the displacement vector of the pointer ?
In , we found the displacement vector of the mouse pointer ( see ) .
We identify its scalar components and and substitute into and to find the magnitude D and direction , respectively .
The magnitude of vector is The direction angle is Vector lies in the second quadrant , so its direction angle is Check Your Understanding If the displacement vector of a blue fly walking on a sheet of graph paper is , find its magnitude and direction .
In many applications , the magnitudes and directions of vector quantities are known and we need to find the resultant of many vectors .
For example , imagine 400 cars moving on the Golden Gate Bridge in San Francisco in a strong wind .
Each car gives the bridge a different push in various directions and we would like to know how big the resultant push can possibly be .
We have already gained some experience with the geometric construction of vector sums , so we know the task of finding the resultant by drawing the vectors and measuring their lengths and angles may become intractable pretty quickly , leading to huge errors .
Worries like this do not appear when we use analytical methods .
The very first step in an analytical approach is to find vector components when the direction and magnitude of a vector are known .
Let us return to the right triangle in .
The quotient of the adjacent side to the hypotenuse A is the cosine function of direction angle , , and the quotient of the opposite side to the hypotenuse A is the sine function of , .
When magnitude A and direction are known , we can solve these relations for the scalar components : When calculating vector components with , care must be taken with the angle .
The direction angle of a vector is the angle measured counterclockwise from the positive direction on the x -axis to the vector .
The clockwise measurement gives a negative angle .
A rescue party for a missing child follows a search dog named Trooper .
Trooper wanders a lot and makes many trial sniffs along many different paths .
Trooper eventually finds the child and the story has a happy ending , but his displacements on various legs seem to be truly convoluted .
On one of the legs he walks 200.0 m southeast , then he runs north some 300.0 m. On the third leg , he examines the scents carefully for 50.0 m in the direction west of north .
On the fourth leg , Trooper goes directly south for 80.0 m , picks up a fresh scent and turns west of south for 150.0 m. Find the scalar components of Trooper ’ s displacement vectors and his displacement vectors in vector component form for each leg .
Let ’ s adopt a rectangular coordinate system with the positive x -axis in the direction of geographic east , with the of the x -axis points east and the positive y -direction pointed to geographic north .
Explicitly , the unit vector of the y -axis points north .
Trooper makes five legs , so there are five displacement vectors .
We start unit vector by identifying their magnitudes and direction angles , then we use to find the scalar components of the displacements and for the displacement vectors .
On the first leg , the displacement magnitude is and the direction is southeast .
For direction angle we can take either measured clockwise from the east direction or measured counterclockwise from the east direction .
With the first choice , .
With the second choice , .
We can use either one of these two angles .
The components are The displacement vector of the first leg is On the second leg of Trooper ’ s wanderings , the magnitude of the displacement is and the direction is north .
The direction angle is .
We obtain the following results : On the third leg , the displacement magnitude is and the direction is west of north .
The direction angle measured counterclockwise from the eastern direction is .
This gives the following answers : On the fourth leg of the excursion , the displacement magnitude is and the direction is south .
The direction angle can be taken as either or .
We obtain On the last leg , the magnitude is and the angle is west of south ) , which gives Check Your Understanding If Trooper runs 20 m west before taking a rest , what is his displacement vector ?
To describe locations of points or vectors in a plane , we need two orthogonal directions .
In the Cartesian coordinate system these directions are given by unit vectors and along the x -axis and the y -axis , respectively .
The Cartesian coordinate system is very convenient to use in describing displacements and velocities of objects and the forces acting on them .
However , it becomes cumbersome when we need to describe the rotation of objects .
When describing rotation , we usually work in the polar coordinate system .
In the polar coordinate system , the location of point P in a plane is given by two polar coordinates .
The first polar coordinate is the radial coordinate r , which is the distance of point P from the origin .
The second polar coordinate is an angle that the radial vector makes with some chosen direction , usually the positive x -direction .
In polar coordinates , angles are measured in radians , or rads .
The radial vector is attached at the origin and points away from the origin to point is a vector orthogonal to the P. This radial direction is described by a unit radial vector .
The second unit vector radial direction .
The positive direction indicates how the angle changes in the counterclockwise direction .
In this way , a point P that has coordinates ( x , y ) in the rectangular system can be described equivalently in the polar coordinate system by the two polar coordinates .
is valid for any vector , so we can use it to express the x .
What are the polar and rectangular coordinates of these findings with respect to the well ?
The well marks the origin of the coordinate system and east is the + x -direction .
We identify radial distances from the locations to the origin , which are ( for the silver coin ) and ( for the gold coin ) .
To find the angular coordinates , we convert to radians : .
We use to find the x and y -coordinates of the coins .
The angular coordinate of the silver coin is , whereas the angular coordinate of the gold coin is .
Hence , the polar coordinates of the silver coin are and those of the gold coin are .
We substitute these coordinates into to obtain rectangular coordinates .
Three-dimensional space has three orthogonal directions , so we need not two but three unit vectors to define a three-dimensional coordinate system .
In the Cartesian .
The coordinate system , the first two unit vectors are the unit vector of the x -axis third unit vector is the direction of the z -axis .
The order in which the axes are labeled , which is the order in which the three unit vectors appear , is important because it defines the orientation of the coordinate system .
The , defines the standard right-handed coordinate system ( positive order x y z , which is equivalent to the order orientation ) .
As seen in , the diagonal in the xy -plane has length and its square adds to the square to give .
Note that when the z -component is zero , the vector lies entirely in the xy -plane and its description is reduced to two dimensions .
During a takeoff of IAI Heron , its position with respect to a control tower is 100 m above the ground , 300 m to the east , and 200 m to the north .
One minute later , its position is 250 m above the ground , 1200 m to the east , and 2100 m to the north .
What is the drone ’ s displacement vector with respect to the control tower ?
What is the magnitude of its displacement vector ?
We take the origin of the Cartesian coordinate system as the control tower .
The drone ’ s first position is the origin ( or , equivalently , the beginning ) of the displacement vector and its second position is the end of the displacement vector .
Vectors can be added together and multiplied by scalars .
Vector addition is associative and commutative , and vector multiplication by a sum of scalars is distributive .
Also , scalar multiplication by a sum of vectors is distributive : In this equation , is any number ( a scalar ) .
If the convoy had to retreat , in what geographic direction would it be moving ?
The velocity vector has the third component , which says the convoy is climbing at a rate of 100 m/h through mountainous terrain .
At the same time , its velocity is 4.0 km/h to the east and 3.0 km/h to the north , so it moves on the ground in direction north of east .
If the convoy had to retreat , its new velocity vector would have to be antiparallel to and be in the form , where is a positive number .
Thus , the velocity of the retreat would be .
The negative sign of the third component indicates the convoy would be descending .
The direction angle of the retreat velocity is south of west .
Therefore , the convoy would be moving on the ground in direction south of west while descending on its way back .
The generalization of the number zero to vector algebra is called the null vector , denoted by .
All components of the null vector are zero , , so the null vector has no length and no direction .
Two vectors and are equal vectors if and only if their difference is the null vector : This vector equation means we must have simultaneously , , and .
Hence , we can write if and only if the corresponding components of vectors and are equal : Two vectors are equal when their corresponding scalar components are equal .
For example , we use this method in kinematics to find resultant displacement vectors and resultant velocity vectors , in mechanics to find resultant force vectors and the resultants of many derived vector quantities , and in electricity and magnetism to find resultant electric or magnetic vector fields .
Three displacement vectors , , and in a plane are specified by their magnitudes A = 10.0 , B = 7.0 , and C = 8.0 , respectively , and by their respective direction angles with the horizontal direction , and .
The physical units of the magnitudes are centimeters .
Resolve the vectors to their scalar components and find the following vector sums : ( a ) , ( b ) , and ( c ) .
First , we use to find the scalar components of each vector and then we express each vector in its vector component form given by .
Then , we use analytical methods of vector algebra to find the resultants .
We resolve the given vectors to their scalar components : For ( a ) we may substitute directly into to find the scalar components of the resultant : Therefore , the resultant vector is .
For ( b ) , we may want to write the vector difference as Then , the scalar components of the vector difference are Hence , the difference vector is .
For ( c ) , we can write vector in the following explicit form : Then , the scalar components of are The vector is .
Having found the vector components , we can illustrate the vectors by graphing or we can compute magnitudes and direction angles , as shown in .
Results for the magnitudes in ( b ) and ( c ) can be compared with results for the same problems obtained with the graphical method , shown in and .
Notice that the analytical method produces exact results and its accuracy is not limited by the resolution of a ruler or a protractor , as it was with the graphical method used in for finding this same resultant .
Check Your Understanding Three displacement vectors , , and are specified by their magnitudes A = 10.00 , B = 7.00 , and F = 20.00 , respectively , and by their respective direction angles with the horizontal direction , , and .
The physical units of the magnitudes are centimeters .
Use the analytical method to find vector .
Verify that G = 28.15 cm and that .
Four dogs named Astro , Balto , Clifford , and Dug play a tug-of-war game with a toy .
Astro pulls on the toy in direction south of east , Balto pulls in direction east of north , and Clifford pulls in direction west of north .
With how big a force and in what direction must Dug pull on the toy for this to happen ?
We assume that east is the direction of the positive x -axis and north is the direction of the positive y -axis .
As in , we have to resolve the three given forces— ( the pull from Astro ) , ( the pull from Balto ) , and ( the pull from Clifford ) —into their scalar components and then find the scalar components of the resultant vector .
When the pulling force from Dug balances out this resultant , the sum of and must give the null vector .
This means that , so the pull from Dug must be antiparallel to .
Check Your Understanding Suppose that Balto in leaves the game to attend to more important matters , but Astro , Clifford , and Dug continue playing .
Astro and Clifford 's pull on the toy does not change , but Dug runs around and bites on the toy in a different place .
With how big a force and in what direction must Dug pull on the toy now to balance out the combined pulls from Clifford and Astro ?
Illustrate this situation by drawing a vector diagram indicating all forces involved .
Find the magnitude of the vector that satisfies the equation , where and .
We first solve the given equation for the unknown vector .
Then we substitute and ; group the , and ; and identify the scalar components , , and .
terms along each of the three directions , Finally , we substitute into to find magnitude C .
The components are , , and , and substituting into gives Starting at a ski lodge , a cross-country skier goes 5.0 km north , then 3.0 km west , and finally 4.0 km southwest before taking a rest .
Find his total displacement vector relative to the lodge when he is at the rest point .
How far and in what direction must he ski from the rest point to return directly to the lodge ?
We assume a rectangular coordinate system with the origin at the ski lodge and with the unit vector pointing north .
There are three displacements : pointing .
We east and the unit vector identify their magnitudes as , , and .
We identify their directions are the angles , , and .
We resolve each displacement vector to its scalar components and substitute the components into to obtain the scalar components of the resultant displacement from the lodge to the rest point .
On the way back from the rest point to the lodge , the displacement is .
Finally , we find the magnitude and direction of .
Scalar components of the displacement vectors are , and , Scalar components of the net displacement vector are Hence , the skier ’ s net displacement vector is .
On the way back to the lodge , his displacement is .
Its magnitude is and its direction angle is .
Therefore , to return to the lodge , he must go 6.2 km in a direction about south of east .
Notice that no figure is needed to solve this problem by the analytical method .
Figures are required when using a graphical method ; however , we can check if our solution makes sense by sketching it , which is a useful final step in solving any vector problem .
A jogger runs up a flight of 200 identical steps to the top of a hill and then runs along the top of the hill 50.0 m before he stops at a drinking fountain .
His displacement vector from point A at the bottom of the .
What is the height and width of each step in steps to point B at the fountain is the flight ?
What is the actual distance the jogger covers ?
If he makes a loop and returns to point A , what is his net displacement vector ?
In the coordinate system indicated in , the jogger ’ s displacement vector on the top of the hill is .
If each step has width w and height h , the horizontal component of .
His net displacement vector is Therefore , his displacement vector along the stairs is Its scalar components are and .
Therefore , we must have Hence , the step width is w = 40.0 m/200 = 0.2 m = 20 cm , and the step height is h = 30.0 m/200 = 0.15 m = 15 cm .
The distance that the jogger covers along the stairs is Thus , the actual distance he runs is .
In many physical situations , we often need to know the direction of a vector .
For example , we may want to know the direction of a magnetic field vector at some point or the direction of motion of an object .
We have already said direction is given by a unit vector , which is a dimensionless entity—that is , it has no physical units associated with it .
When the vector in question lies along one of the axes in a Cartesian system of coordinates , the answer is simple , because then its unit vector of direction is either parallel or antiparallel to the direction of the unit vector of an axis .
For example , the direction of vector is unit vector .
The general rule of finding the unit vector of direction for any vector is to divide it by its magnitude V : We see from this expression that the unit vector of direction is indeed dimensionless because the numerator and the denominator in have the same physical unit .
In this way , allows us to express the unit vector of direction in terms of unit vectors of the axes .
The following example illustrates this principle .
, If the velocity vector of the military convoy in is what is the unit vector of its direction of motion ?
The unit vector of the convoy ’ s direction of motion is the unit vector that is parallel to the velocity vector .
The unit vector is obtained by dividing a vector by its magnitude , in accordance with .
If you round off your partial answer too early , you risk your final answer having a huge numerical error , and it may be far off from the exact answer or from a value measured in an experiment .
Check Your Understanding Verify that vector obtained in is indeed a unit vector by computing its magnitude .
If the convoy in was moving across a desert flatland—that is , if the third component of its velocity was zero—what is the unit vector of its direction of motion ?
Which geographic direction does it represent ?
A vector can be multiplied by another vector but may not be divided by another vector .
There are two kinds of products of vectors used broadly in physics and engineering .
One kind of multiplication is a scalar multiplication of two vectors .
Taking a scalar product of two vectors results in a number ( a scalar ) , as its name indicates .
Scalar products are used to define work and energy relations .
For example , the work that a force ( a vector ) performs on an object while causing its displacement ( a vector ) is defined as a scalar product of the force vector with the displacement vector .
A quite different kind of multiplication is a vector multiplication of vectors .
Taking a vector product of two vectors returns as a result a vector , as its name suggests .
Vector products are used to define other derived vector quantities .
For example , in describing rotations , a vector quantity called torque is defined as a vector product of an applied force ( a vector ) and its distance from pivot to force ( a vector ) .
It is important to distinguish between these two kinds of vector multiplications because the scalar product is a scalar quantity and a vector product is a vector quantity .
Scalar multiplication of two vectors yields a scalar product .
The scalar product of two vectors and is a number defined by the equation where is the angle between the vectors ( shown in ) .
The scalar product is also called the dot product because of the dot notation that indicates it .
In the definition of the dot product , the direction of angle does not matter , and can be measured from either of the two vectors to the other because .
The dot product is a negative number when and is a positive number when .
Moreover , the dot product of two parallel vectors is , and the dot product of two antiparallel vectors is .
The scalar product of two orthogonal vectors vanishes : .
The scalar product of a vector with itself is the square of its magnitude : For the vectors shown in , find the scalar product .
From , the magnitudes of vectors and are A = 10.0 and F = 20.0 .
Angle , between them , is the difference : .
Substituting these values into gives the scalar product .
A straightforward calculation gives us Check Your Understanding For the vectors given in , find the scalar products and .
In the Cartesian coordinate system , scalar products of the unit vector of an axis with other unit vectors of axes always vanish because these unit vectors are orthogonal : In these equations , we use the fact that the magnitudes of all unit vectors are one : .
Check Your Understanding For vector in a rectangular coordinate system , use through to show that and .
Thus , the scalar product simplifies to We can use for the scalar product in terms of scalar components of vectors to find the angle between two vectors .
When we divide by AB , we obtain the equation for , into which we substitute : Angle between vectors and is obtained by taking the inverse cosine of the expression in .
Three dogs are pulling on a stick in different directions , as shown in .
The first dog pulls with , the second dog pulls with force force the third dog pulls with force .
What is the angle between forces , and ?
and are , , and , whereas those are , , and .
Computing the scalar product of The components of force vector of force vector these vectors and their magnitudes , and substituting into gives the angle of interest .
Here , for example , the + x -direction might be to the east and the + y -direction might be to the north .
But , the angle between the forces in the problem is the same if the + x -direction is to the west and the + y -direction is to the south .
Check Your Understanding Find the angle between forces and in .
When force pulls on an object and when it causes its displacement , we say the force performs work .
The amount of work the force does is the scalar product .
If the stick in moves momentarily and gets displaced by vector , how much work is done by the third dog in ?
We compute the scalar product of displacement vector with force vector is the pull from the third dog .
Let ’ s use to denote the work done by force Calculating the work is a straightforward application of the dot product : , which on displacement .
The SI unit of work is called the joule , where 1 J = 1 .
The unit can be written as , so the answer can be expressed as .
Check Your Understanding How much work is done by the first dog and by the second dog in on the displacement in ?
Vector multiplication of two vectors yields a vector product .
The vector product of two vectors and is denoted by and is often referred to as a cross product .
The vector product is a vector that has its direction perpendicular to both vectors and .
In other words , vector is perpendicular to the plane that contains vectors and , as shown in .
The magnitude of the vector product is defined as where angle , between the two vectors , is measured from vector ( first vector in the product ) to vector ( second vector in the product ) , as indicated in , and is between and .
According to , the vector product vanishes for pairs of vectors that are either parallel antiparallel because .
or On the line perpendicular to the plane that contains vectors and there are two alternative directions—either up or down , as shown in —and the direction of the vector product may be either one of them .
In the standard righthanded orientation , where the angle between vectors is measured counterclockwise from the first vector , vector points upward , as seen in ( a ) .
If we reverse the order of multiplication , so that now comes first in the product , then vector must point downward , as seen in ( b ) .
This means that vectors and are antiparallel to each other and that vector multiplication is not commutative but anticommutative .
The anticommutative property means the vector product reverses the sign when the order of multiplication is reversed : The corkscrew right-hand rule is a common mnemonic used to determine the direction of the vector product .
As shown in , a corkscrew is placed in a direction perpendicular to the plane that contains vectors and , and its handle is turned in the direction from the first to the second vector in the product .
The direction of the cross product is given by the progression of the corkscrew .
The mechanical advantage that a familiar tool called a wrench provides depends on magnitude F of the applied force , on its direction with respect to the wrench handle , and on how far from the nut this force is applied .
The distance R from the nut to the point where force vector is attached is represented by the radial vector .
The physical vector quantity that makes the nut turn is called torque ( denoted by , and it is the vector product of the distance between the pivot to force with the force : .
To loosen a rusty nut , a 20.00-N force is applied to the wrench handle at angle and at a distance of 0.25 m from the nut , as shown in ( a ) .
Find the magnitude and direction of the torque applied to the nut .
What would the magnitude and direction of the torque be if the force were applied at angle , as shown in ( b ) ?
For what value of angle does the torque have the largest magnitude ?
We adopt the frame of reference shown in , where vectors and lie in the xy -plane and the origin is at the position of the nut .
The radial direction along vector ( pointing away from the origin ) is the reference direction for measuring the angle because is the first vector in the vector product .
Vector must lie along the z -axis because this is the axis that is perpendicular to the xy -plane , where both and lie .
To compute the magnitude , we use .
To find the direction of , we use the corkscrew right-hand rule .
For the situation in ( a ) , the corkscrew rule gives the direction of in the positive direction of the z -axis .
Physically , it means the torque vector points out of the page , perpendicular to the wrench handle .
We identify F = 20.00 N and R = 0.25 m , and compute the magnitude using : For the situation in ( b ) , the corkscrew rule gives the direction of in the negative direction of the z -axis .
Physically , it means the vector points into the page , perpendicular to the wrench handle .
The magnitude of this torque is The torque has the largest value when , which happens when .
Physically , it means the wrench is most effective—giving us the best mechanical advantage—when we apply the force perpendicular to is .
the wrench best-torque example , situation handle .
value this this For the in When solving mechanics problems , we often do not need to use the corkscrew rule at all , as we ’ ll see now in the following equivalent solution .
Notice that once we have identified that vector lies along the z -axis , we can write this vector in terms of the unit vector of the z -axis : to ( second vector ) .
Following this principle for In this equation , the number that multiplies is the scalar z -component of the vector .
In the computation of this component , care must be taken that the angle is measured counterclockwise from ( first vector ) the angles , we obtain for the situation in ( a ) , and we obtain for the situation in ( b ) .
In the latter case , the angle is negative because the graph in indicates the angle is measured clockwise ; but , the same result is obtained when this angle is measured counterclockwise because and .
In this way , we obtain the solution without reference to the corkscrew rule .
For the situation in ( a ) , the solution is ; for the situation in ( b ) , the solution is .
Check Your Understanding For the vectors given in , find the vector products and .
Similar to the dot product , the cross product has the following distributive property : The distributive property is applied frequently when vectors are expressed in their component forms , in terms of unit vectors of Cartesian axes .
For example , for the pair and , the magnitude is .
The direction must be orthogonal to the xy -plane , which means it must be along the z -axis .
The only unit of the vector product must be parallel to the vectors along the z -axis are or .
By the corkscrew rule , the direction of vector positive z -axis .
Therefore , the result of the multiplication is identical to .
We can repeat similar reasoning for the remaining pairs of unit vectors .
The results of these multiplications are , , and are , Notice that in , the three unit vectors , and appear in the cyclic order shown in a diagram in follows and comes before , or follows ( a ) .
The cyclic order means that in the product formula , follows and comes before .
The cross product of two different unit vectors is always and comes before , or a third unit vector .
When two unit vectors in the cross product appear in the cyclic order , the result of such a multiplication is the remaining unit vector , as illustrated in ( b ) .
In practice , when the task is to find cross products of vectors that are given in vector component form , this rule for the cross-multiplication of unit vectors is very useful .
to find the and Suppose we want .
The last two steps that we still have to do to complete our task are , first , grouping the terms that contain a common unit vector and , second , factoring .
They both lead to the same final result .
One way to make sure if the final result is correct is to use them both .
When moving in a magnetic field , some particles may experience a magnetic force .
Without going into details—a detailed study of magnetic phenomena comes in later chapters—let ’ s acknowledge that the magnetic field is a vector , the magnetic force is a vector , and the velocity of the particle is a vector .
The magnetic force vector is proportional to the vector product of the velocity vector with the magnetic field vector , which we express as .
In this equation , a constant takes care of the consistency in physical units , so we can omit physical units on vectors and .
In this example , let ’ s assume the constant is positive .
A particle moving in space with velocity vector enters a region with a magnetic field and experiences a magnetic force .
Find the magnetic force on this particle at the entry point to the region where the magnetic field vector is ( a ) and ( b ) .
In each case , find magnitude F of the magnetic force and angle the force vector makes with the given magnetic field vector .
, because then we can determine the magnetic force First , we want to find the vector product using .
Magnitude F can be found either by using components , , or by computing the magnitude directly using .
In the latter approach , we would have to find the angle between vectors and .
When we have , the general method for finding the direction angle involves the computation of the scalar product and substitution into .
To compute the vector product we can either use or compute the product directly , whichever way is simpler .
The components of the velocity vector are , , and .
( a ) The components of the magnetic field vector are , , and .
( We could have saved some time if we had computed the scalar product earlier . )
( b ) Because vector has only one component , we can perform the algebra quickly and find the vector product directly : The magnitude of the magnetic force is Because the scalar product is the magnetic force vector is perpendicular to the magnetic field vector .
Even without actually computing the scalar product , we can predict that the magnetic force vector must always be perpendicular to the magnetic field vector because of the way this vector is constructed .
Namely , the magnetic force vector is the vector product and , by the definition of the vector product ( see ) , vector must be perpendicular to both vectors and .
Check Your Understanding Given two vectors and , find ( a ) , ( b ) , ( c ) the angle between and , and ( d ) the angle between and vector .
In conclusion to this section , we want to stress that “ dot product ” and “ cross product ” are entirely different mathematical objects that have different meanings .
The dot product is a scalar ; the cross product is a vector .
Later chapters use the terms dot product and scalar product interchangeably .
Similarly , the terms cross product and vector product are used interchangeably .
change in the order of operation introduces the minus sign two vectors with directions that differ by terms can be grouped in any fashion operations can be performed in any order Our universe is full of objects in motion .
From the stars , planets , and galaxies ; to the motion of people and animals ; down to the microscopic scale of atoms and molecules—everything in our universe is in motion .
We can describe motion using the two disciplines of kinematics and dynamics .
We study dynamics , which is concerned with the causes of motion , in ; but , there is much to be learned about motion without referring to what causes it , and this is the study of kinematics .
Kinematics involves describing motion through properties such as position , time , velocity , and acceleration .
A full treatment of kinematics considers motion in two and three dimensions .
For now , we discuss motion in one dimension , which provides us with the tools necessary to study multidimensional motion .
A good example of an object undergoing onedimensional motion is the maglev ( magnetic levitation ) train depicted at the beginning of this chapter .
As it travels , say , from Tokyo to Kyoto , it is at different positions along the track at various times in its journey , and therefore has displacements , or changes in position .
It also has a variety of velocities along its path and it undergoes accelerations ( changes in velocity ) .
With the skills learned in this chapter we can calculate these quantities and average velocity .
All these quantities can be described using kinematics , without knowing the train ’ s mass or the forces involved .
When you ’ re in motion , the basic questions to ask are : Where are you ?
Where are you going ?
How fast are you getting there ?
The answers to these questions require that you specify your position , your displacement , and your average velocity—the terms we define in this section .
To describe the motion of an object , you must first be able to describe its position ( x ) : where it is at any particular time .
More precisely , we need to specify its position relative to a convenient frame of reference .
A frame of reference is an arbitrary set of axes from which the position and motion of an object are described .
Earth is often used as a frame of reference , and we often describe the position of an object as it relates to stationary objects on Earth .
For example , a rocket launch could be described in terms of the position of the rocket with respect to Earth as a whole , whereas a cyclist ’ s position could be described in terms of where she is in relation to the buildings she passes .
In other cases , we use reference frames that are not stationary but are in motion relative to Earth .
To describe the position of a person in an airplane , for example , we use the airplane , not Earth , as the reference frame .
To describe the position of an object undergoing onedimensional motion , we often use the variable x .
Later in the chapter , during the discussion of free fall , we use the variable y .
If an object moves relative to a frame of reference—for example , if a professor moves to the right relative to a whiteboard —then the object ’ s position changes .
This change in position is called displacement .
The word displacement implies that an object has moved , or has been displaced .
Although position is the numerical value of x along a straight line where an object might be located , displacement gives the change in position along this line .
Since displacement indicates direction , it is a vector and can be either positive or negative , depending on the choice of positive direction .
Also , an analysis of motion can have many displacements embedded in it .
If right is positive and an object moves 2 m to the right , then 4 m to the left , the individual displacements are 2 m and m , respectively .
Displacement is the change in position of an object : where is displacement , is the final position , and is the initial position .
We use the uppercase Greek letter delta ( Δ ) to mean “ change in ” whatever quantity follows it ; thus , means change in position ( final position less initial position ) .
We always solve for displacement by subtracting initial position from final position .
Note that the SI unit for displacement is the meter , but sometimes we use kilometers or other units of length .
Keep in mind that when units other than meters are used in a problem , you may need to convert them to meters to complete the calculation ( see ) .
Objects in motion can also have a series of displacements .
In the earlier example , Similarly , Thus , The total displacement is 2 − 4 = −2 m to the left , or in the negative direction .
It is also useful to calculate the magnitude of the displacement , or its size .
The magnitude of the displacement is always positive .
This is the absolute value of the displacement , because displacement is a vector and can not have a negative value of magnitude .
In our example , the magnitude of the total displacement is 2 m , whereas the magnitudes of the individual displacements are 2 m and 4 m. The magnitude of the total displacement should not be confused with the distance traveled .
Distance traveled , is the total length of the path traveled between two positions .
In the previous problem , the distance traveled is the sum of the magnitudes of the individual displacements : To calculate the other physical quantities in kinematics we must introduce the time variable .
The time variable allows us not only to state where the object is ( its position ) during its motion , but also how fast it is moving .
How fast an object is moving is given by the rate at which the position changes with time .
For each position , we assign a particular time .
If the details of the motion at each instant are not important , the rate is usually expressed as the average velocity .
This vector quantity is simply the total displacement between two points divided by the time taken to travel between them .
The time taken to travel between two points is called the elapsed time .
If and are the positions of an object at times and , respectively , then It is important to note that the average velocity is a vector and can be negative , depending on positions and .
Jill sets out from her home to deliver flyers for her yard sale , traveling due east along her street lined with houses .
At km and 9 minutes later she runs out of flyers and has to retrace her steps back to her house to get more .
This takes an additional 9 minutes .
After picking up more flyers , she sets out again on the same path , continuing where she left off , and ends up 1.0 km from her house .
This third leg of her trip takes minutes .
At this point she turns back toward her house , heading west .
After km and minutes she stops to rest .
What is Jill ’ s total displacement to the point where she stops to rest ?
What is the magnitude of the final displacement ?
What is the average velocity during her entire trip ?
What is the total distance traveled ?
Make a graph of position versus time .
A sketch of Jill ’ s movements is shown in .
The problem contains data on the various legs of Jill ’ s trip , so it would be useful to make a table of the physical quantities .
We are given position and time in the wording of the problem so we can calculate the displacements and the elapsed time .
We take east to be the positive direction .
From this information we can find the total displacement and average velocity .
Jill ’ s home is the starting point .
The following table gives Jill ’ s time and position in the first two columns , and the displacements are calculated in the third column .
From the above table , the total displacement is The magnitude of the total displacement is .
traveled individual of The total distance ( sum of magnitudes .
displacements ) is We can graph Jill ’ s position versus time as a useful aid to see the motion ; the graph is shown in .
Jill ’ s total displacement is −0.75 km , which means at the end of her trip she ends up due west of her home .
The average velocity means if someone was to walk due west at km/min starting at the same time Jill left her home , they both would arrive at the final stopping point at the same time .
Note that if Jill were to end her trip at her house , her total displacement would be zero , as well as her average velocity .
The total distance traveled during the 58 minutes of elapsed time for her trip is 3.75 km .
Check Your Understanding A cyclist rides 3 km west and then turns around and rides 2 km east .
( a ) What is his displacement ?
( b ) What is the distance traveled ?
( c ) What is the magnitude of his displacement ?
We have now seen how to calculate the average velocity between two positions .
However , since objects in the real world move continuously through space and time , we would like to find the velocity of an object at any single point .
We can find the velocity of the object anywhere along its path by using some fundamental principles of calculus .
This section gives us better insight into the physics of motion and will be useful in later chapters .
The quantity that tells us how fast an object is moving anywhere along its path is the instantaneous velocity , usually called simply velocity .
It is the average velocity between two points on the path in the limit that the time ( and therefore the displacement ) between the two points approaches zero .
To illustrate this idea mathematically , we need to express position x as a continuous function of t denoted by x ( t ) .
The expression for the average velocity between two points using this notation is .
To find the instantaneous velocity at any position , we let and .
The instantaneous velocity at a specific time point is the rate of change of the position function , which is the slope of the position function at .
shows how the average velocity between two times approaches the instantaneous velocity at The instantaneous velocity is shown at time , which happens to be at the maximum of the position function .
The slope of the position graph is zero at this point , and thus the instantaneous velocity is zero .
At other times , , and so on , the instantaneous velocity is not zero because the slope of the position graph would be positive or negative .
If the position function had a minimum , the slope of the position graph would also be zero , giving an instantaneous velocity of zero there as well .
Thus , the zeros of the velocity function give the minimum and maximum of the position function .
Given the position-versus-time graph of , find the velocity-versus-time graph .
The graph contains three straight lines during three time intervals .
We find the velocity during each time interval by taking the slope of the line using the grid .
Time interval 0 s to 0.5 s : Time interval 0.5 s to 1.0 s : Time interval 1.0 s to 2.0 s : The graph of these values of velocity versus time is shown in .
During the time interval between 0 s and 0.5 s , the object ’ s position is moving away from the origin and the position-versus-time curve has a positive slope .
At any point along the curve during this time interval , we can find the instantaneous velocity by taking its slope , which is +1 m/s , as shown in .
In the subsequent time interval , between 0.5 s and 1.0 s , the position doesn ’ t change and we see the slope is zero .
From 1.0 s to 2.0 s , the object is moving back toward the origin and the slope is −0.5 m/s .
The object has reversed direction and has a negative velocity .
In everyday language , most people use the terms speed and velocity interchangeably .
In physics , however , they do not have the same meaning and are distinct concepts .
One major difference is that speed has no direction ; that is , speed is a scalar .
We can calculate the average speed by finding the total distance traveled divided by the elapsed time : Average speed is not necessarily the same as the magnitude of the average velocity , which is found by dividing the magnitude of the total displacement by the elapsed time .
For example , if a trip starts and ends at the same location , the total displacement is zero , and therefore the average velocity is zero .
The average speed , however , is not zero , because the total distance traveled is greater than zero .
If we take a road trip of 300 km and need to be at our destination at a certain time , then we would be interested in our average speed .
Some typical speeds are shown in the following table .
When calculating instantaneous velocity , we need to specify the explicit form of the position function x ( t ) .
For the moment , let ’ s use polynomials , because they are easily differentiated using the power rule of calculus : The following example illustrates the use of .
The position of a particle is given by .
Using and , find the instantaneous velocity at s. Calculate the average velocity between 1.0 s and 3.0 s. gives the instantaneous velocity of the particle as the derivative of the position function .
Looking at the form of the position function given , we see that it is a polynomial in t .
Therefore , we can use , the power rule from calculus , to find the solution .
We use to calculate the average velocity of the particle .
Substituting t = 2.0 s into this equation gives .
What is the instantaneous velocity at t = 0.25 s , t = 0.50 s , and t = 1.0 s ?
What is the speed of the particle at these times ?
The instantaneous velocity is the derivative of the position function and the speed is the magnitude of the instantaneous velocity .
We use and to solve for instantaneous velocity .
The velocity of the particle gives us direction information , indicating the particle is moving to the left ( west ) or right ( east ) .
The speed gives the magnitude of the velocity .
By graphing the position , velocity , and speed as functions of time , we can understand these concepts visually .
In ( a ) , the graph shows the particle moving in the positive direction until t = 0.5 s , when it reverses direction .
The reversal of direction can also be seen in ( b ) at 0.5 s where the velocity is zero and then turns negative .
At 1.0 s it is back at the origin where it started .
The particle ’ s velocity at 1.0 s in ( b ) is negative , because it is traveling in the negative direction .
But in ( c ) , however , its speed is positive and remains positive throughout the travel time .
We can also interpret velocity as the slope of the position-versus-time graph .
The slope of x ( t ) is decreasing toward zero , becoming zero at 0.5 s and increasingly negative thereafter .
This analysis of comparing the graphs of position , velocity , and speed helps catch errors in calculations .
The graphs must be consistent with each other and help interpret the calculations .
Check Your Understanding The position of an object as a function of time is .
( a ) What is the velocity of the object as a function of time ?
( b ) Is the velocity ever positive ?
( c ) What are the velocity and speed at t = 1.0 s ?
The importance of understanding acceleration spans our day-to-day experience , as well as the vast reaches of outer space and the tiny world of subatomic physics .
In everyday conversation , to accelerate means to speed up ; applying the brake pedal causes a vehicle to slow down .
We are familiar with the acceleration of our car , for example .
The greater the acceleration , the greater the change in velocity over a given time .
Acceleration is widely seen in experimental physics .
In linear particle accelerator experiments , for example , subatomic particles are accelerated to very high velocities in collision experiments , which tell us information about the structure of the subatomic world as well as the origin of the universe .
In space , cosmic rays are subatomic particles that have been accelerated to very high energies in supernovas ( exploding massive stars ) and active galactic nuclei .
It is important to understand the processes that accelerate cosmic rays because these rays contain highly penetrating radiation that can damage electronics flown on spacecraft , for example .
The formal definition of acceleration is consistent with these notions just described , but is more inclusive .
Average acceleration is the rate at which velocity changes : where is average acceleration , v is velocity , and t is time .
( The bar over the a means average acceleration . )
Because acceleration is velocity in meters per second divided by time in seconds , the SI units for acceleration are often abbreviated m/s —that is , meters per second squared or meters per second per second .
This literally means by how many meters per second the velocity changes every second .
Recall that velocity is a vector—it has both magnitude and direction—which means that a change in velocity can be a change in magnitude ( or speed ) , but it can also be a change in direction .
Thus , acceleration occurs when velocity changes in magnitude ( an increase or decrease in speed ) or in direction , or both .
Acceleration is a vector in the same direction as the change in velocity , .
Since velocity is a vector , it can change in magnitude or in direction , or both .
Acceleration is , therefore , a change in speed or direction , or both .
Keep in mind that although acceleration is in the direction of the change in velocity , it is not always in the direction of motion .
When an object slows down , its acceleration is opposite to the direction of its motion .
Although this is commonly referred to as deceleration , we say the train is accelerating in a direction opposite to its direction of motion .
The term deceleration can cause confusion in our analysis because it is not a vector and it does not point to a specific direction with respect to a coordinate system , so we do not use it .
Acceleration is a vector , so we must choose the appropriate sign for it in our chosen coordinate system .
In the case of the train in , acceleration is in the negative direction in the chosen coordinate system , so we say the train is undergoing negative acceleration .
If an object in motion has a velocity in the positive direction with respect to a chosen origin and it acquires a constant negative acceleration , the object eventually comes to a rest and reverses direction .
If we wait long enough , the object passes through the origin going in the opposite direction .
This is illustrated in .
A racehorse coming out of the gate accelerates from rest to a velocity of 15.0 m/s due west in 1.80 s. What is its average acceleration ?
First we draw a sketch and assign a coordinate system to the problem .
This is a simple problem , but it always helps to visualize it .
Notice that we assign east as positive and west as negative .
Thus , in this case , we have negative velocity .
We can solve this problem by identifying from the given information , and then calculating the average acceleration directly from the equation .
First , identify the knowns : ( the negative sign indicates direction toward the west ) , Δ t = 1.80 s. Second , find the change in velocity .
Since the horse is going from zero to –15.0 m/s , its change in velocity equals its final velocity : Last , substitute the known values and solve for the unknown : The negative sign for acceleration indicates that acceleration is toward the west .
An acceleration of 8.33 m/s due west means the horse increases its velocity by 8.33 m/s due west each second ; that is , 8.33 meters per second per second , which we write as 8.33 m/s .
This is truly an average acceleration , because the ride is not smooth .
We see later that an acceleration of this magnitude would require the rider to hang on with a force nearly equal to his weight .
Check Your Understanding Protons in a linear accelerator are accelerated from rest to in 10 s. What is the average acceleration of the protons ?
Instantaneous acceleration a , or acceleration at a specific instant in time , is obtained using the same process discussed for instantaneous velocity .
That is , we calculate the average acceleration between two points in time separated by and let approach zero .
The result is the derivative of the velocity function v ( t ) , which is instantaneous acceleration and is expressed mathematically as Thus , similar to velocity being the derivative of the position function , instantaneous acceleration is the derivative of the velocity function .
We can show this graphically in the same way as instantaneous velocity .
In , instantaneous acceleration at time t is the slope of the tangent line to the velocity-versus-time graph at time t .
We see that average acceleration approaches instantaneous acceleration as approaches zero .
Also in part ( a ) of the figure , we see that velocity has a maximum when its slope is zero .
This time corresponds to the zero of the acceleration function .
In part ( b ) , instantaneous acceleration at the minimum velocity is shown , which is also zero , since the slope of the curve is zero there , too .
Thus , for a given velocity function , the zeros of the acceleration function give either the minimum or the maximum velocity .
To illustrate this concept , let ’ s look at two examples .
First , a simple example is shown using ( b ) , the velocityversus-time graph of , to find acceleration graphically .
This graph is depicted in ( a ) , which is a straight line .
The corresponding graph of acceleration versus time is found from the slope of velocity and is shown in ( b ) .
In this example , the velocity function is a straight line with a constant slope , thus acceleration is a constant .
In the next example , the velocity function has a more complicated functional dependence on time .
If we know the functional form of velocity , v ( t ) , we can calculate instantaneous acceleration a ( t ) at any time point in the motion using .
A particle is in motion and is accelerating .
The functional form of the velocity is .
Find the functional form of the acceleration .
We find the functional form of acceleration by taking the derivative of the velocity function .
Then , we calculate the values of instantaneous velocity and acceleration from the given functions for each .
For part ( d ) , we need to compare the directions of velocity and acceleration at each time .
, , , , , , At t = 1 s , velocity is positive and acceleration is positive , so both velocity and acceleration are in the same direction .
The particle is moving faster .
At t = 2 s , velocity has increased to , where it is maximum , which corresponds to the time when the acceleration is zero .
We see that the maximum velocity occurs when the slope of the velocity function is zero , which is just the zero of the acceleration function .
At t = 3 s , velocity is and acceleration is negative .
The particle has reduced its velocity and the acceleration vector is negative .
The particle is slowing down .
At t = 5 s , velocity is and acceleration is increasingly negative .
Between the times t = 3 s and t = 5 s the particle has decreased its velocity to zero and then become negative , thus reversing its direction .
The particle is now speeding up again , but in the opposite direction .
We can see these results graphically in .
By doing both a numerical and graphical analysis of velocity and acceleration of the particle , we can learn much about its motion .
The numerical analysis complements the graphical analysis in giving a total view of the motion .
The zero of the acceleration function corresponds to the maximum of the velocity in this example .
Also in this example , when acceleration is positive and in the same direction as velocity , velocity increases .
As acceleration tends toward zero , eventually becoming negative , the velocity reaches a maximum , after which it starts decreasing .
If we wait long enough , velocity also becomes negative , indicating a reversal of direction .
A real-world example of this type of motion is a car with a velocity that is increasing to a maximum , after which it starts slowing down , comes to a stop , then reverses direction .
Check Your Understanding An airplane lands on a runway traveling east .
Describe its acceleration .
You are probably used to experiencing acceleration when you step into an elevator , or step on the gas pedal in your car .
However , acceleration is happening to many other objects in our universe with which we don ’ t have direct contact .
presents the acceleration of various objects .
We can see the magnitudes of the accelerations extend over many orders of magnitude .
In this table , we see that typical accelerations vary widely with different objects and have nothing to do with object size or how massive it is .
Acceleration can also vary widely with time during the motion of an object .
A drag racer has a large acceleration just after its start , but then it tapers off as the vehicle reaches a constant velocity .
Its average acceleration can be quite different from its instantaneous acceleration at a particular time during its motion .
compares graphically average acceleration with instantaneous acceleration for two very different motions .
Learn about position , velocity , and acceleration graphs .
Move the little man back and forth with a mouse and plot his motion .
Set the position , velocity , or acceleration and let the simulation move the man for you .
Visit to use the moving man simulation .
You might guess that the greater the acceleration of , say , a car moving away from a stop sign , the greater the car ’ s displacement in a given time .
But , we have not developed a specific equation that relates acceleration and displacement .
In this section , we look at some convenient equations for kinematic relationships , starting from the definitions of displacement , velocity , and acceleration .
We first investigate a single object in motion , called single-body motion .
Then we investigate the motion of two objects , called two-body pursuit problems .
First , let us make some simplifications in notation .
Taking the initial time to be zero , as if time is measured with a stopwatch , is a great simplification .
Since elapsed time is , taking means that , the final time on the stopwatch .
When initial time is taken to be zero , we use the subscript 0 to denote initial values of position and velocity .
That is , is the initial position and is the initial velocity .
We put no subscripts on the final values .
That is , t is the final time , x is the final position , and v is the final velocity .
This gives a simpler expression for elapsed time , .
It also simplifies the expression for x displacement , which is now .
Also , it simplifies the expression for change in velocity , which is now .
To summarize , using the simplified notation , with the initial time taken to be zero , where the subscript 0 denotes an initial value and the absence of a subscript denotes a final value in whatever motion is under consideration .
We now make the important assumption that acceleration is constant .
This assumption allows us to avoid using calculus to find instantaneous acceleration .
Since acceleration is constant , the average and instantaneous accelerations are equal—that is , Thus , we can use the symbol a for acceleration at all times .
Assuming acceleration to be constant does not seriously limit the situations we can study nor does it degrade the accuracy of our treatment .
For one thing , acceleration is constant in a great number of situations .
Furthermore , in many other situations we can describe motion accurately by assuming a constant acceleration equal to the average acceleration for that motion .
Lastly , for motion during which acceleration changes drastically , such as a car accelerating to top speed and then braking to a stop , motion can be considered in separate parts , each of which has its own constant acceleration .
illustrates this concept graphically .
In part ( a ) of the figure , acceleration is constant , with velocity increasing at a constant rate .
The average velocity during the 1-h interval from 40 km/h to 80 km/h is 60 km/h : In part ( b ) , acceleration is not constant .
During the 1-h interval , velocity is closer to 80 km/h than 40 km/h .
Thus , the average velocity is greater than in part ( a ) .
First , we identify the knowns : .
Second , we identify the unknown ; in this case , it is final velocity .
Last , we determine which equation to use .
To do this we figure out which kinematic equation gives the unknown in terms of the knowns .
We calculate the final velocity using , .
Substitute the known values and solve : is a sketch that shows the acceleration and velocity vectors .
The final velocity is much less than the initial velocity , as desired when slowing down , but is still positive ( see figure ) .
With jet engines , reverse thrust can be maintained long enough to stop the plane and start moving it backward , which is indicated by a negative final velocity , but is not the case here .
In addition to being useful in problem solving , the equation gives us insight into the relationships among velocity , acceleration , and time .
Note that it is always useful to examine basic equations in light of our intuition and experience to check that they do indeed describe nature accurately .
We can combine the previous equations to find a third equation that allows us to calculate the final position of an object experiencing constant acceleration .
We start with Adding to each side of this equation and dividing by 2 gives Since for constant acceleration , we have Now we substitute this expression for into the equation for displacement , , yielding Dragsters can achieve an average acceleration of 26.0 m/s .
Suppose a dragster accelerates from rest at this rate for 5.56 s .
How far does it travel in this time ?
First , let ’ s draw a sketch .
We are asked to find displacement , which is x if we take to be zero .
( Think about as the starting line of a race .
It can be anywhere , but we call it zero and measure all other positions relative to it . )
We can use the equation when we identify , , and t from the statement of the problem .
First , we need to identify the knowns .
So , our answer is reasonable .
This is an impressive displacement to cover in only 5.56 s , but top-notch dragsters can do a quarter mile in even less time than this .
If the dragster were given an initial velocity , this would add another term to the distance equation .
If the same acceleration and time are used in the equation , the distance covered would be much greater .
What else can we learn by examining the equation We can see the following relationships : Displacement depends on the square of the elapsed time when acceleration is not zero .
In , the dragster covers only one-fourth of the total distance in the first half of the elapsed time .
If acceleration initial velocity average equals zero , then is velocity , and A fourth useful equation can be obtained from another algebraic manipulation of previous equations .
If we solve for t , we get Substituting this and into , we get is ideally suited to this task because it relates velocities , acceleration , and Calculate the final velocity of the dragster in without using information about time .
The equation displacement , and no time information is required .
First , we identify the known values .
We know that v = 0 , since the dragster starts from rest .
We also know that x − x = 402 m ( this was the answer in ) .
The average acceleration was given by a = 26.0 m/s .
Second , we substitute the knowns into the equation and solve for v : Thus , A velocity of 145 m/s is about 522 km/h , or about 324 mi/h , but even this breakneck speed is short of the record for the quarter mile .
Also , note that a square root has two values ; we took the positive value to indicate a velocity in the same direction as the acceleration .
An examination of the equation physical quantities : can produce additional insights into the general relationships among The final velocity depends on how large the acceleration is and the distance over which it acts .
For a fixed acceleration , a car that is going twice as fast doesn ’ t simply stop in twice the distance .
It takes much farther to stop .
( This is why we have reduced speed zones near schools . )
In the following examples , we continue to explore one-dimensional motion , but in situations requiring slightly more algebraic manipulation .
The examples also give insight into problem-solving techniques .
The note that follows is provided for easy reference to the equations needed .
Be aware that these equations are not independent .
In many situations we have two unknowns and need two equations from the set to solve for the unknowns .
We need as many equations as there are unknowns to solve a given situation .
Before we get into the examples , let ’ s look at some of the equations more closely to see the behavior of acceleration at extreme values .
Rearranging , we have From this we see that , for a finite time , if the difference between the initial and final velocities is small , the acceleration is small , approaching zero in the limit that the initial and final velocities are equal .
On the contrary , in the limit for a finite difference between the initial and final velocities , acceleration becomes infinite .
Similarly , rearranging , we can express acceleration in terms of velocities and displacement : Thus , for a finite difference between the initial and final velocities acceleration becomes infinite in the limit the displacement approaches zero .
Acceleration approaches zero in the limit the difference in initial and final velocities approaches zero for a finite displacement .
On dry concrete , a car can decelerate at a rate of 7.00 m/s , whereas on wet concrete it can decelerate at only 5.00 m/s .
Find the distances necessary to stop a car moving at 30.0 m/s ( about 110 km/h ) on ( a ) dry concrete and ( b ) wet concrete .
( c ) Repeat both calculations and find the displacement from the point where the driver sees a traffic light turn red , taking into account his reaction time of 0.500 s to get his foot on the brake .
First , we need to draw a sketch .
To determine which equations are best to use , we need to list all the known values and identify exactly what we need to solve for .
First , we need to identify the knowns and what we want to solve for .
We know that v = 30.0 m/s , v = 0 , and a = −7.00 m/s ( a is negative because it is in a direction opposite to velocity ) .
We take x to be zero .
We are looking for displacement , or x − x .
Second , we identify the equation that will help us solve the problem .
The best equation to use is This equation is best because it includes only one unknown , x .
We know the values of all the other variables in this equation .
( Other equations would allow us to solve for x , but they require us to know the stopping time , t , which we do not know .
We could use them , but it would entail additional calculations . )
Third , we rearrange the equation to solve for x : and substitute the known values : Thus , This part can be solved in exactly the same manner as ( a ) .
The only difference is that the acceleration is −5.00 m/s .
The result is When the driver reacts , the stopping distance is the same as it is in ( a ) and ( b ) for dry and wet concrete .
So , to answer this question , we need to calculate how far the car travels during the reaction time , and then add that to the stopping time .
It is reasonable to assume the velocity remains constant during the driver ’ s reaction time .
To do this , we , again , identify the knowns and what we want to solve for .
We know that , , and .
We take to be zero .
We are looking for .
Second , as before , we identify the best equation to use .
In this case , works well because the only unknown value is x , which is what we want to solve for .
Third , we substitute the knowns to solve the equation : This means the car travels 15.0 m while the driver reacts , making the total displacements in the two cases of dry and wet concrete 15.0 m greater than if he reacted instantly .
The displacements found in this example seem reasonable for stopping a fast-moving car .
It should take longer to stop a car on wet pavement than dry .
It is interesting that reaction time adds significantly to the displacements , but more important is the general approach to solving problems .
We identify the knowns and the quantities to be determined , then find an appropriate equation .
If there is more than one unknown , we need as many independent equations as there are unknowns to solve .
There is often more than one way to solve a problem .
The various parts of this example can , in fact , be solved by other methods , but the solutions presented here are the shortest .
Suppose a car merges into freeway traffic on a 200-m-long ramp .
If its initial velocity is 10.0 m/s and it accelerates at 2.00 m/s , how long does it take the car to travel the 200 m up the ramp ?
( Such information might be useful to a traffic engineer . )
First , we draw a sketch .
We are asked to solve for time t .
As before , we identify the known quantities to choose a convenient physical relationship ( that is , an equation with one unknown , t . )
Again , we identify the knowns and what we want to solve for .
We know that , and x = 200 m. We need to solve for t .
The equation works best because the only unknown in the equation is the variable t , for which we need to solve .
From this insight we see that when we input the knowns into the equation , we end up with a quadratic equation .
We need to rearrange the equation to solve for t , then substituting the knowns into the equation : We then simplify the equation .
The units of meters cancel because they are in each term .
We can get the units of seconds to cancel by taking t = t s , where t is the magnitude of time and s is the unit .
Doing so leaves We then use the quadratic formula to solve for t , which yields two solutions : t = 10.0 and t = −20.0 .
A negative value for time is unreasonable , since it would mean the event happened 20 s before the motion began .
We can discard that solution .
Thus , Whenever an equation contains an unknown squared , there are two solutions .
In some problems both solutions are meaningful ; in others , only one solution is reasonable .
The 10.0-s answer seems reasonable for a typical freeway on-ramp .
Check Your Understanding A manned rocket accelerates at a rate of 20 m/s during launch .
How long does it take the rocket to reach a velocity of 400 m/s ?
A spaceship has left Earth ’ s orbit and is on its way to the Moon .
It accelerates at 20 m/s for 2 min and covers a distance of 1000 km .
What are the initial and final velocities of the spaceship ?
We are asked to find the initial and final velocities of the spaceship .
Looking at the kinematic equations , we see that one equation will not give the answer .
We must use one kinematic equation to solve for one of the velocities and substitute it into another kinematic equation to get the second velocity .
Thus , we solve two of the kinematic equations simultaneously .
First we solve for using Then we substitute into to solve for the final velocity : There are six variables in displacement , time , velocity , and acceleration that describe motion in one dimension .
The initial conditions of a given problem can be many combinations of these variables .
Because of this diversity , solutions may not be as easy as simple substitutions into one of the equations .
This example illustrates that solutions to kinematics may require solving two simultaneous kinematic equations .
With the basics of kinematics established , we can go on to many other interesting examples and applications .
In the process of developing kinematics , we have also glimpsed a general approach to problem solving that produces both correct answers and insights into physical relationships .
The next level of complexity in our kinematics problems involves the motion of two interrelated bodies , called two-body pursuit problems .
Up until this point we have looked at examples of motion involving a single body .
Even for the problem with two cars and the stopping distances on wet and dry roads , we divided this problem into two separate problems to find the answers .
In a two-body pursuit problem , the motions of the objects are coupled—meaning , the unknown we seek depends on the motion of both objects .
To solve these problems we write the equations of motion for each object and then solve them simultaneously to find the unknown .
This is illustrated in .
The time and distance required for car 1 to catch car 2 depends on the initial distance car 1 is from car 2 as well as the velocities of both cars and the acceleration of car 1 .
The kinematic equations describing the motion of both cars must be solved to find these unknowns .
Consider the following example .
A cheetah waits in hiding behind a bush .
The cheetah spots a gazelle running past at 10 m/s .
At the instant the gazelle passes the cheetah , the cheetah accelerates from rest at 4 m/s to catch the gazelle .
( a ) How long does it take the cheetah to catch the gazelle ?
( b ) What is the displacement of the gazelle and cheetah ?
We use the set of equations for constant acceleration to solve this problem .
Since there are two objects in motion , we have separate equations of motion describing each animal .
But what links the equations is a common parameter that has the same value for each animal .
If we look at the problem closely , it is clear the common parameter to each animal is their position x at a later time t .
Since they both start at , their displacements are the same at a later time t , when the cheetah catches up with the gazelle .
If we pick the equation of motion that solves for the displacement for each animal , we can then set the equations equal to each other and solve for the unknown , which is time .
Equation for the gazelle : The gazelle has a constant velocity , which is its average velocity , since it is not accelerating .
Therefore , we use with : Equation for the cheetah : The cheetah is accelerating from rest , so we use with and : Now we have an equation of motion for each animal with a common parameter , which can be eliminated to find the solution .
In this case , we solve for t : The gazelle has a constant velocity of 10 m/s , which is its average velocity .
The acceleration of the cheetah is 4 m/s .
Evaluating t , the time for the cheetah to reach the gazelle , we have To get the displacement , we use either the equation of motion for the cheetah or the gazelle , since they should both give the same answer .
Displacement of the cheetah : Displacement of the gazelle : We see that both displacements are equal , as expected .
It is important to analyze the motion of each object and to use the appropriate kinematic equations to describe the individual motion .
It is also important to have a good visual perspective of the two-body pursuit problem to see the common parameter that links the motion of both objects .
Check Your Understanding A bicycle has a constant velocity of 10 m/s .
A person starts from rest and runs to catch up to the bicycle in 30 s. What is the acceleration of the person ?
An interesting application of through is called free fall , which describes the motion of an object falling in a gravitational field , such as near the surface of Earth or other celestial objects of planetary size .
Let ’ s assume the body is falling in a straight line perpendicular to the surface , so its motion is one-dimensional .
For example , we can estimate the depth of a vertical mine shaft by dropping a rock into it and listening for the rock to hit the bottom .
But “ falling , ” in the context of free fall , does not necessarily imply the body is moving from a greater height to a lesser height .
If a ball is thrown upward , the equations of free fall apply equally to its ascent as well as its descent .
The most remarkable and unexpected fact about falling objects is that if air resistance and friction are negligible , then in a given location all objects fall toward the center of Earth with the same constant acceleration , independent of their mass .
This experimentally determined fact is unexpected because we are so accustomed to the effects of air resistance and friction that we expect light objects to fall slower than heavy ones .
Until Galileo Galilei ( 1564–1642 ) proved otherwise , people believed that a heavier object has a greater acceleration in a free fall .
We now know this is not the case .
In the absence of air resistance , heavy objects arrive at the ground at the same time as lighter objects when dropped from the same height .
In the real world , air resistance can cause a lighter object to fall slower than a heavier object of the same size .
A tennis ball reaches the ground after a baseball dropped at the same time .
( It might be difficult to observe the difference if the height is not large . )
Air resistance opposes the motion of an object through the air , and friction between objects—such as between clothes and a laundry chute or between a stone and a pool into which it is dropped—also opposes motion between them .
For the ideal situations of these first few chapters , an object falling without air resistance or friction is defined to be in free fall .
The force of gravity causes objects to fall toward the center of Earth .
The acceleration of free-falling objects is therefore called acceleration due to gravity .
Acceleration due to gravity is constant , which means we can apply the kinematic equations to any falling object where air resistance and friction are negligible .
This opens to us a broad class of interesting situations .
Acceleration due to gravity is so important that its magnitude is given its own symbol , g .
In fact , its direction defines what we call vertical .
Note that whether acceleration a in the kinematic equations has the value + g or − g depends on how we define our coordinate system .
If we define the upward direction as positive , then and if we define the downward direction as positive , then .
The best way to see the basic features of motion involving gravity is to start with the simplest situations and then progress toward more complex ones .
So , we start by considering straight up-and-down motion with no air resistance or friction .
These assumptions mean the velocity ( if there is any ) is vertical .
If an object is dropped , we know the initial velocity is zero when in free fall .
When the object has left contact with whatever held or threw it , the object is in free fall .
When the object is thrown , it has the same initial speed in free fall as it did before it was released .
When the object comes in contact with the ground or any other object , it is no longer in free fall and its acceleration of g is no longer valid .
Under these circumstances , the motion is one-dimensional and has constant acceleration of magnitude g .
We represent vertical displacement with the symbol y .
We assume here that acceleration equals − g ( with the positive direction upward ) .
Decide on the sign of the acceleration of gravity .
In through , acceleration g is negative , which says the positive direction is upward and the negative direction is downward .
In some problems , it may be useful to have acceleration g as positive , indicating the positive direction is downward .
Draw a sketch of the problem .
This helps visualize the physics involved .
Record the knowns and unknowns from the problem description .
This helps devise a strategy for selecting the appropriate equations to solve the problem .
Decide which of through are to be used to solve for the unknowns .
shows the positions of a ball , at 1-s intervals , with an initial velocity of 4.9 m/s downward , that is thrown from the top of a 98-m-high building .
( a ) How much time elapses before the ball reaches the ground ?
( b ) What is the velocity when it arrives at the ground ?
Choose the origin at the top of the building with the positive direction upward and the negative direction time when the position is −98 m , we use , with downward .
To find the .
Substitute the given values into the equation : This simplifies to This is a quadratic equation with roots .
The positive root is the one we are interested in , since time is the time when the ball is released at the top of the building .
( The time represents the fact that a ball thrown upward from the ground would have been in the air for 5.0 s when it passed by the top of the building moving downward at 4.9 m/s . )
Using , we have For situations when two roots are obtained from a quadratic equation in the time variable , we must look at the physical significance of both roots to determine which is correct .
Since corresponds to the time when the ball was released , the negative root would correspond to a time before the ball was released , which is not physically meaningful .
When the ball hits the ground , its velocity is not immediately zero , but as soon as the ball interacts with the ground , its acceleration is not g and it accelerates with a different value over a short time to zero velocity .
This problem shows how important it is to establish the correct coordinate system and to keep the signs of g in the kinematic equations consistent .
A batter hits a baseball straight upward at home plate and the ball is caught 5.0 s after it is struck .
( a ) What is the initial velocity of the ball ?
( b ) What is the maximum height the ball reaches ?
( c ) How long does it take to reach the maximum height ?
( d ) What is the acceleration at the top of its path ?
( e ) What is the velocity of the ball when it is caught ?
Assume the ball is hit and caught at the same location .
Choose a coordinate system with a positive y -axis that is straight up and with an origin that is at the spot where the ball is hit and caught .
gives which gives .
At the maximum height , .
With , gives or To find the time when , we use : This gives .
Since the ball rises for 2.5 s , the time to fall is 2.5 s. The acceleration is 9.8 m/s everywhere , even when the velocity is zero at the top of the path .
Although the velocity is zero at the top , it is changing at the rate of 9.8 m/s downward .
The velocity at can be determined with : The ball returns with the speed it had when it left .
This is a general property of free fall for any initial velocity .
We used a single equation to go from throw to catch , and did not have to break the motion into two segments , upward and downward .
We are used to thinking that the effect of gravity is to create free fall downward toward Earth .
It is important to understand , as illustrated in this example , that objects moving upward away from Earth are also in a state of free fall .
Check Your Understanding A chunk of ice breaks off a glacier and falls 30.0 m before it hits the water .
Assuming it falls freely ( there is no air resistance ) , how long does it take to hit the water ?
Which quantity increases faster , the speed of the ice chunk or its distance traveled ?
A small rocket with a booster blasts off and heads straight upward .
When at a height of and velocity of 200.0 m/s , it releases its booster .
( a ) What is the maximum height the booster attains ?
( b ) What is the velocity of the booster at a height of 6.0 km ?
Neglect air resistance .
We need to select the coordinate system for the acceleration of gravity , which we take as negative downward .
We are given the initial velocity of the booster and its height .
We consider the point of release as the origin .
We know the velocity is zero at the maximum position within the acceleration interval ; thus , the velocity of the booster is zero at its maximum height , so we can use this information as well .
From these observations , we use , which gives us the maximum height of the booster .
We also use to give the velocity at 6.0 km .
The initial velocity of the booster is 200.0 m/s .
With , we can solve for y : This solution gives the maximum height of the booster in our coordinate system , which has its origin at the point of release , so the maximum height of the booster is roughly 7.0 km .
An altitude of 6.0 km corresponds to in the coordinate system we are using .
The other initial conditions are .
We have , from , We have both a positive and negative solution in ( b ) .
Since our coordinate system has the positive direction upward , the +142.8 m/s corresponds to a positive upward velocity at 6000 m during the upward leg of the trajectory of the booster .
The value v = −142.8 m/s corresponds to the velocity at 6000 m on the downward leg .
This example is also important in that an object is given an initial velocity at the origin of our coordinate system , but the origin is at an altitude above the surface of Earth , which must be taken into account when forming the solution .
Visit to learn about graphing polynomials .
The shape of the curve changes as the constants are adjusted .
View the curves for the individual terms ( for example , y = bx ) to see how they add to generate the polynomial curve .
This section assumes you have enough background in calculus to be familiar with integration .
In and we introduced the kinematic functions of velocity and acceleration using the derivative .
By taking the derivative of the position function we found the velocity function , and likewise by taking the derivative of the velocity function we found the acceleration function .
Using integral calculus , we can work backward and calculate the velocity function from the acceleration function , and the position function from the velocity function .
Let ’ s begin with a particle with an acceleration a ( t ) which is a known function of time .
Since the time derivative of the velocity function is acceleration , we can take the indefinite integral of both sides , finding where C is a constant of integration .
Since , the velocity is given by Similarly , the time derivative of the position function is the velocity function , Thus , we can use the same mathematical manipulations we just used and find where C is a second constant of integration .
We can derive the kinematic equations for a constant acceleration using these integrals .
With a ( t ) = a a constant , and doing the integration in , we find If the initial velocity is v ( 0 ) = v , then Then , C = v and which is .
Substituting this expression into gives Doing the integration , we find If x ( 0 ) = x , we have so , C = x .
Substituting back into the equation for x ( t ) , we finally have which is .
A motorboat is traveling at a constant velocity of 5.0 m/s when it starts to decelerate to arrive at the dock .
Its acceleration is .
( a ) What is the velocity function of the motorboat ?
( b ) At what time does the velocity reach zero ?
( c ) What is the position function of the motorboat ?
( d ) What is the displacement of the motorboat from the time it begins to decelerate to when the velocity is zero ?
( e ) Graph the velocity and position functions .
( a ) To get the velocity function we must integrate and use initial conditions to find the constant of integration .
( b ) We set the velocity function equal to zero and solve for t .
( c ) Similarly , we must integrate to find the position function and use initial conditions to find the constant of integration .
( d ) Since the initial position is taken to be zero , we only have to evaluate the position function at .
We take t = 0 to be the time when the boat starts to decelerate .
From the functional form of the acceleration we can solve to get v ( t ) : At t = 0 we have v ( 0 ) = 5.0 m/s = 0 + C , so C = 5.0 m/s or .
Solve : At t = 0 , we set x ( 0 ) = 0 = x , since we are only interested in the displacement from when the boat starts to decelerate .
We have Therefore , the equation for the position is Since the initial position is taken to be zero , we only have to evaluate the position function at the time when the velocity is zero .
This occurs at t = 6.3 s. Therefore , the displacement is The acceleration function is linear in time so the integration involves simple polynomials .
In , we see that if we extend the solution beyond the point when the velocity is zero , the velocity becomes negative and the boat reverses direction .
This tells us that solutions can give us information outside our immediate interest and we should be careful when interpreting them .
Check Your Understanding A particle starts from rest and has an acceleration function .
( a ) What is the velocity function ?
( b ) What is the position function ?
( c ) When is the velocity zero ?
After all , most objects in our universe do not move in straight lines ; rather , they follow curved paths .
From kicked footballs to the flight paths of birds to the orbital motions of celestial bodies and down to the flow of blood plasma in your veins , most motion follows curved trajectories .
Fortunately , the treatment of motion in one dimension in the previous chapter has given us a foundation on which to build , as the concepts of position , displacement , velocity , and acceleration defined in one dimension can be expanded to two and three dimensions .
Consider the Red Arrows , also known as the Royal Air Force Aerobatic team of the United Kingdom .
Each jet follows a unique curved trajectory in three-dimensional airspace , as well as has a unique velocity and acceleration .
Thus , to describe the motion of any of the jets accurately , we must assign to each jet a unique position vector in three dimensions as well as a unique velocity and acceleration vector .
We can apply the same basic equations for displacement , velocity , and acceleration we derived in to describe the motion of the jets in two and three dimensions , but with some modifications—in particular , the inclusion of vectors .
In this chapter we also explore two special types of motion in two dimensions : projectile motion and circular motion .
Last , we conclude with a discussion of relative motion .
In the chapter-opening picture , each jet has a relative motion with respect to any other jet in the group or to the people observing the air show on the ground .
Displacement and velocity in two or three dimensions are straightforward extensions of the one-dimensional definitions .
However , now they are vector quantities , so calculations with them have to follow the rules of vector algebra , not scalar algebra .
To describe motion in two and three dimensions , we must first establish a coordinate system and a convention for the axes .
We generally use the coordinates x , y , and z to locate a particle at point P ( x , y , z ) in three dimensions .
Note the orientation of the x , y , and z axes .
This orientation is called a right-handed coordinate system and it is used throughout the chapter .
With our definition of the position of a particle in three-dimensional space , we can formulate the three-dimensional displacement .
shows a particle at time located at with position vector the At a later time particle is located at with position vector from .
The displacement vector is found by subtracting Vector addition is discussed in .
Note that this is the same operation we did in one dimension , but now the vectors are in three-dimensional space .
The following examples illustrate the concept of displacement in multiple dimensions .
A satellite is in a circular polar orbit around Earth at an altitude of 400 km—meaning , it passes directly overhead at the North and South Poles .
What is the magnitude and direction of the displacement vector from when it is directly over the North Pole to when it is at latitude ?
We make a picture of the problem to visualize the solution graphically .
This will aid in our understanding of the displacement .
We then use unit vectors to solve for the displacement .
shows the surface of Earth and a circle that represents the orbit of the satellite .
Although satellites are moving in three-dimensional space , they follow trajectories of ellipses , which can be graphed in two dimensions .
The position vectors are drawn from the center of Earth , which we take to be the origin of the coordinate system , with the y -axis as north and the x -axis as east .
The vector between them is the displacement of the satellite .
We take the radius of Earth as 6370 km , so the length of each position vector is 6770 km .
When plotting the displacement , we need to include its components as well as its magnitude and the angle it makes with a chosen axis—in this case , the x -axis .
Note that the satellite took a curved path along its circular orbit to get from its initial position to its final position in this example .
It also could have traveled 4787 km east , then 11,557 km south to arrive at the same location .
Both of these paths are longer than the length of the displacement vector .
In fact , the displacement vector gives the shortest path between two points in one , two , or three dimensions .
Many applications in physics can have a series of displacements , as discussed in the previous chapter .
The total displacement is the sum of the individual displacements , only this time , we need to be careful , because we are adding vectors .
We illustrate this concept with an example of Brownian motion .
Brownian motion is a chaotic random motion of particles suspended in a fluid , resulting from collisions with the molecules of the fluid .
This motion is three-dimensional .
The displacements in numerical order of a particle undergoing Brownian motion could look like the following , in micrometers : What is the total displacement of the particle from the origin ?
We form the sum of the displacements and add them as vectors : To complete the solution , we express the displacement as a magnitude and direction , with respect to the x -axis in the xzplane .
From the figure we can see the magnitude of the total displacement is less than the sum of the magnitudes of the individual displacements .
In the previous chapter we found the instantaneous velocity by calculating the derivative of the position function with respect to time .
We can do the same operation in two and three dimensions , but we use vectors .
The instantaneous velocity vector is now Let ’ s look at the relative orientation of the position vector and velocity vector graphically .
In we show the which give the position of a particle moving along a path represented by the gray line .
vectors As goes to zero , the velocity vector , given by , becomes tangent to the path of the particle at time t .
( b ) What is the average velocity between 1.0 s and 3.0 s ?
This need not be the case in general .
In fact , most of the time , instantaneous and average velocities are not the same .
Check Your Understanding The position function of a particle is ( a ) What is the instantaneous velocity at t = 3 s ?
( b ) Is the average velocity between 2 s and 4 s equal to the instantaneous velocity at t = 3 s ?
When we look at the three-dimensional equations for position and velocity written in unit vector notation , and , we see the components of these equations are separate and unique functions of time that do not depend on one another .
Motion along the x direction has no part of its motion along the y and z directions , and similarly for the other two coordinate axes .
Thus , the motion of an object in two or three dimensions can be divided into separate , independent motions along the perpendicular axes of the coordinate system in which the motion takes place .
To illustrate this concept with respect to displacement , consider a woman walking from point A to point B in a city with square blocks .
The woman taking the path from A to B may walk east for so many blocks and then north ( two perpendicular directions ) for another set of blocks to arrive at B .
How far she walks east is affected only by her motion eastward .
Similarly , how far she walks north is affected only by her motion northward .
In the kinematic description of motion , we are able to treat the horizontal and vertical components of motion separately .
In many cases , motion in the horizontal direction does not affect motion in the vertical direction , and vice versa .
An example illustrating the independence of vertical and horizontal motions is given by two baseballs .
One baseball is dropped from rest .
At the same instant , another is thrown horizontally from the same height and it follows a curved path .
A stroboscope captures the positions of the balls at fixed time intervals as they fall .
It is remarkable that for each flash of the strobe , the vertical positions of the two balls are the same .
This similarity implies vertical motion is independent of whether the ball is moving horizontally .
( Assuming no air resistance , the vertical motion of a falling object is influenced by gravity only , not by any horizontal forces . )
Careful examination of the ball thrown horizontally shows it travels the same horizontal distance between flashes .
This is because there are no additional forces on the ball in the horizontal direction after it is thrown .
This result means horizontal velocity is constant and is affected neither by vertical motion nor by gravity ( which is vertical ) .
Note this case is true for ideal conditions only .
In the real world , air resistance affects the speed of the balls in both directions .
The two-dimensional curved path of the horizontally thrown ball is composed of two independent one-dimensional motions ( horizontal and vertical ) .
The key to analyzing such motion , called projectile motion , is to resolve it into motions along perpendicular directions .
Resolving two-dimensional motion into perpendicular components is possible because the components are independent .
In addition to obtaining the displacement and velocity vectors of an object in motion , we often want to know its acceleration vector at any point in time along its trajectory .
This acceleration vector is the instantaneous acceleration and it can be obtained from the derivative with respect to time of the velocity function , as we have seen in a previous chapter .
The only difference in two or three dimensions is that these are now vector quantities .
( b ) A particle has a velocity of What is the acceleration vector at t = 2.0 s ?
Find its magnitude and direction .
( a ) We take the first derivative with respect to time of the velocity function to find the acceleration .
The derivative is taken component by component : ( b ) Evaluating gives us the direction in unit vector notation .
The magnitude of the acceleration is In this example we find that acceleration has a time dependence and is changing throughout the motion .
Let ’ s consider a different velocity function for the particle .
( a ) What is the velocity ?
( b ) What is A particle has a position function the acceleration ?
( c ) Describe the motion from t = 0 s. We can gain some insight into the problem by looking at the position function .
It is linear in y and z , so we know the acceleration in these directions is zero when we take the second derivative .
( b ) Taking the derivative of the velocity function , we find The acceleration vector is a constant in the negative x -direction .
( c ) The trajectory of the particle can be seen in .
Let ’ s look in the y and z directions first .
The particle ’ s position increases steadily as a function of time with a constant velocity in these directions .
In the x direction , however , the particle follows a path in positive x until t = 5 s , when it reverses direction .
We know this from looking at the velocity function , which becomes zero at this time and negative thereafter .
We also know this because the acceleration is negative and constant—meaning , the particle is decelerating , or accelerating in the negative direction .
The particle ’ s position reaches 25 m , where it then reverses direction and begins to accelerate in the negative x direction .
The position reaches zero at t = 10 s. By graphing the trajectory of the particle , we can better understand its motion , given by the numerical results of the kinematic equations .
Your Check Understanding form where a , b , and c are constants .
What can be said about the functional form of the velocity function ?
acceleration Suppose function has the the Multidimensional motion with constant acceleration can be treated the same way as shown in the previous chapter for one-dimensional motion .
Earlier we showed that three-dimensional motion is equivalent to three one-dimensional motions , each along an axis perpendicular to the others .
To develop the relevant equations in each direction , let ’ s consider the twodimensional problem of a particle moving in the xy plane with constant acceleration , ignoring the z -component for the moment .
The acceleration vector is Each component of the motion has a separate set of equations similar to – of the previous chapter on one-dimensional motion .
We show only the equations for position and velocity in the x and y -directions .
A similar set of kinematic equations could be written for motion in the z -direction : Here the subscript 0 denotes the initial position or velocity .
to can be substituted into and without the z -component to obtain the position vector and velocity vector as a function of time in two dimensions : The following example illustrates a practical use of the kinematic equations in two dimensions .
shows a skier moving with an acceleration of down a slope of at t = 0 .
With the origin of the coordinate system at the front of the lodge , her initial position and velocity are and ( a ) What are the xand y -components of the skier ’ s position and velocity as functions of time ?
( b ) What are her position and velocity at t = 10.0 s ?
Since we are evaluating the components of the motion equations in the x and y directions , we need to find the components of the acceleration and put them into the kinematic equations .
The components of the acceleration are found by referring to the coordinate system in .
Then , by inserting the components of the initial position and velocity into the motion equations , we can solve for her position and velocity at a later time t .
( a ) The origin of the coordinate system is at the top of the hill with yaxis vertically upward and the xaxis horizontal .
By looking at the trajectory of the skier , the xcomponent of the acceleration is positive and the ycomponent is negative .
It is useful to know that , given the initial conditions of position , velocity , and acceleration of an object , we can find the position , velocity , and acceleration at any later time .
With through we have completed the set of expressions for the position , velocity , and acceleration of an object moving in two or three dimensions .
If the trajectories of the objects look something like the “ Red Arrows ” in the opening picture for the chapter , then the expressions for the position , velocity , and acceleration can be quite complicated .
In the sections to follow we examine two special cases of motion in two and three dimensions by looking at projectile motion and circular motion .
At this , you can explore the position velocity and acceleration of a ladybug with an interactive simulation that allows you to change these parameters .
Projectile motion is the motion of an object thrown or projected into the air , subject only to acceleration as a result of gravity .
The applications of projectile motion in physics and engineering are numerous .
Some examples include meteors as they enter Earth ’ s atmosphere , fireworks , and the motion of any ball in sports .
Such objects are called projectiles and their path is called a trajectory .
The motion of falling objects as discussed in is a simple one-dimensional type of projectile motion in which there is no horizontal movement .
In this section , we consider twodimensional projectile motion , and our treatment neglects the effects of air resistance .
The most important fact to remember here is that motions along perpendicular axes are independent and thus can be analyzed separately .
We discussed this fact in , where we saw that vertical and horizontal motions are independent .
The key to analyzing two-dimensional projectile motion is to break it into two motions : one along the horizontal axis and the other along the vertical .
( This choice of axes is the most sensible because acceleration resulting from gravity is vertical ; thus , there is no acceleration along the horizontal axis when air resistance is negligible . )
As is customary , we call the horizontal axis the x -axis and the vertical axis the y -axis .
It is not required that we use this choice of axes ; it is simply convenient in the case of gravitational acceleration .
In other cases we may choose a different set to be the total displacement , and of axes .
illustrates the notation for displacement , where we define and are its component vectors along the horizontal and vertical axes , respectively .
The magnitudes of these vectors are s , x , and y .
To describe projectile motion completely , we must include velocity and acceleration , as well as displacement .
We must find their components along the xand y -axes .
Let ’ s assume all forces except gravity ( such as air resistance and friction , for example ) are negligible .
The kinematic equations for motion in a uniform gravitational field become kinematic equations with Horizontal Motion Vertical Motion Using this set of equations , we can analyze projectile motion , keeping in mind some important points .
Resolve the motion into horizontal and vertical components along the x and y -axes .
The magnitudes of the along these axes are x and y .
The magnitudes of the components of velocity components of displacement are where v is the magnitude of the velocity and θ is its direction relative to the horizontal , as shown in .
Treat the motion as two independent one-dimensional motions : one horizontal and the other vertical .
Use the kinematic equations for horizontal and vertical motion presented earlier .
Solve for the unknowns in the two separate motions : one horizontal and one vertical .
Note that the only common variable between the motions is time t .
The problem-solving procedures here are the same as those for one-dimensional kinematics and are illustrated in the following solved examples .
The fuse is timed to ignite the shell just as it reaches its highest point above the ground .
( a ) Calculate the height at which the shell explodes .
( b ) How much time passes between the launch of the shell and the explosion ?
( c ) What is the horizontal displacement of the shell when it explodes ?
( d ) What is the total displacement from the point of launch to the highest point ?
The motion can be broken into horizontal and vertical motions in which and We can then define and to be zero and solve for the desired quantities .
( a ) By “ height ” we mean the altitude or vertical position y above the starting point .
Thus , the component of the initial velocity in the y direction .
It is given by and y is Thus , we have Note that because up is positive , the initial vertical velocity is positive , as is the maximum height , but the acceleration resulting from gravity is negative .
Note also that the maximum height depends only on the vertical component of the initial velocity , so that any projectile with a 67.6-m/s initial vertical component of velocity reaches a maximum height of 233 m ( neglecting air resistance ) .
The numbers in this example are reasonable for large fireworks displays , the shells of which do reach such heights before exploding .
In practice , air resistance is not completely negligible , so the initial velocity would have to be somewhat larger than that given to reach the same height .
( b ) As in many physics problems , there is more than one way to solve for the time the projectile reaches its highest point .
In this case , the easiest method is to use Because at the apex , this equation reduces to simply or This time is also reasonable for large fireworks .
If you are able to see the launch of fireworks , notice that several seconds pass before the shell explodes .
Another way of finding the time is by using This is left for you as an exercise to complete .
( c ) Because air resistance is negligible , and the horizontal velocity is constant , as discussed earlier .
The horizontal displacement is the horizontal velocity multiplied by time as given by where is equal to zero .
Thus , where is the x -component of the velocity , which is given by Time t for both motions is the same , so x is Horizontal motion is a constant velocity in the absence of air resistance .
The horizontal displacement found here could be useful in keeping the fireworks fragments from falling on spectators .
When the shell explodes , air resistance has a major effect , and many fragments land directly below .
To see why this is , review , which shows the curvature of the trajectory toward the ground level .
When solving ( a ) , the expression we found for y is valid for any projectile motion when air resistance is negligible .
Call the maximum height y = h .
Then , This equation defines the maximum height of a projectile above its launch position and it depends only on the vertical component of the initial velocity .
Check Your Understanding A rock is thrown horizontally off a cliff high with a velocity of 15.0 m/s .
( a ) Define the origin of the coordinate system .
( b ) Which equation describes the horizontal motion ?
( c ) Which equations describe the vertical motion ?
( d ) What is the rock ’ s velocity at the point of impact ?
A tennis player wins a match at Arthur Ashe stadium and hits a ball into the stands at 30 m/s and at an angle above the horizontal .
On its way down , the ball is caught by a spectator 10 m above the point where the ball was hit .
( a ) Calculate the time it takes the tennis ball to reach the spectator .
( b ) What are the magnitude and direction of the ball ’ s velocity at impact ?
Again , resolving this two-dimensional motion into two independent one-dimensional motions allows us to solve for the desired quantities .
The time a projectile is in the air is governed by its vertical motion alone .
Thus , we solve for t first .
While the ball is rising and falling vertically , the horizontal motion continues at a constant velocity .
at This example asks for the final velocity .
Thus , we recombine the vertical and horizontal results to obtain final time t , determined in the first part of the example .
( a ) While the ball is in the air , it rises and then falls to a final position 10.0 m higher than its starting altitude .
Thus , any projectile that has an initial vertical velocity of 21.2 m/s and lands 10.0 m below its starting altitude spends 3.79 s in the air .
( b ) We can find the final horizontal and vertical velocities and with the use of the result from ( a ) .
Then , and the angle it makes with we can combine them to find the magnitude of the total velocity vector the horizontal .
Since is constant , we can solve for it at any horizontal location .
We choose the starting point because we know both the initial velocity and the initial angle .
Thus , any projectile that has an initial vertical velocity of 21.2 m/s and lands 10.0 m below its starting altitude spends 3.79 s in the air .
( b ) The negative angle means the velocity is below the horizontal at the point of impact .
This result is consistent with the fact that the ball is impacting at a point on the other side of the apex of the trajectory and therefore has a negative y component of the velocity .
The magnitude of the velocity is less than the magnitude of the initial velocity we expect since it is impacting 10.0 m above the launch elevation .
Of interest are the time of flight , trajectory , and range for a projectile launched on a flat horizontal surface and impacting on the same surface .
In this case , kinematic equations give useful expressions for these quantities , which are derived in the following sections .
We can solve for the time of flight of a projectile that is both launched and impacts on a flat horizontal surface by performing some manipulations of the kinematic equations .
We note the position and displacement in y must be zero at launch and at impact on an even surface .
Thus , we set the displacement in y equal to zero and find Factoring , we have Solving for t gives us This is the time of flight for a projectile both launched and impacting on a flat horizontal surface .
does not apply when the projectile lands at a different elevation than it was launched , as we saw in of the tennis player hitting the ball into the stands .
The other solution , t = 0 , corresponds to the time at launch .
The time of flight is linearly proportional to the initial velocity in the y direction and inversely proportional to g .
Thus , on the Moon , where gravity is one-sixth that of Earth , a projectile launched with the same velocity as on Earth would be airborne six times as long .
The trajectory of a projectile can be found by eliminating the time variable t from the kinematic equations for arbitrary t and solving for y ( x ) .
We take so the projectile is launched from the origin .
Factoring , we have The position y is zero for both the launch point and the impact point , since we are again considering only a flat horizontal surface .
Setting y = 0 in this equation gives solutions x = 0 , corresponding to the launch point , and corresponding to the impact point .
Using the trigonometric identity and setting x = R for range , we find Note particularly that is valid only for launch and impact on a horizontal surface .
We see the range is directly proportional to the square of the initial speed and , and it is inversely proportional to the acceleration of gravity .
Thus , on the Moon , the range would be six times greater than on Earth for the same initial velocity .
Furthermore , we see from the factor that the range is maximum at These results are shown in .
In ( a ) we see that the greater the initial velocity , the greater the range .
In ( b ) , we see that the range is maximum at This is true only for conditions neglecting air resistance .
If air resistance is considered , the maximum angle is somewhat smaller .
It is interesting that the same range is found for two initial launch angles that sum to The projectile launched with the smaller angle has a lower apex than the higher angle , but they both have the same range .
A golfer finds himself in two different situations on different holes .
On the second hole he is 120 m from the green and wants to hit the ball 90 m and let it run onto the green .
He angles the shot low to the ground at to the horizontal to let the ball roll after impact .
On the fourth hole he is 90 m from the green and wants to let the ball drop with a minimum amount of rolling after impact .
Here , he angles the shot at to the horizontal to minimize rolling after impact .
Both shots are hit and impacted on a level surface .
( a ) What is the initial speed of the ball at the second hole ?
( b ) What is the initial speed of the ball at the fourth hole ?
( c ) Write the trajectory equation for both cases .
( d ) Graph the trajectories .
We see that the range equation has the initial speed and angle , so we can solve for the initial speed for both ( a ) and ( b ) .
When we have the initial speed , we can use this value to write the trajectory equation .
( a ) ( b ) ( c ) ( d ) Using a graphing utility , we can compare the two trajectories , which are shown in .
Check Your Understanding If the two golf shots in were launched at the same speed , which shot would have the greatest range ?
When we speak of the range of a projectile on level ground , we assume R is very small compared with the circumference of Earth .
If , however , the range is large , Earth curves away below the projectile and the acceleration resulting from gravity changes direction along the path .
The range is larger than predicted by the range equation given earlier because the projectile has farther to fall than it would on level ground , as shown in , which is based on a drawing in Newton ’ s Principia .
If the initial speed is great enough , the projectile goes into orbit .
Earth ’ s surface drops 5 m every 8000 m. In 1 s an object falls 5 m without air resistance .
Thus , if an object is given a horizontal velocity of 8000 m/s ( or 18,000 mi/hr ) near Earth ’ s surface , it will go into orbit around the planet because the surface continuously falls away from the object .
This is roughly the speed of the Space Shuttle in a low Earth orbit when it was operational , or any satellite in a low Earth orbit .
These and other aspects of orbital motion , such as Earth ’ s rotation , are covered in greater depth in .
At , learn about projectile motion in terms of the launch angle and initial velocity .
Uniform circular motion is a specific type of motion in which an object travels in a circle with a constant speed .
For example , any point on a propeller spinning at a constant rate is executing uniform circular motion .
Other examples are the second , minute , and hour hands of a watch .
It is remarkable that points on these rotating objects are actually accelerating , although the rotation rate is a constant .
To see this , we must analyze the motion in terms of vectors .
In one-dimensional kinematics , objects with a constant speed have zero acceleration .
However , in twoand threedimensional kinematics , even if the speed is a constant , a particle can have acceleration if it moves along a curved trajectory such as a circle .
In this case the velocity vector is changing , or This is shown in .
As the particle moves counterclockwise in time on the circular path , its position vector moves from to The velocity vector has constant magnitude and is tangent to the path as it changes from to changing its direction only .
Since the velocity vector is perpendicular to the position vector the triangles formed by the position vectors and and the velocity vectors and are similar .
Furthermore , since and the two triangles are isosceles .
Summarizing , a particle moving in a circle at a constant speed has an acceleration with magnitude The direction of the acceleration vector is toward the center of the circle .
A jet is flying at 134.1 m/s along a straight line and makes a turn along a circular path level with the ground .
What does the radius of the circle have to be to produce a centripetal acceleration of 1 g on the pilot and jet toward the center of the circular trajectory ?
Given the speed of the jet , we can solve for the radius of the circle in the expression for the centripetal acceleration .
Check Your Understanding A flywheel has a radius of 20.0 cm .
What is the speed of a point on the edge of the flywheel if it experiences a centripetal acceleration of Centripetal acceleration can have a wide range of values , depending on the speed and radius of curvature of the circular path .
Typical centripetal accelerations are given in the following table .
shows a particle executing A particle executing circular motion can be described by its position vector circular motion in a counterclockwise direction .
As the particle moves on the circle , its position vector sweeps out the angle making an angle with the xaxis is shown with its components along the x and y -axes .
with the xaxis .
Vector The magnitude of the position vector is and is also the radius of the circle , so that in terms of its components , Here , is a constant called the angular frequency of the particle .
The angular frequency has units of radians ( rad ) per second and is simply the number of radians of angular measure through which the particle passes per second .
The angle that the position vector has at any particular time is .
Sketch the trajectory .
From the given data , the proton has period and angular frequency : The position of the particle at with A = 0.175 m is From this result we see that the proton is located slightly below the x -axis .
This is shown in .
We picked the initial position of the particle to be on the xaxis .
This was completely arbitrary .
If a different starting position were given , we would have a different final position at t = 200 ns .
Circular motion does not have to be at a constant speed .
A particle can travel in a circle and speed up or slow down , showing an acceleration in the direction of the motion .
In uniform circular motion , the particle executing circular motion has a constant speed and the circle is at a fixed radius .
If the speed of the particle is changing as well , then we introduce an additional acceleration in the direction tangential to the circle .
Such accelerations occur at a point on a top that is changing its spin rate , or any accelerating rotor .
In we showed that centripetal acceleration is the time rate of change of the direction of the velocity vector .
Thus , a particle in circular motion with a tangential acceleration has a total acceleration that is the vector sum of the centripetal and tangential accelerations : The acceleration vectors are shown in .
Note that the two acceleration vectors perpendicular to each other , with points at an angle between in the radial direction and and are in the tangential direction .
We are given the speed of the particle and the radius of the circle , so we can calculate centripetal acceleration easily .
The direction of the centripetal acceleration is toward the center of the circle .
We find the magnitude of the tangential acceleration by taking the derivative with respect to time of using and evaluating it at t = 2.0 s. We use this and the magnitude of the centripetal acceleration to find the total acceleration .
Centripetal acceleration is directed toward the center of the circle .
Tangential acceleration is Total acceleration is and from the tangent to the circle .
The directions of centripetal and tangential accelerations can be described more conveniently in terms of a polar coordinate system , with unit vectors in the radial and tangential directions .
This coordinate system , which is used for motion along curved paths , is discussed in detail later in the book .
Motion does not happen in isolation .
If you ’ re riding in a train moving at 10 m/s east , this velocity is measured relative to the ground on which you ’ re traveling .
However , if another train passes you at 15 m/s east , your velocity relative to this other train is different from your velocity relative to the ground .
Your velocity relative to the other train is 5 m/s west .
To explore this idea further , we first need to establish some terminology .
To discuss relative motion in one or more dimensions , we first introduce the concept of reference frames .
When we say an object has a certain velocity , we must state it has a velocity with respect to a given reference frame .
In most examples we have examined so far , this reference frame has been Earth .
If you say a person is sitting in a train moving at 10 m/s east , then you imply the person on the train is moving relative to the surface of Earth at this velocity , and Earth is the reference frame .
We can expand our view of the motion of the person on the train and say Earth is spinning in its orbit around the Sun , in which case the motion becomes more complicated .
In this case , the solar system is the reference frame .
In summary , all discussion of relative motion must define the reference frames involved .
We now develop a method to refer to reference frames in relative motion .
We introduce relative motion in one dimension first , because the velocity vectors simplify to having only two possible directions .
Take the example of the person sitting in a train moving east .
If we choose east as the positive direction and Earth as the reference frame , then we can write the velocity of the train with respect to the Earth as east , where the subscripts TE refer to train and Earth .
Let ’ s now say the person gets up out of her seat and walks toward the back of the train at 2 m/s .
This tells us she has a velocity relative to the reference frame of the train .
Since the person is We can add walking west , in the negative direction , we write her velocity with respect to the train as the two velocity vectors to find the velocity of the person with respect to Earth .
This relative velocity is written as Note the ordering of the subscripts for the various reference frames in .
The subscripts for the coupling reference frame , which is the train , appear consecutively in the right-hand side of the equation .
shows the correct order of subscripts when forming the vector equation .
Adding the vectors , we find is shown in .
so the person is moving 8 m/s east with respect to Earth .
Graphically , this We can now apply these concepts to describing motion in two dimensions .
Consider a particle P and reference frames S and as shown in .
The position of the origin of as measured in S is the position of P as measured in is and the position of P as measured in S is From we see that The relative velocities are the time derivatives of the position vectors .
Therefore , The velocity of a particle relative to S is equal to its velocity relative to plus the velocity of relative to S .
We in frames A , B , and C , can extend to any number of reference frames .
A truck is traveling south at a speed of 70 km/h toward an intersection .
A car is traveling east toward the intersection at a speed of 80 km/h .
What is the velocity of the car relative to the truck ?
First , we must establish the reference frame common to both vehicles , which is Earth .
Then , we write the velocities of each with respect to the reference frame of Earth , which enables us to form a vector equation that links the car , the truck , and Earth to solve for the velocity of the car with respect to the truck .
Here , Since we have the velocity of the truck with respect to Earth , the negative of this vector is the velocity of Earth with respect to the truck : The vector diagram of this equation is shown in .
We can now solve for the velocity of the car with respect to the truck : and Drawing a vector diagram showing the velocity vectors can help in understanding the relative velocity of the two objects .
Check Your Understanding A boat heads north in still water at 4.5 m/s directly across a river that is running east at 3.0 m/s .
What is the velocity of the boat with respect to Earth ?
A pilot must fly his plane due north to reach his destination .
The plane can fly at 300 km/h in still air .
A wind is blowing out of the northeast at 90 km/h .
( a ) What is the speed of the plane relative to the ground ?
( b ) In what direction must the pilot head her plane to fly due north ?
The pilot must point her plane somewhat east of north to compensate for the wind velocity .
We need to construct a vector equation that contains the velocity of the plane with respect to the ground , the velocity of the plane with respect to the air , and the velocity of the air with respect to the ground .
Since these last two quantities are known , we can solve for the velocity of the plane with respect to the ground .
We can graph the vectors and use this diagram to evaluate the magnitude of the plane ’ s velocity with respect to the ground .
The diagram will also tell us the angle the plane ’ s velocity makes with north with respect to the air , which is the direction the pilot must head her plane .
where P = plane , A = air , and G = ground .
dimensional space measured When you drive across a bridge , you expect it to remain stable .
You also expect to speed up or slow your car in response to traffic changes .
In both cases , you deal with forces .
The forces on the bridge are in equilibrium , so it stays in place .
In contrast , the force produced by your car engine causes a change in motion .
Isaac Newton discovered the laws of motion that describe these situations .
Forces affect every moment of your life .
Your body is held to Earth by force and held together by the forces of charged particles .
When you open a door , walk down a street , lift your fork , or touch a baby ’ s face , you are applying forces .
Zooming in deeper , your body ’ s atoms are held together by electrical forces , and the core of the atom , called the nucleus , is held together by the strongest force we know—strong nuclear force .
The study of motion is called kinematics , but kinematics only describes the way objects move—their velocity and their acceleration .
Dynamics is the study of how forces affect the motion of objects and systems .
It considers the causes of motion of objects and systems of interest , where a system is anything being analyzed .
The foundation of dynamics are the laws of motion stated by Isaac Newton ( 1642–1727 ) .
These laws provide an example of the breadth and simplicity of principles under which nature functions .
They are also universal laws in that they apply to situations on Earth and in space .
Newton ’ s laws of motion were just one part of the monumental work that has made him legendary .
The development of Newton ’ s laws marks the transition from the Renaissance to the modern era .
These constraints define the realm of Newtonian mechanics .
At the beginning of the twentieth century , Albert Einstein ( 1879–1955 ) developed the theory of relativity and , along with many other scientists , quantum mechanics .
Quantum mechanics does not have the constraints present in Newtonian physics .
All of the situations we consider in this chapter , and all those preceding the introduction of relativity in , are in the realm of Newtonian physics .
Dynamics is the study of the forces that cause objects and systems to move .
To understand this , we need a working definition of force .
An intuitive definition of force —that is , a push or a pull—is a good place to start .
We know that a push or a pull has both magnitude and direction ( therefore , it is a vector quantity ) , so we can define force as the push or pull on an object with a specific magnitude and direction .
Force can be represented by vectors or expressed as a multiple of a standard force .
The push or pull on an object can vary considerably in either magnitude or direction .
For example , a cannon exerts a strong force on a cannonball that is launched into the air .
In contrast , Earth exerts only a tiny downward pull on a flea .
Our everyday experiences also give us a good idea of how multiple forces add .
If two people push in different directions on a third person , as illustrated in , we might expect the total force to be in the direction shown .
Since force is a vector , it adds just like other vectors .
Forces , like other vectors , are represented by arrows and can be added using the familiar head-to-tail method or trigonometric methods .
These ideas were developed in .
( b ) is our first example of a free-body diagram , which is a sketch showing all external forces acting on an object or system .
The object or system is represented by a single isolated point ( or free body ) , and only those forces acting on it that originate outside of the object or system—that is , external forces —are shown .
( These forces are the only ones shown because only external forces acting on the free body affect its motion .
We can ignore any internal forces within the body . )
The forces are represented by vectors extending outward from the free body .
Free-body diagrams are useful in analyzing forces acting on an object or system , and are employed extensively in the study and application of Newton ’ s laws of motion .
You will see them throughout this text and in all your studies of physics .
The following steps briefly explain how a free-body diagram is created ; we examine this strategy in more detail in .
Draw the object under consideration .
If you are treating the object as a particle , represent the object as a point .
Place this point at the origin of an xy -coordinate system .
Include all forces that act on the object , representing these forces as vectors .
However , do not include the net force on the object or the forces that the object exerts on its environment .
Resolve all force vectors into x and y -components .
Draw a separate free-body diagram for each object in the problem .
We illustrate this strategy with two examples of free-body diagrams .
The terms used in this figure are explained in more detail later in the chapter .
The steps given here are sufficient to guide you in this important problem-solving strategy .
The final section of this chapter explains in more detail how to draw free-body diagrams when working with the ideas presented in this chapter .
A quantitative definition of force can be based on some standard force , just as distance is measured in units relative to a standard length .
One possibility is to stretch a spring a certain fixed distance and use the force it exerts to pull itself back to its relaxed shape—called a restoring force —as a standard .
The magnitude of all other forces can be considered as multiples of this standard unit of force .
Many other possibilities exist for standard forces .
Some alternative definitions of force will be given later in this chapter .
Let ’ s analyze force more deeply .
Suppose a physics student sits at a table , working diligently on his homework .
What external forces act on him ?
Can we determine the origin of these forces ?
In most situations , forces are grouped into two categories : contact forces and field forces .
As you might guess , contact forces are due to direct physical contact between objects .
For example , the student in experiences the contact forces , , and , which are exerted by the chair on his posterior , the floor on his feet , and the table on his forearms , respectively .
Field forces , however , act without the necessity of physical contact between objects .
They depend on the presence of a “ field ” in the region of space surrounding the body under consideration .
Since the student is in Earth ’ s gravitational field , he feels a gravitational force ; in other words , he has weight .
You can think of a field as a property of space that is detectable by the forces it exerts .
Scientists think there are only four fundamental force fields in nature .
These are the gravitational , electromagnetic , strong nuclear , and weak fields ( we consider these four forces in nature later in this text ) .
As noted for in , the gravitational field is responsible for the weight of a body .
The forces of the electromagnetic field include those of static electricity and magnetism ; they are also responsible for the attraction among atoms in bulk matter .
Both the strong nuclear and the weak force fields are effective only over distances roughly equal to a length of scale no larger than an atomic nucleus .
Their range is so small that neither field has influence in the macroscopic world of Newtonian mechanics .
Contact forces are fundamentally electromagnetic .
While the elbow of the student in is in contact with the tabletop , the atomic charges in his skin interact electromagnetically with the charges in the surface of the table .
The net ( total ) result is the force .
Similarly , when adhesive tape sticks to a piece of paper , the atoms of the tape are intermingled with those of the paper to cause a net electromagnetic force between the two objects .
However , in the context of Newtonian mechanics , the electromagnetic origin of contact forces is not an important concern .
As previously discussed , force is a vector ; it has both magnitude and direction .
The hypotenuse of the triangle shown In this example , we have in is the resultant force , or net force .
It is a vector .
Let ’ s suppose the ice skaters now push the third ice skater with What is the resultant of these two forces ?
We must recognize that force is a vector ; therefore , we must add using the rules for vector addition : and just given .
Check Your Understanding Find the magnitude and direction of the net force in the ice skater example View this to learn how to add vectors .
Drag vectors onto a graph , change their length and angle , and sum them together .
The magnitude , angle , and components of each vector can be displayed in several formats .
Experience suggests that an object at rest remains at rest if left alone and that an object in motion tends to slow down and stop unless some effort is made to keep it moving .
However , Newton ’ s first law gives a deeper explanation of this observation .
A body at rest remains at rest or , if in motion , remains in motion at constant velocity unless acted on by a net external force .
Note the repeated use of the verb “ remains. ” We can think of this law as preserving the status quo of motion .
Also note the expression “ constant velocity ; ” this means that the object maintains a path along a straight line , since neither the magnitude nor the direction of the velocity vector changes .
We can use to consider the two parts of Newton ’ s first law .
Rather than contradicting our experience , Newton ’ s first law says that there must be a cause for any change in velocity ( a change in either magnitude or direction ) to occur .
This cause is a net external force , which we defined earlier in the chapter .
An object sliding across a table or floor slows down due to the net force of friction acting on the object .
If friction disappears , will the object still slow down ?
The idea of cause and effect is crucial in accurately describing what happens in various situations .
For example , consider what happens to an object sliding along a rough horizontal surface .
The object quickly grinds to a halt .
If we spray the surface with talcum powder to make the surface smoother , the object slides farther .
If we make the surface even smoother by rubbing lubricating oil on it , the object slides farther yet .
Extrapolating to a frictionless surface and ignoring air resistance , we can imagine the object sliding in a straight line indefinitely .
Friction is thus the cause of slowing ( consistent with Newton ’ s first law ) .
The object would not slow down if friction were eliminated .
Consider an air hockey table .
When the air is turned off , the puck slides only a short distance before friction slows it to a stop .
However , when the air is turned on , it creates a nearly frictionless surface , and the puck glides long distances without slowing down .
Additionally , if we know enough about the friction , we can accurately predict how quickly the object slows down .
Newton ’ s first law is general and can be applied to anything from an object sliding on a table to a satellite in orbit to blood pumped from the heart .
Experiments have verified that any change in velocity ( speed or direction ) must be caused by an external force .
The idea of generally applicable or universal laws is important—it is a basic feature of all laws of physics .
Identifying these laws is like recognizing patterns in nature from which further patterns can be discovered .
Regardless of the scale of an object , whether a molecule or a subatomic particle , two properties remain valid and thus of interest to physics : gravitation and inertia .
Both are connected to mass .
Roughly speaking , mass is a measure of the amount of matter in something .
Gravitation is the attraction of one mass to another , such as the attraction between yourself and Earth that holds your feet to the floor .
The magnitude of this attraction is your weight , and it is a force .
Mass is also related to inertia , the ability of an object to resist changes in its motion—in other words , to resist acceleration .
Newton ’ s first law is often called the law of inertia .
As we know from experience , some objects have more inertia than others .
It is more difficult to change the motion of a large boulder than that of a basketball , for example , because the boulder has more mass than the basketball .
In other words , the inertia of an object is measured by its mass .
The relationship between mass and weight is explored later in this chapter .
Therefore , the first law says that the velocity of an object remains constant if the net force on it is zero .
Newton ’ s first law is usually considered to be a statement about reference frames .
It provides a method for identifying a special type of reference frame : the inertial reference frame .
In principle , we can make the net force on a body zero .
If its velocity relative to a given frame is constant , then that frame is said to be inertial .
So by definition , an inertial reference frame is a reference frame in which Newton ’ s first law is valid .
Newton ’ s first law applies to objects with constant velocity .
From this fact , we can infer the following statement .
A reference frame moving at constant velocity relative to an inertial frame is also inertial .
A reference frame accelerating relative to an inertial frame is not inertial .
Are inertial frames common in nature ?
It turns out that well within experimental error , a reference frame at rest relative to the most distant , or “ fixed , ” stars is inertial .
All frames moving uniformly with respect to this fixed-star frame are also inertial .
For most problems , however , such a frame serves as a sufficiently accurate approximation to an inertial frame , because the acceleration of a point on Earth ’ s surface relative to the fixed stars is rather small .
Thus , unless indicated otherwise , we consider reference frames fixed on Earth to be inertial .
Finally , no particular inertial frame is more special than any other .
As far as the laws of nature are concerned , all inertial frames are equivalent .
In analyzing a problem , we choose one inertial frame over another simply on the basis of convenience .
Newton ’ s first law tells us about the equilibrium of a system , which is the state in which the forces on the system are balanced .
Returning to and the ice skaters in , we know that the forces combine to form a resultant force , or the net external force : To create equilibrium , we require a balancing force that will produce a net force of zero .
This force must be equal in magnitude but opposite in direction to to be See the free , we can determine the balancing force by simply finding body diagram in ( b ) .
We can give Newton ’ s first law in vector form : Referring to the ice skaters , for which we found which means the vector must be and This equation says that a net force of zero implies that the velocity of the object is constant .
( The word “ constant ” can indicate zero velocity . )
Newton ’ s first law is deceptively simple .
If a car is at rest , the only forces acting on the car are weight and the contact force of the pavement pushing up on the car .
It is easy to understand that a nonzero net force is required to change the state of motion of the car .
As a car moves with constant velocity , the friction force propels the car forward and opposes the drag force against it .
Newton ’ s laws can be applied to all physical processes involving force and motion , including something as mundane as driving a car .
( a ) Your car is parked outside your house .
Does Newton ’ s first law apply in this situation ?
Why or why not ?
( b ) Your car moves at constant velocity down the street .
Does Newton ’ s first law apply in this situation ?
Why or why not ?
In ( a ) , we are considering the first part of Newton ’ s first law , dealing with a body at rest ; in ( b ) , we look at the second part of Newton ’ s first law for a body in motion .
When your car is parked , all forces on the car must be balanced ; the vector sum is 0 N. Thus , the net force is zero , and Newton ’ s first law applies .
The acceleration of the car is zero , and in this case , the velocity is also zero .
When your car is moving at constant velocity down the street , the net force must also be zero according to Newton ’ s first law .
The car ’ s frictional force between the road and tires opposes the drag force on the car with the same magnitude , producing a net force of zero .
The body continues in its state of constant velocity until the net force becomes nonzero .
Realize that a net force of zero means that an object is either at rest or moving with constant velocity , that is , it is not accelerating .
What do you suppose happens when the car accelerates ?
We explore this idea in the next section .
As this example shows , there are two kinds of equilibrium .
In ( a ) , the car is at rest ; we say it is in static equilibrium .
In ( b ) , the forces on the car are balanced , but the car is moving ; we say that it is in dynamic equilibrium .
( We examine this idea in more detail in . )
Again , it is possible for two ( or more ) forces to act on an object yet for the object to move .
In addition , a net force of zero can not produce acceleration .
Check Your Understanding A skydiver opens his parachute , and shortly thereafter , he is moving at constant velocity .
( a ) What forces are acting on him ?
( b ) Which force is bigger ?
Engage this to predict , qualitatively , how an external force will affect the speed and direction of an object ’ s motion .
Explain the effects with the help of a freebody diagram .
Use free-body diagrams to draw position , velocity , acceleration , and force graphs , and vice versa .
Explain how the graphs relate to one another .
Given a scenario or a graph , sketch all four graphs .
Newton ’ s second law is closely related to his first law .
It mathematically gives the cause-and-effect relationship between force and changes in motion .
Newton ’ s second law is quantitative and is used extensively to calculate what happens in situations involving a force .
Before we can write down Newton ’ s second law as a simple equation that gives the exact relationship of force , mass , and acceleration , we need to sharpen some ideas we mentioned earlier .
First , what do we mean by a change in motion ?
The answer is that a change in motion is equivalent to a change in velocity .
A change in velocity means , by definition , that there is acceleration .
Newton ’ s first law says that a net external force causes a change in motion ; thus , we see that a net external force causes nonzero acceleration .
We defined external force in as force acting on an object or system that originates outside of the object or system .
Let ’ s consider this concept further .
An intuitive notion of external is correct—it is outside the system of interest .
For example , in ( a ) , the system of interest is the car plus the person within it .
The two forces exerted by the two students are external forces .
In contrast , an internal force acts between elements of the system .
Thus , the force the person in the car exerts to hang on to the steering wheel is an internal force between elements of the system of interest .
Only external forces affect the motion of a system , according to Newton ’ s first law .
( The internal forces cancel each other out , as explained in the next section . )
Therefore , we must define the boundaries of the system before we can determine which forces are external .
Sometimes , the system is obvious , whereas at other times , identifying the boundaries of a system is more subtle .
The concept of a system is fundamental to many areas of physics , as is the correct application of Newton ’ s laws .
This concept is revisited many times in the study of physics .
From this example , you can see that different forces exerted on the same mass produce different accelerations .
In ( a ) , the two students push a car with a driver in it .
Arrows representing all external forces are shown .
The system of interest is the car and its driver .
The vector opposing the motion of the car .
( We discuss friction in more detail in the next chapter . )
In ( b ) , all external forces acting on the system add together to produce the net force The free-body diagram shows all of the forces acting on the system of interest .
The dot represents the center of mass of the system .
Each force vector extends from this dot .
Because there are two forces acting to the right , the vectors are shown collinearly .
Finally , in ( c ) , a larger net external force produces a larger acceleration when the tow truck pulls the car .
It seems reasonable that acceleration would be directly proportional to and in the same direction as the net external force acting on a system .
This assumption has been verified experimentally and is illustrated in .
Once the system of interest is chosen , identify the external forces and ignore the internal ones .
It is a tremendous simplification to disregard the numerous internal forces acting between objects within the system , such as muscular forces within the students ’ bodies , let alone the myriad forces between the atoms in the objects .
Still , this simplification helps us solve some complex problems .
It also seems reasonable that acceleration should be inversely proportional to the mass of the system .
In other words , the larger the mass ( the inertia ) , the smaller the acceleration produced by a given force .
As illustrated in , the same net external force applied to a basketball produces a much smaller acceleration when it is applied to an SUV .
The proportionality is written as where m is the mass of the system and a is the magnitude of the acceleration .
Experiments have shown that acceleration is exactly inversely proportional to mass , just as it is directly proportional to net external force .
It has been found that the acceleration of an object depends only on the net external force and the mass of the object .
Combining the two proportionalities just given yields Newton ’ s second law .
The acceleration of a system is directly proportional to and in the same direction as the net external force acting on the system and is inversely proportion to its mass .
In equation form , Newton ’ s second law is where is the acceleration , form is the net force , and m is the mass .
This is often written in the more familiar but the first equation gives more insight into what Newton ’ s second law means .
When only the magnitude of force and acceleration are considered , this equation can be written in the simpler scalar form : The law is a cause-and-effect relationship among three quantities that is not simply based on their definitions .
The validity of the second law is based on experimental verification .
The free-body diagram , which you will learn to draw in , is the basis for writing Newton ’ s second law .
Suppose that the net external force ( push minus friction ) exerted on a lawn mower is 51 N ( about 11 lb . )
parallel to the ground .
The mass of the mower is 24 kg .
What is its acceleration ?
This problem involves only motion in the horizontal direction ; we are also given the net force , indicated by the single vector , but we can suppress the vector nature and concentrate on applying Newton ’ s second law .
Since and m are given , the acceleration can be calculated directly from Newton ’ s second law as The magnitude of the acceleration a is .
Entering known values gives Substituting the unit of kilograms times meters per square second for newtons yields The direction of the acceleration is the same direction as that of the net force , which is parallel to the ground .
This is a result of the vector relationship expressed in Newton ’ s second law , that is , the vector representing net force is the scalar multiple of the acceleration vector .
There is no information given in this example about the individual external forces acting on the system , but we can say something about their relative magnitudes .
The acceleration found is small enough to be reasonable for a person pushing a mower .
Such an effort would not last too long , because the person ’ s top speed would soon be reached .
Check Your Understanding At the time of its launch , the HMS Titanic was the most massive mobile object ever built , with a mass of .
If a force of 6 MN was applied to the ship , what acceleration would it experience ?
In the preceding example , we dealt with net force only for simplicity .
However , several forces act on the lawn mower .
The weight ( discussed in detail in ) pulls down on the mower , toward the center of Earth ; this produces a contact force on the ground .
The ground must exert an upward force on the lawn mower , known as the normal force , which we define in .
These forces are balanced and therefore do not produce vertical acceleration .
In the next example , we show both of these forces .
As you continue to solve problems using Newton ’ s second law , be sure to show multiple forces .
( a ) The car shown in is moving at a constant speed .
Which force is bigger , ?
( b ) The same car is now accelerating to the right .
Which force is bigger , or or Explain .
We must consider Newton ’ s first and second laws to analyze the situation .
We need to decide which law applies ; this , in turn , will tell us about the relationship between the forces .
The forces are equal .
According to Newton ’ s first law , if the net force is zero , the velocity is constant .
In this case , required to cause acceleration .
must be larger than According to Newton ’ s second law , a net force is These questions may seem trivial , but they are commonly answered incorrectly .
For a car or any other object to move , it must be accelerated from rest to the desired speed ; this requires that the friction force be greater than the drag force .
Once the car is moving at constant velocity , the net force must be zero ; otherwise , the car will accelerate ( gain speed ) .
To solve problems involving Newton ’ s laws , we must understand whether to apply Newton ’ s first law ( where ) or Newton ’ s second law ( where is not zero ) .
This will be apparent as you see more examples and attempt to solve problems on your own .
Before manned space flights , rocket sleds were used to test aircraft , missile equipment , and physiological effects on human subjects at high speeds .
They consisted of a platform that was mounted on one or two rails and propelled by several rockets .
Calculate the magnitude of force exerted by each rocket , called its thrust T , for the four-rocket propulsion system shown in .
This leaves us with only horizontal forces and a simpler one-dimensional problem .
Directions are indicated with plus or minus signs , with right taken as the positive direction .
See the free-body diagram in .
Since acceleration , mass , and the force of friction are given , we start with Newton ’ s second law and look for ways to find the thrust of the engines .
We have defined the direction of the force and acceleration as acting “ to the right , ” so we need to consider only the magnitudes of these quantities in the calculations .
Hence we begin with where is the net force along the horizontal direction .
We can see from the figure that the engine thrusts add , whereas friction opposes the thrust .
Experiments such as this were performed in the early 1960s to test the limits of human endurance , and the setup was designed to protect human subjects in jet fighter emergency ejections .
Speeds of 1000 km/h were obtained , with accelerations of 45 g ’ s .
( Recall that g , acceleration due to gravity , is .
When we say that acceleration is 45 g ’ s , it is which is approximately . )
Although living subjects are not used anymore , land speeds of 10,000 km/h have been obtained with a rocket sled .
In this example , as in the preceding one , the system of interest is obvious .
We see in later examples that choosing the system of interest is crucial—and the choice is not always obvious .
Newton ’ s second law is more than a definition ; it is a relationship among acceleration , force , and mass .
It can help us make predictions .
Each of those physical quantities can be defined independently , so the second law tells us something basic and universal about nature .
Check Your Understanding A 550-kg sports car collides with a 2200-kg truck , and during the collision , the net force on each vehicle is the force exerted by the other .
If the magnitude of the truck ’ s acceleration is what is the magnitude of the sports car ’ s acceleration ?
We have developed Newton ’ s second law and presented it as a vector equation in .
This vector equation can be written as three component equations : The second law is a description of how a body responds mechanically to its environment .
The influence of the environment is the net force and the strength of the response is inversely proportional to the mass m .
The larger the mass of an object , the smaller its response ( its acceleration ) to the influence of the environment ( a given net force ) .
Therefore , a body ’ s mass is a measure of its inertia , as we explained in .
The vectors in and format , which indicate force direction along the x -axis and the y -axis , respectively , are involved , so we apply Newton ’ s second law in vector form .
We apply Newton ’ s second law : Magnitude and direction are found using the components of : We must remember that Newton ’ s second law is a vector equation .
In ( a ) , we are multiplying a vector by a scalar to determine the net force in vector form .
While the vector form gives a compact representation of the force vector , it does not tell us how “ big ” it is , or where it goes , in intuitive terms .
In ( b ) , we are determining the actual size ( magnitude ) of this force and the direction in which it travels .
Find the mass of a car if a net force of produces an acceleration of .
Vector division is not defined , so use the scalar form of Newton ’ s second law , .
We use and substitute the magnitudes of the two vectors : and Therefore , can not be performed .
However , mass m is a scalar , so we can Force and acceleration were given in the and format , but the answer , mass m , is a scalar and thus is not given in and form .
particle A of magnitudes .
, with the directions as shown in the free-body diagram in .
What is the acceleration of the particle ?
of mass forces acted upon four by is Because this is a two-dimensional problem , we must use a free-body diagram .
First , x and y -components .
We can then apply the second law in each direction .
We draw a free-body diagram as shown in .
Now we apply Newton ’ s second law .
We consider all vectors resolved into x and y -components : must be resolved into Thus , the net acceleration is which is a vector of magnitude directed at to the positive x -axis .
Numerous examples in everyday life can be found that involve three or more forces acting on a single object , such as cables running from the Golden Gate Bridge or a football player being tackled by three defenders .
We can see that the solution of this example is just an extension of what we have already done .
Check Your Understanding A car has forces acting on it , as shown below .
The mass of the car is 1000.0 kg .
The road is slick , so friction can be ignored .
( a ) What is the net force on the car ?
( b ) What is the acceleration of the car ?
Newton actually stated his second law in terms of momentum : “ The instantaneous rate at which a body ’ s momentum changes is equal to the net force acting on the body. ” ( “ Instantaneous rate ” implies that the derivative is involved . )
This can be given by the vector equation This means that Newton ’ s second law addresses the central question of motion : What causes a change in motion of an object ?
Momentum was described by Newton as “ quantity of motion , ” a way of combining both the velocity of an object and its mass .
We devote to the study of momentum .
For now , it is sufficient to define momentum as the product of the mass of the object m and its velocity : Since velocity is a vector , so is momentum .
It is easy to visualize momentum .
A train moving at 10 m/s has more momentum than one that moves at 2 m/s .
In everyday life , we speak of one sports team as “ having momentum ” when they score points against the opposing team .
If we substitute into , we obtain When m is constant , we have Thus , we see that the momentum form of Newton ’ s second law reduces to the form given earlier in this section .
Explore the when or pushing a refrigerator , crate , or person .
Create an and see how it makes objects move .
Put and see how it affects its motion .
Mass and weight are often used interchangeably in everyday conversation .
For example , our medical records often show our weight in kilograms but never in the correct units of newtons .
In physics , however , there is an important distinction .
Weight is the pull of Earth on an object .
It depends on the distance from the center of Earth .
Unlike weight , mass does not vary with location .
The mass of an object is the same on Earth , in orbit , or on the surface of the Moon .
The equation is used to define net force in terms of mass , length , and time .
As explained earlier , the SI unit of force is the newton .
Since Although almost the entire world uses the newton for the unit of force , in the United States , the most familiar unit of force is the pound ( lb ) , where 1 N = 0.225 lb .
Thus , a 225-lb person weighs 1000 N. When an object is dropped , it accelerates toward the center of Earth .
Newton ’ s second law says that a net force on an object is responsible for its acceleration .
If air resistance is negligible , the net force on a falling object is the gravitational force , commonly called its weight , or its force due to gravity acting on an object of mass m .
Weight can be denoted as a vector because it has a direction ; down is , by definition , the direction of gravity , and hence , weight is a downward force .
The magnitude of weight is denoted as w .
Galileo was instrumental in showing that , in the absence of air resistance , all objects fall with the same acceleration g .
Using Galileo ’ s result and Newton ’ s second law , we can derive an equation for weight .
Consider an object with mass m falling toward Earth .
It experiences only the downward force of gravity , which is the weight .
Newton ’ s second law says that the magnitude of the net external force on an object is We know that the acceleration of an object due to gravity is or .
Substituting these into Newton ’ s second law gives us the following equations .
The gravitational force on a mass is its weight .
However , when objects on Earth fall downward , they are never truly in free fall because there is always some upward resistance force from the air acting on the object .
Acceleration due to gravity g varies slightly over the surface of Earth , so the weight of an object depends on its location and is not an intrinsic property of the object .
Weight varies dramatically if we leave Earth ’ s surface .
On the Moon , for example , acceleration due to gravity is only .
A 1.0-kg mass thus has a weight of 9.8 N on Earth and only about 1.7 N on the Moon .
The broadest definition of weight in this sense is that the weight of an object is the gravitational force on it from the nearest large body , such as Earth , the Moon , or the Sun .
This is the most common and useful definition of weight in physics .
It differs dramatically , however , from the definition of weight used by NASA and the popular media in relation to space travel and exploration .
When they speak of “ weightlessness ” and “ microgravity , ” they are referring to the phenomenon we call “ free fall ” in physics .
We use the preceding definition of weight , force due to gravity acting on an object of mass m , and we make careful distinctions between free fall and actual weightlessness .
Be aware that weight and mass are different physical quantities , although they are closely related .
Mass is an intrinsic property of an object : It is a quantity of matter .
The quantity or amount of matter of an object is determined by the numbers of atoms and molecules of various types it contains .
Because these numbers do not vary , in Newtonian physics , mass does not vary ; therefore , its response to an applied force does not vary .
In contrast , weight is the gravitational force acting on an object , so it does vary depending on gravity .
For example , a person closer to the center of Earth , at a low elevation such as New Orleans , weighs slightly more than a person who is located in the higher elevation of Denver , even though they may have the same mass .
It is tempting to equate mass to weight , because most of our examples take place on Earth , where the weight of an object varies only a little with the location of the object .
In addition , it is difficult to count and identify all of the atoms and molecules in an object , so mass is rarely determined in this manner .
If we consider situations in which is a constant on Earth , we see that weight is directly proportional to mass m , since that is , the more massive an object is , the more it weighs .
Operationally , the masses of objects are determined by comparison with the standard kilogram , as we discussed in .
But by comparing an object on Earth with one on the Moon , we can easily see a variation in weight but not in mass .
For instance , on Earth , a 5.0-kg object weighs 49 N ; on the Moon , where g is , the object weighs 8.4 N. However , the mass of the object is still 5.0 kg on the Moon .
A farmer is lifting some moderately heavy rocks from a field to plant crops .
He lifts a stone that weighs 40.0 lb .
( about 180 N ) .
What force does he apply if the stone accelerates at a rate of We were given the weight of the stone , which we use in finding the net force on the stone .
However , we also need to know its mass to apply Newton ’ s second law , so we must apply the equation for weight , , to determine the mass .
No forces act in the horizontal direction , so we can concentrate on vertical forces , as shown in the following freebody diagram .
We label the acceleration to the side ; technically , it is not part of the free-body diagram , but it helps to remind us that the object accelerates upward ( so the net force is upward ) .
To apply Newton ’ s second law as the primary equation in solving a problem , we sometimes have to rely on other equations , such as the one for weight or one of the kinematic equations , to complete the solution .
Check Your Understanding For , find the acceleration when the farmer ’ s applied force is 230.0 N. Can you avoid the boulder field and land safely just before your fuel runs out , as Neil Armstrong did in 1969 ?
This accurately simulates the real motion of the lunar lander , with the correct mass , thrust , fuel consumption rate , and lunar gravity .
The real lunar lander is hard to control .
Use this to move the Sun , Earth , Moon , and space station to see the effects on their gravitational forces and orbital paths .
Visualize the sizes and distances between different heavenly bodies , and turn off gravity to see what would happen without it .
We have thus far considered force as a push or a pull ; however , if you think about it , you realize that no push or pull ever occurs by itself .
When you push on a wall , the wall pushes back on you .
This brings us to Newton ’ s third law .
Whenever one body exerts a force on a second body , the first body experiences a force that is equal in magnitude and opposite in direction to the force that it exerts .
We sometimes refer to this law loosely as “ action-reaction , ” where the force exerted is the action and the force experienced as a consequence is the reaction .
Newton ’ s third law has practical uses in analyzing the origin of forces and understanding which forces are external to a system .
We can readily see Newton ’ s third law at work by taking a look at how people move about .
Consider a swimmer pushing off the side of a pool .
She pushes against the wall of the pool with her feet and accelerates in the direction opposite that of her push .
The wall has exerted an equal and opposite force on the swimmer .
You might think that two equal and opposite forces would cancel , but they do not because they act on different systems .
In this case , there are two systems that we could investigate : the swimmer and the wall .
If we select the swimmer to be the system of interest , as in the figure , then is an external force on this system and affects its motion .
The swimmer moves in the direction of this force .
In contrast , the force acts on the wall , not on our system of interest .
Thus , does not directly affect the motion of the system and does not cancel The swimmer pushes in the direction opposite that in which she wishes to move .
The reaction to her push is thus in the desired direction .
In a free-body diagram , such as the one shown in , we never include both forces of an action-reaction pair ; in this case , we only use , not .
Other examples of Newton ’ s third law are easy to find : As a professor paces in front of a whiteboard , he exerts a force backward on the floor .
The floor exerts a reaction force forward on the professor that causes him to accelerate forward .
A car accelerates forward because the ground pushes forward on the drive wheels , in reaction to the drive wheels pushing backward on the ground .
You can see evidence of the wheels pushing backward when tires spin on a gravel road and throw the rocks backward .
Rockets move forward by expelling gas backward at high velocity .
This means the rocket exerts a large backward force on the gas in the rocket combustion chamber ; therefore , the gas exerts a large reaction force forward on the rocket .
This reaction force , which pushes a body forward in response to a backward force , is called thrust .
It is a common misconception that rockets propel themselves by pushing on the ground or on the air behind them .
They actually work better in a vacuum , where they can more readily expel the exhaust gases .
Helicopters create lift by pushing air down , thereby experiencing an upward reaction force .
Birds and airplanes also fly by exerting force on the air in a direction opposite that of whatever force they need .
For example , the wings of a bird force air downward and backward to get lift and move forward .
An octopus propels itself in the water by ejecting water through a funnel from its body , similar to a jet ski .
When a person pulls down on a vertical rope , the rope pulls up on the person .
There are two important features of Newton ’ s third law .
First , the forces exerted ( the action and reaction ) are always equal in magnitude but opposite in direction .
Second , these forces are acting on different bodies or systems : A ’ s force acts on B and B ’ s force acts on A .
In other words , the two forces are distinct forces that do not act on the same body .
Thus , they do not cancel each other .
For the situation shown in , the third law indicates that because the chair is pushing upward on the boy with force he is pushing downward on the chair with force Similarly , he is pushing downward with forces and on the floor and table , respectively .
Finally , since Earth pulls downward on the boy with force he pulls upward on Earth with force .
If that student were to angrily pound the table in frustration , he would quickly learn the painful lesson ( avoidable by studying Newton ’ s laws ) that the table hits back just as hard .
A person who is walking or running applies Newton ’ s third law instinctively .
For example , the runner in pushes backward on the ground so that it pushes him forward .
The package in is sitting on a scale .
The forces on the package are which is due to the scale , and which is due to Earth ’ s gravitational field .
The reaction forces that the package exerts are on the scale and on Earth .
Because the package is not accelerating , application of the second law yields so Thus , the scale reading gives the magnitude of the package ’ s weight .
However , the scale does not measure the weight of the package ; it measures the force on its surface .
If the system is accelerating , and would not be equal , as explained in .
A physics professor pushes a cart of demonstration equipment to a lecture hall .
Her mass is 65.0 kg , the cart ’ s mass is 12.0 kg , and the equipment ’ s mass is 7.0 kg .
Calculate the acceleration produced when the professor exerts a backward force of 150 N on the floor .
All forces opposing the motion , such as friction on the cart ’ s wheels and air resistance , total 24.0 N. Since they accelerate as a unit , we define the system to be the professor , cart , and equipment .
This is System 1 in .
The professor pushes backward with a force of 150 N. According to Newton ’ s third law , the floor exerts a forward reaction force of 150 N on System 1 .
Because all motion is horizontal , we can assume there is no net force in the vertical direction .
Therefore , the problem is one-dimensional along the horizontal direction .
As noted , friction f opposes the motion and is thus in the opposite direction of We do not include the forces or because these are internal forces , and we do not include because it acts on the floor , not on the system .
There are no other significant forces acting on System 1 .
If the net external force can be found from all this information , we can use Newton ’ s second law to find the acceleration as requested .
See the free-body diagram in the figure .
Another way to look at this is that forces between components of a system cancel because they are equal in magnitude and opposite in direction .
For example , the force exerted by the professor on the cart results in an equal and opposite force back on the professor .
In this case , both forces act on the same system and therefore cancel .
Thus , internal forces ( between components of a system ) cancel .
Choosing System 1 was crucial to solving this problem .
Calculate the force the professor exerts on the cart in , using data from the previous example if needed .
If we define the system of interest as the cart plus the equipment ( System 2 in ) , then the net external force on System 2 is the force the professor exerts on the cart minus friction .
The force she exerts on the cart , , is an external force acting on System 2. was internal to System 1 , but it is external to System 2 and thus enters Newton ’ s second law for this system .
Using Newton ’ s second law , we see that where the mass of System 2 is 19.0 kg and its acceleration was found to be in the previous example .
Thus , Now we can find the desired force : This force is significantly less than the 150-N force the professor exerted backward on the floor .
Not all of that 150-N force is transmitted to the cart ; some of it accelerates the professor .
The choice of a system is an important analytical step both in solving problems and in thoroughly understanding the physics of the situation ( which are not necessarily the same things ) .
Check Your Understanding Two blocks are at rest and in contact on a frictionless surface as shown below , with and applied force 24 N. ( a ) Find the acceleration of the system of blocks .
( b ) Suppose that the blocks are later separated .
What force will give the second block , with the mass of 6.0 kg , the same acceleration as the system of blocks ?
View this to watch examples of action and reaction .
View this to watch examples of Newton ’ s laws and internal and external forces .
Forces are given many names , such as push , pull , thrust , and weight .
Traditionally , forces have been grouped into several categories and given names relating to their source , how they are transmitted , or their effects .
Several of these categories are discussed in this section , together with some interesting applications .
Further examples of forces are discussed later in this text .
A catalog of forces will be useful for reference as we solve various problems involving force and motion .
These forces include normal force , tension , friction , and spring force .
Weight ( also called the force of gravity ) is a pervasive force that acts at all times and must be counteracted to keep an object from falling .
You must support the weight of a heavy object by pushing up on it when you hold it stationary , as illustrated in ( a ) .
But how do inanimate objects like a table support the weight of a mass placed on them , such as shown in ( b ) ?
When the bag of dog food is placed on the table , the table sags slightly under the load .
This would be noticeable if the load were placed on a card table , but even a sturdy oak table deforms when a force is applied to it .
Unless an object is deformed beyond its limit , it will exert a restoring force much like a deformed spring ( or a trampoline or diving board ) .
The greater the deformation , the greater the restoring force .
Thus , when the load is placed on the table , the table sags until the restoring force becomes as large as the weight of the load .
At this point , the net external force on the load is zero .
That is the situation when the load is stationary on the table .
The table sags quickly and the sag is slight , so we do not notice it .
But it is similar to the sagging of a trampoline when you climb onto it .
We must conclude that whatever supports a load , be it animate or not , must supply an upward force equal to the weight of the load , as we assumed in a few of the previous examples .
Consider the skier on the slope in .
Her mass including equipment is 60.0 kg .
( a ) What is her acceleration if friction is negligible ?
( b ) What is her acceleration if friction is 45.0 N ?
This is a two-dimensional problem , since not all forces on the skier ( the system of interest ) are parallel .
The approach we have used in two-dimensional kinematics also works well here .
Choose a convenient coordinate system and project the vectors onto its axes , creating two one-dimensional problems to solve .
The most convenient coordinate system for motion on an incline is one that has one coordinate parallel to the slope and one perpendicular to the slope .
( Motions along mutually perpendicular axes are independent . )
We use x and y for the parallel and perpendicular directions , respectively .
This choice of axes simplifies this type of problem , because there is no motion perpendicular to the slope and the acceleration is downslope .
Then , we can consider the separate problems of forces parallel to the slope and forces perpendicular to the slope .
The magnitude of the component of weight parallel to the slope is and the magnitude of the component of the weight perpendicular to the slope is a .
Since the acceleration is parallel to the slope , we need only consider forces parallel to the slope .
( Forces perpendicular to the slope add to zero , since there is no acceleration in that direction . )
The forces parallel to the slope are the component of the skier ’ s weight parallel to slope and friction f .
Using Newton ’ s second law , with subscripts to denote quantities parallel to the slope , where assuming no friction for this part .
Therefore , is the acceleration .
We have a given value for friction , and we know its direction is parallel to the slope and it opposes motion between surfaces in contact .
So the net external force is Substituting this into Newton ’ s second law , gives We substitute known values to obtain This gives us which is the acceleration parallel to the incline when there is 45.0 N of opposing friction .
Since friction always opposes motion between surfaces , the acceleration is smaller when there is friction than when there is none .
It is a general result that if friction on an incline is negligible , then the acceleration down the incline is , regardless of mass .
As discussed previously , all objects fall with the same acceleration in the absence of air resistance .
Similarly , all objects , regardless of mass , slide down a frictionless incline with the same acceleration ( if the angle is the same ) .
When an object rests on an incline that makes an angle with the horizontal , the force of gravity acting on the object is divided into two components : a force acting perpendicular to the plane , , and a force acting parallel to the plane , .
The normal force is typically equal in magnitude and opposite in direction to the perpendicular component of the weight .
The force acting parallel to the plane , , causes the object to accelerate down the incline .
Be careful when resolving the weight of the object into components .
To do this , we draw the right angle formed by the three weight vectors .
The angle of the incline is the same as the angle formed between w and .
Knowing this property , we can use trigonometry to determine the magnitude of the weight components : Check Your Understanding A force of 1150 N acts parallel to a ramp to push a 250-kg gun safe into a moving van .
The ramp is frictionless and inclined at ( a ) What is the acceleration of the safe up the ramp ?
( b ) If we consider friction in this problem , with a friction force of 120 N , what is the acceleration of the safe ?
A tension is a force along the length of a medium ; in particular , it is a pulling force that acts along a stretched flexible connector , such as a rope or cable .
The word “ tension ” comes from a Latin word meaning “ to stretch. ” Not coincidentally , the flexible cords that carry muscle forces to other parts of the body are called tendons .
Any flexible connector , such as a string , rope , chain , wire , or cable , can only exert a pull parallel to its length ; thus , a force carried by a flexible connector is a tension with a direction parallel to the connector .
Tension is a pull in a connector .
Consider the phrase : “ You can ’ t push a rope. ” Instead , tension force pulls outward along the two ends of a rope .
Consider a person holding a mass on a rope , as shown in .
If the 5.00-kg mass in the figure is stationary , then its acceleration is zero and the net force is zero .
The only external forces acting on the mass are its weight and the tension supplied by the rope .
Thus , where T and w are the magnitudes of the tension and weight , respectively , and their signs indicate direction , with up being positive .
Flexible connectors are often used to transmit forces around corners , such as in a hospital traction system , a tendon , or a bicycle brake cable .
If there is no friction , the tension transmission is undiminished ; only its direction changes , and it is always parallel to the flexible connector , as shown in .
Calculate the tension in the wire supporting the 70.0-kg tightrope walker shown in .
As you can see in , the wire is bent under the person ’ s weight .
Thus , the tension on either side of the person has an upward component that can support his weight .
As usual , forces are vectors represented pictorially by arrows that have the same direction as the forces and lengths proportional to their magnitudes .
The system is the tightrope walker , and the only external forces acting on him are his weight and the two tensions ( left tension ) and ( right tension ) .
It is reasonable to neglect the weight of the wire .
The net external force is zero , because the system is static .
We can use trigonometry to find the tensions .
One conclusion is possible at the outset—we can see from ( b ) that the magnitudes of the tensions and must be equal .
We know this because there is no horizontal acceleration in the rope and the only forces acting to the left and right are and .
Thus , the magnitude of those horizontal components of the forces must be equal so that they cancel each other out .
Whenever we have two-dimensional vector problems in which no two vectors are parallel , the easiest method of solution is to pick a convenient coordinate system and project the vectors onto its axes .
In this case , the best coordinate system has one horizontal axis ( x ) and one vertical axis ( y ) .
First , we need to resolve the tension vectors into their horizontal and vertical components .
It helps to look at a new free-body diagram showing all horizontal and vertical components of each force acting on the system .
Consider the horizontal components of the forces ( denoted with a subscript x ) : The net external horizontal force since the person is stationary .
Thus , Now observe .
You can use trigonometry to determine the magnitude of and : Equating T and T : Thus , as predicted .
Now , considering the vertical components ( denoted by a subscript y ) , we can solve for T .
Again , since the person is stationary , Newton ’ s second law implies that .
Thus , as illustrated in the free-body diagram , We can use trigonometry to determine the relationships among and T .
The tension is almost six times the 686-N weight of the tightrope walker .
Since the wire is nearly horizontal , the vertical component of its tension is only a fraction of the tension in the wire .
The large horizontal components are in opposite directions and cancel , so most of the tension in the wire is not used to support the weight of the tightrope walker .
If we wish to create a large tension , all we have to do is exert a force perpendicular to a taut flexible connector , as illustrated in .
As we saw in , the weight of the tightrope walker acts as a force perpendicular to the rope .
In this case , T becomes large as approaches zero .
Even the relatively small weight of any flexible connector will cause it to sag , since an infinite tension would result if it were horizontal ( i.e. , and sin ) .
For example , shows a situation where we wish to pull a car out of the mud when no tow truck is available .
Each time the car moves forward , the chain is tightened to keep it as straight as possible .
The tension in the chain is given by and since is small , T is large .
This situation is analogous to the tightrope walker , except that the tensions shown here are those transmitted to the car and the tree rather than those acting at the point where is applied .
Check Your Understanding One end of a 3.0-m rope is tied to a tree ; the other end is tied to a car stuck in the mud .
The motorist pulls sideways on the midpoint of the rope , displacing it a distance of 0.25 m. If he exerts a force of 200.0 N under these conditions , determine the force exerted on the car .
In , we extend the discussion on tension in a cable to include cases in which the angles shown are not equal .
Friction is a resistive force opposing motion or its tendency .
Imagine an object at rest on a horizontal surface .
The net force acting on the object must be zero , leading to equality of the weight and the normal force , which act in opposite directions .
If the surface is tilted , the normal force balances the component of the weight perpendicular to the surface .
If the object does not slide downward , the component of the weight parallel to the inclined plane is balanced by friction .
Friction is discussed in greater detail in the next chapter .
A spring is a special medium with a specific atomic structure that has the ability to restore its shape , if deformed .
To restore its shape , a spring exerts a restoring force that is proportional to and in the opposite direction in which it is stretched or compressed .
This is the statement of a law known as Hooke ’ s law , which has the mathematical form The constant of proportionality k is a measure of the spring ’ s stiffness .
The line of action of this force is parallel to the spring axis , and the sense of the force is in the opposite direction of the displacement vector .
The displacement must be measured from the relaxed position ; when the spring is relaxed .
There is another distinction among forces : Some forces are real , whereas others are not .
Real forces have some physical origin , such as a gravitational pull .
In contrast , fictitious forces arise simply because an observer is in an accelerating or noninertial frame of reference , such as one that rotates ( like a merry-go-round ) or undergoes linear acceleration ( like a car slowing down ) .
For example , if a satellite is heading due north above Earth ’ s Northern Hemisphere , then to an observer on Earth , it will appear to experience a force to the west that has no physical origin .
Instead , Earth is rotating toward the east and moves east under the satellite .
In Earth ’ s frame , this looks like a westward force on the satellite , or it can be interpreted as a violation of Newton ’ s first law ( the law of inertia ) .
We can identify a fictitious force by asking the question , “ What is the reaction force ? ” If we can not name the reaction force , then the force we are considering is fictitious .
In the example of the satellite , the reaction force would have to be an eastward force on Earth .
Recall that an inertial frame of reference is one in which all forces are real and , equivalently , one in which Newton ’ s laws have the simple forms given in this chapter .
Earth ’ s rotation is slow enough that Earth is nearly an inertial frame .
You ordinarily must perform precise experiments to observe fictitious forces and the slight departures from Newton ’ s laws , such as the effect just described .
On a large scale , such as for the rotation of weather systems and ocean currents , the effects can be easily observed .
The crucial factor in determining whether a frame of reference is inertial is whether it accelerates or rotates relative to a known inertial frame .
Unless stated otherwise , all phenomena discussed in this text are in inertial frames .
The forces discussed in this section are real forces , but they are not the only real forces .
Lift and thrust , for example , are more specialized real forces .
In the long list of forces , are some more basic than others ?
Are some different manifestations of the same underlying force ?
The answer to both questions is yes , as you will see in the treatment of modern physics later in the text .
Explore forces and motion in this as you push household objects up and down a ramp .
Lower and raise the ramp to see how the angle of inclination affects the parallel forces .
Graphs show forces , energy , and work .
Stretch and compress springs in this to explore the relationships among force , spring constant , and displacement .
Investigate what happens when two springs are connected in series and in parallel .
The first step in describing and analyzing most phenomena in physics involves the careful drawing of a free-body diagram .
Free-body diagrams have been used in examples throughout this chapter .
Remember that a free-body diagram must only include the external forces acting on the body of interest .
In , we gave a brief problem-solving strategy to help you understand free-body diagrams .
Here , we add some details to the strategy that will help you in constructing these diagrams .
Observe the following rules when constructing a free-body diagram : Draw the object under consideration ; it does not have to be artistic .
At first , you may want to draw a circle around the object of interest to be sure you focus on labeling the forces acting on the object .
If you are treating the object as a particle ( no size or shape and no rotation ) , represent the object as a point .
We often place this point at the origin of an xy -coordinate system .
Include all forces that act on the object , representing these forces as vectors .
Consider the types of forces described in —normal force , friction , tension , and spring force—as well as weight and applied force .
Do not include the net force on the object .
With the exception of gravity , all of the forces we have discussed require direct contact with the object .
However , forces that the object exerts on its environment must not be included .
We never include both forces of an action-reaction pair .
Convert the free-body diagram into a more detailed diagram showing the x and y -components of a given force ( this is often helpful when solving a problem using Newton ’ s first or second law ) .
In this case , place a squiggly line through the original vector to show that it is no longer in play—it has been replaced by its x and y -components .
If there are two or more objects , or bodies , in the problem , draw a separate free-body diagram for each object .
Note : If there is acceleration , we do not directly include it in the free-body diagram ; however , it may help to indicate acceleration outside the free-body diagram .
You can label it in a different color to indicate that it is separate from the free-body diagram .
Let ’ s apply the problem-solving strategy in drawing a free-body diagram for a sled .
In ( a ) , a sled is pulled by force P at an angle of .
In part ( b ) , we show a free-body diagram for this situation , as described by steps 1 and 2 of the problem-solving strategy .
In part ( c ) , we show all forces in terms of their x and y -components , in keeping with step 3 .
Construct the free-body diagram for object A and object B in .
We follow the four steps listed in the problem-solving strategy .
We start by creating a diagram for the first object of interest .
In ( a ) , object A is isolated ( circled ) and represented by a dot .
We now include any force that acts on the body .
Here , no applied force is present .
The weight of the object acts as a force pointing vertically downward , and the presence of the cord indicates a force of tension pointing away from the object .
Object A has one interface and hence experiences a normal force , directed away from the interface .
The source of this force is object B , and this normal force is labeled accordingly .
Since object B has a tendency to slide down , object A has a tendency to slide up with respect to the interface , so the friction is directed downward parallel to the inclined plane .
As noted in step 4 of the problem-solving strategy , we then construct the free-body diagram in ( b ) using the same approach .
Object B experiences two normal forces and two friction forces due to the presence of two contact surfaces .
The object under consideration in each part of this problem was circled in gray .
When you are first learning how to draw free-body diagrams , you will find it helpful to circle the object before deciding what forces are acting on that particular object .
This focuses your attention , preventing you from considering forces that are not acting on the body .
A force is applied to two blocks in contact , as shown .
Draw a free-body diagram for each block .
Be sure to consider Newton ’ s third law at the interface where the two blocks touch .
free-body diagrams in .
is the action force of block 2 on block 1. is the reaction force of block 1 on block 2 .
We use these A block rests on the table , as shown .
A light rope is attached to it and runs over a pulley .
The other end of the rope is attached to a second block .
The two blocks are said to be coupled .
Block exerts a force due to its weight , which causes the system ( two blocks and a string ) to accelerate .
We assume that the string has no mass so that we do not have to consider it as a separate object .
Draw a free-body diagram for each block .
) ; however , assuming the string remains and Each block accelerates ( notice the labels shown for taut , they accelerate at the same rate .
Thus , we have .
If we were to continue solving the problem , we could simply call the acceleration .
Also , we use two free-body diagrams because we are usually finding tension T , which may require us to use a system of two equations in this type of problem .
The tension is the same on both .
Check Your Understanding ( a ) Draw the free-body diagram for the situation shown .
( b ) Redraw it showing components ; use x -axes parallel to the two ramps .
View this to predict , qualitatively , how an external force will affect the speed and direction of an object ’ s motion .
Explain the effects with the help of a freebody diagram .
Use free-body diagrams to draw position , velocity , acceleration , and force graphs , and vice versa .
Explain how the graphs relate to one another .
Given a scenario or a graph , sketch all four graphs .
As each car moves in a curved path around the turn , its wheels also spin rapidly .
The wheels complete many revolutions while the car makes only part of one ( a circular arc ) .
How can we describe the velocities , accelerations , and forces involved ?
What force keeps a racecar from spinning out , hitting the wall bordering the track ?
What provides this force ?
Why is the track banked ?
We answer all of these questions in this chapter as we expand our consideration of Newton ’ s laws of motion .
Success in problem solving is necessary to understand and apply physical principles .
We developed a pattern of analyzing and setting up the solutions to problems involving Newton ’ s laws in ; in this chapter , we continue to discuss these strategies and apply a step-by-step process .
We follow here the basics of problem solving presented earlier in this text , but we emphasize specific strategies that are useful in applying Newton ’ s laws of motion .
Once you identify the physical principles involved in the problem and determine that they include Newton ’ s laws of motion , you can apply these steps to find a solution .
These techniques also reinforce concepts that are useful in many other areas of physics .
Many problem-solving strategies are stated outright in the worked examples , so the following techniques should reinforce skills you have already begun to develop .
Identify the physical principles involved by listing the givens and the quantities to be calculated .
Sketch the situation , using arrows to represent all forces .
Determine the system of interest .
The result is a free-body diagram that is essential to solving the problem .
Apply Newton ’ s second law to solve the problem .
If necessary , apply appropriate kinematic equations from the chapter on motion along a straight line .
Check the solution to see whether it is reasonable .
Let ’ s apply this problem-solving strategy to the challenge of lifting a grand piano into a second-story apartment .
Once we have determined that Newton ’ s laws of motion are involved ( if the problem involves forces ) , it is particularly important to draw a careful sketch of the situation .
Such a sketch is shown in ( a ) .
Then , as in ( b ) , we can represent all forces with arrows .
Whenever sufficient information exists , it is best to label these arrows carefully and make the length and direction of each correspond to the represented force .
As with most problems , we next need to identify what needs to be determined and what is known or can be inferred from the problem as stated , that is , make a list of knowns and unknowns .
It is particularly crucial to identify the system of interest , since Newton ’ s second law involves only external forces .
We can then determine which forces are external and which are internal , a necessary step to employ Newton ’ s second law .
( See ( c ) . )
Newton ’ s third law may be used to identify whether forces are exerted between components of a system ( internal ) or between the system and something outside ( external ) .
As illustrated in , the system of interest depends on the question we need to answer .
Only forces are shown in free-body diagrams , not acceleration or velocity .
We have drawn several free-body diagrams in previous worked examples .
( c ) shows a free-body diagram for the system of interest .
Note that no internal forces are shown in a free-body diagram .
Once a free-body diagram is drawn , we apply Newton ’ s second law .
This is done in ( d ) for a particular situation .
In general , once external forces are clearly identified in free-body diagrams , it should be a straightforward task to put them into equation form and solve for the unknown , as done in all previous examples .
If the problem is one-dimensional—that is , if all forces are parallel—then the forces can be handled algebraically .
If the problem is two-dimensional , then it must be broken down into a pair of one-dimensional problems .
We do this by projecting the force vectors onto a set of axes chosen for convenience .
As seen in previous examples , the choice of axes can simplify the problem .
For example , when an incline is involved , a set of axes with one axis parallel to the incline and one perpendicular to it is most convenient .
It is almost always convenient to make one axis parallel to the direction of motion , if this is known .
Generally , just write Newton ’ s second law in components along the different directions .
Then , you have the following equations : ( If , for example , the system is accelerating horizontally , then you can then set ) We need this information to determine unknown forces acting on a system .
As always , we must check the solution .
In some cases , it is easy to tell whether the solution is reasonable .
For example , it is reasonable to find that friction causes an object to slide down an incline more slowly than when no friction exists .
In practice , intuition develops gradually through problem solving ; with experience , it becomes progressively easier to judge whether an answer is reasonable .
Another way to check a solution is to check the units .
If we are solving for force and end up with units of millimeters per second , then we have made a mistake .
There are many interesting applications of Newton ’ s laws of motion , a few more of which are presented in this section .
These serve also to illustrate some further subtleties of physics and to help build problem-solving skills .
We look first at problems involving particle equilibrium , which make use of Newton ’ s first law , and then consider particle acceleration , which involves Newton ’ s second law .
Recall that a particle in equilibrium is one for which the external forces are balanced .
Static equilibrium involves objects at rest , and dynamic equilibrium involves objects in motion without acceleration , but it is important to remember that these conditions are relative .
For example , an object may be at rest when viewed from our frame of reference , but the same object would appear to be in motion when viewed by someone moving at a constant velocity .
We now make use of the knowledge attained in , regarding the different types of forces and the use of free-body diagrams , to solve additional problems in particle equilibrium .
Consider the traffic light ( mass of 15.0 kg ) suspended from two wires as shown in .
Find the tension in each wire , neglecting the masses of the wires .
The system of interest is the traffic light , and its free-body diagram is shown in ( c ) .
The three forces involved are not parallel , and so they must be projected onto a coordinate system .
The most convenient coordinate system has one axis vertical and one horizontal , and the vector projections on it are shown in ( d ) .
There are two unknowns in this problem ( and ) , so two equations are needed to find them .
These two equations come from applying Newton ’ s second law along the vertical and horizontal axes , noting that the net external force is zero along each axis because acceleration is zero .
First consider the horizontal or x -axis : Thus , as you might expect , This gives us the following relationship : Thus , Note that and are not equal in this case because the angles on either side are not equal .
Thus we obtain Both tensions would be larger if both wires were more horizontal , and they will be equal if and only if the angles on either side are the same ( as they were in the earlier example of a tightrope walker in .
We have given a variety of examples of particles in equilibrium .
We now turn our attention to particle acceleration problems , which are the result of a nonzero net force .
Refer again to the steps given at the beginning of this section , and notice how they are applied to the following examples .
Two tugboats push on a barge at different angles .
The first tugboat exerts a force of in the x -direction , and the second tugboat exerts a force of in the y -direction .
The mass of the barge is and its acceleration is observed to be in the direction shown .
What is the drag force of the water on the barge resisting the motion ?
( Note : Drag force is a frictional force exerted by fluids , such as air or water .
The drag force opposes the motion of the object .
Since the barge is flat bottomed , we can assume that the drag force is in the direction opposite of motion of the barge . )
The directions and magnitudes of acceleration and the applied forces are given in ( a ) .
We define the total force of the tugboats on the barge as so that The drag of the water is in the direction opposite to the direction of motion of the boat ; this force thus works against as shown in the free-body diagram in ( b ) .
The system of interest here is the barge , since the forces on it are given as well as its acceleration .
First , the The angle is given by From Newton ’ s first law , we know this is the same direction as the acceleration .
We also know that the opposite direction of is in the same direction as but its magnitude is slightly less than dimensional .
From the free-body diagram , we can see that is in since it acts to slow down the acceleration .
The numbers used in this example are reasonable for a moderately large barge .
It is certainly difficult to obtain larger accelerations with tugboats , and small speeds are desirable to avoid running the barge into the docks .
Drag is relatively small for a well-designed hull at low speeds , consistent with the answer to this example , where is less than 1/600th of the weight of the ship .
or at an angle of In , we discussed the normal force , which is a contact force that acts normal to the surface so that an object does not have an acceleration perpendicular to the surface .
The bathroom scale is an excellent example of a normal force acting on a body .
It provides a quantitative reading of how much it must push upward to support the weight of an object .
But can you predict what you would see on the dial of a bathroom scale if you stood on it during an elevator ride ?
Will you see a value greater than your weight when the elevator starts up ?
What about when the elevator moves upward at a constant speed ?
Take a guess before reading the next example .
shows a 75.0-kg man ( weight of about 165 lb . )
standing on a bathroom scale in an elevator .
Calculate the scale reading : ( a ) if the elevator accelerates upward at a rate of and ( b ) if the elevator moves upward at a constant speed of 1 m/s .
If the scale at rest is accurate , its reading equals , the magnitude of the force the person exerts downward on it .
( a ) shows the numerous forces acting on the elevator , scale , and person .
It makes this onedimensional problem look much more formidable than if the person is chosen to be the system of interest and a free-body diagram is drawn , as in ( b ) .
Analysis of the free-body diagram using Newton ’ s laws can produce answers to both ( a ) and ( b ) of this example , as well as some other questions that might arise .
The only forces acting on the person are his weight and the upward force of the scale Newton ’ s third law , in order to find what the scale reads .
( Note : We are considering the case when the elevator is accelerating upward .
If the elevator is accelerating downward , Newton ’ s second law becomes ) We have so that yielding Now , what happens when the elevator reaches a constant upward velocity ?
Will the scale still read more than his weight ?
For any constant velocity—up , down , or stationary—acceleration is zero because and Thus , or which gives The scale reading in ( a ) is about 185 lb .
What would the scale have read if he were stationary ?
Since his acceleration would be zero , the force of the scale would be equal to his weight : Thus , the scale reading in the elevator is greater than his 735-N ( 165-lb . )
This means that the scale is pushing up on the person with a force greater than his weight , as it must in order to accelerate him upward .
Clearly , the greater the acceleration of the elevator , the greater the scale reading , consistent with what you feel in rapidly accelerating versus slowly accelerating elevators .
In ( b ) , the scale reading is 735 N , which equals the person ’ s weight .
This is the case whenever the elevator has a constant velocity—moving up , moving down , or stationary .
Check Your Understanding Now calculate the scale reading when the elevator accelerates downward at a rate of The solution to the previous example also applies to an elevator accelerating downward , as mentioned .
When an elevator accelerates downward , a is negative , and the scale reading is less than the weight of the person .
If a constant downward velocity is reached , the scale reading again becomes equal to the person ’ s weight .
If the elevator is in free fall and accelerating downward at g , then the scale reading is zero and the person appears to be weightless .
shows a block of mass on a frictionless , horizontal surface .
It is pulled by a light string that passes over a frictionless and massless pulley .
The other end of the string is connected to a block of mass Find the acceleration of the blocks and the tension in the string in terms of We draw a free-body diagram for each mass separately , as shown in .
Then we analyze each one to find the required unknowns .
The forces on block 1 are the gravitational force , the contact force of the surface , and the tension in the string .
Block 2 is subjected to the gravitational force and the string tension .
Newton ’ s second law applies to each , so we write two vector equations : For block 1 : For block 2 : Notice that is the same for both blocks .
Since the string and the pulley have negligible mass , and since there is no friction in the pulley , the tension is the same throughout the string .
We can now write component equations for each block .
All forces are either horizontal or vertical , so we can use the same horizontal/vertical coordinate system for both objects The component equations follow from the vector equations above .
We see that block 1 has the vertical forces balanced , so we ignore them and write an equation relating the x -components .
There are no horizontal forces on block 2 , so only the y -equation is written .
A common error in problems like this is to set You can see from the free-body diagram of block 2 that can not be correct if the block is accelerating .
It is particularly useful in understanding the connection between force and motion .
In , and Consider the pulley to be frictionless .
( a ) If is released , what will its acceleration be ?
( b ) What is the tension in the string ?
We draw a free-body diagram for each mass separately , as shown in the figure .
Then we analyze each diagram to find the required unknowns .
This may involve the solution of simultaneous equations .
It is also important to note the similarity with the previous example .
As block 2 accelerates with acceleration in the downward direction , block 1 accelerates upward with acceleration .
Thus , We have ( The negative sign in front of indicates that accelerates downward ; both blocks accelerate at the same rate , but in opposite directions . )
We can also use the Atwood machine to measure local gravitational field strength .
Check Your Understanding Determine a general formula in terms of and g for calculating the tension in the string for the Atwood machine shown above .
Physics is most interesting and most powerful when applied to general situations that involve more than a narrow set of physical principles .
Newton ’ s laws of motion can also be integrated with other concepts that have been discussed previously in this text to solve problems of motion .
For example , forces produce accelerations , a topic of kinematics , and hence the relevance of earlier chapters .
When approaching problems that involve various types of forces , acceleration , velocity , and/or position , listing the givens and the quantities to be calculated will allow you to identify the principles involved .
Then , you can refer to the chapters that deal with a particular topic and solve the problem using strategies outlined in the text .
The following worked example illustrates how the problem-solving strategy given earlier in this chapter , as well as strategies presented in other chapters , is applied to an integrated concept problem .
A soccer player starts at rest and accelerates forward , reaching a velocity of 8.00 m/s in 2.50 s. ( a ) What is her average acceleration ?
( b ) What average force does the ground exert forward on the runner so that she achieves this acceleration ?
The player ’ s mass is 70.0 kg , and air resistance is negligible .
To find the answers to this problem , we use the problem-solving strategy given earlier in this chapter .
The solutions to each part of the example illustrate how to apply specific problem-solving steps .
In this case , we do not need to use all of the steps .
We simply identify the physical principles , and thus the knowns and unknowns ; apply Newton ’ s second law ; and check to see whether the answer is reasonable .
We are given the initial and final velocities ( zero and 8.00 m/s forward ) ; thus , the change in velocity is .
We are given the elapsed time , so The unknown is acceleration , which can be found from its definition : Substituting the known values yields Here we are asked to find the average force the ground exerts on the runner to produce this acceleration .
( Remember that we are dealing with the force or forces acting on the object of interest . )
This is the reaction force to that exerted by the player backward against the ground , by Newton ’ s third law .
Neglecting air resistance , this would be equal in magnitude to the net external force on the player , since this force causes her acceleration .
Since we now know the player ’ s acceleration and are given her mass , we can use Newton ’ s second law to find the force exerted .
That is , Substituting the known values of m and a gives This is a reasonable result : The acceleration is attainable for an athlete in good condition .
The force is about 50 pounds , a reasonable average force .
This example illustrates how to apply problem-solving strategies to situations that include topics from different chapters .
The first step is to identify the physical principles , the knowns , and the unknowns involved in the problem .
The second step is to solve for the unknown , in this case using Newton ’ s second law .
Finally , we check our answer to ensure it is reasonable .
These techniques for integrated concept problems will be useful in applications of physics outside of a physics course , such as in your profession , in other science disciplines , and in everyday life .
Check Your Understanding The soccer player stops after completing the play described above , but now notices that the ball is in position to be stolen .
If she now experiences a force of 126 N to attempt to steal the ball , which is 2.00 m away from her , how long will it take her to get to the ball ?
A 1.50-kg model helicopter has a velocity of at It is accelerated at a constant rate for two seconds ( 2.00 s ) after which it has a velocity of What is the magnitude of the resultant force acting on the helicopter during this time interval ?
We can easily set up a coordinate system in which the x -axis direction ) is horizontal , and the y -axis direction ) is vertical .
We know that and From this , we can calculate the acceleration by the definition ; we can then apply Newton ’ s second law .
We have The magnitude of the force is now easily found : The original problem was stated in terms of this example with the previous example .
vector components , so we used vector methods .
Compare Check Your Understanding Find the direction of the resultant for the 1.50-kg model helicopter .
( a ) shows a baggage tractor pulling luggage carts from an airplane .
The tractor has mass 650.0 kg , while cart A has mass 250.0 kg and cart B has mass 150.0 kg .
The driving force acting for a brief period of time accelerates the system from rest and acts for 3.00 s. ( a ) If this driving force is given by find the speed after 3.00 seconds .
( b ) What is the horizontal force acting on the connecting cable between the tractor and cart A at this instant ?
A free-body diagram shows the driving force of the tractor , which gives the system its acceleration .
We only need to consider motion in the horizontal direction .
The vertical forces balance each other and it is not necessary to consider them .
For part b , we make use of a free-body diagram of the tractor alone to determine the force between it and cart A .
This exposes the coupling force which is our objective .
and so Since acceleration is a function of time , we can determine the velocity of the tractor by using with the initial condition that at We integrate from to Refer to the free-body diagram in ( b ) .
Since the force varies with time , we must use calculus to solve this problem .
Notice how the total mass of the system was important in solving ( a ) , whereas only the mass of the truck ( since it supplied the force ) was of use in ( b ) .
If acceleration is a function of time , we can use the calculus forms developed in , as shown in this example .
However , sometimes acceleration is a function of displacement .
In and this case , we can derive an important result from these calculus relations .
Solving for dt in each , we have Now , equating these expressions , we have We can rearrange this to obtain and A 10.0-kg mortar shell is fired vertically upward from the ground , with an initial velocity of 50.0 m/s ( see ) .
Determine the maximum height it will travel if atmospheric resistance is measured as where v is the speed at any instant .
The known force on the mortar shell can be related to its acceleration using the equations of motion .
Kinematics can then be used to relate the mortar shell ’ s acceleration to its position .
Initially , and At the maximum height The free-body diagram shows to act downward , because it slows the upward motion of the mortar shell .
Thus , we can write The acceleration depends on v and is therefore variable .
To make matters worse , the force depends on v ( not t ) , and so we must use the trick explained prior to the example .
The answer for the height indicates a lower elevation if there were air resistance .
We will deal with the effects of air resistance and other drag forces in greater detail in .
Check Your Understanding If atmospheric resistance is neglected , find the maximum height for the mortar shell .
Is calculus required for this solution ?
Explore the forces at work in this when you try to push a filing cabinet .
Create an applied force and see the resulting frictional force and total force acting on the cabinet .
Charts show the forces , position , velocity , and acceleration vs. time .
View a free-body diagram of all the forces ( including gravitational and normal forces ) .
When a body is in motion , it has resistance because the body interacts with its surroundings .
This resistance is a force of friction .
Friction opposes relative motion between systems in contact but also allows us to move , a concept that becomes obvious if you try to walk on ice .
Friction is a common yet complex force , and its behavior still not completely understood .
Still , it is possible to understand the circumstances in which it behaves .
The basic definition of friction is relatively simple to state .
Friction is a force that opposes relative motion between systems in contact .
There are several forms of friction .
One of the simpler characteristics of sliding friction is that it is parallel to the contact surfaces between systems and is always in a direction that opposes motion or attempted motion of the systems relative to each other .
If two systems are in contact and moving relative to one another , then the friction between them is called kinetic friction .
For example , friction slows a hockey puck sliding on ice .
When objects are stationary , static friction can act between them ; the static friction is usually greater than the kinetic friction between two objects .
If two systems are in contact and stationary relative to one another , then the friction between them is called static friction .
If two systems are in contact and moving relative to one another , then the friction between them is called kinetic friction .
Imagine , for example , trying to slide a heavy crate across a concrete floor—you might push very hard on the crate and not move it at all .
This means that the static friction responds to what you do—it increases to be equal to and in the opposite direction of your push .
If you finally push hard enough , the crate seems to slip suddenly and starts to move .
Now static friction gives way to kinetic friction .
Once in motion , it is easier to keep it in motion than it was to get it started , indicating that the kinetic frictional force is less than the static frictional force .
If you add mass to the crate , say by placing a box on top of it , you need to push even harder to get it started and also to keep it moving .
Furthermore , if you oiled the concrete you would find it easier to get the crate started and keep it going ( as you might expect ) .
is a crude pictorial representation of how friction occurs at the interface between two objects .
Close-up inspection of these surfaces shows them to be rough .
Thus , when you push to get an object moving ( in this case , a crate ) , you must raise the object until it can skip along with just the tips of the surface hitting , breaking off the points , or both .
A considerable force can be resisted by friction with no apparent motion .
The harder the surfaces are pushed together ( such as if another box is placed on the crate ) , the more force is needed to move them .
Part of the friction is due to adhesive forces between the surface molecules of the two objects , which explains the dependence of friction on the nature of the substances .
For example , rubber-soled shoes slip less than those with leather soles .
Adhesion varies with substances in contact and is a complicated aspect of surface physics .
Once an object is moving , there are fewer points of contact ( fewer molecules adhering ) , so less force is required to keep the object moving .
At small but nonzero speeds , friction is nearly independent of speed .
The magnitude of the frictional force has two forms : one for static situations ( static friction ) , the other for situations involving motion ( kinetic friction ) .
What follows is an approximate empirical ( experimentally determined ) model only .
These equations for static and kinetic friction are not vector equations .
The magnitude of static friction is where is the coefficient of static friction and N is the magnitude of the normal force .
The symbol means less than or equal to , implying that static friction can have a maximum value of Static friction is a responsive force that increases to be equal and opposite to whatever force is exerted , up to its maximum limit .
Once the applied force exceeds the object moves .
Thus , The magnitude of kinetic friction is given by where is the coefficient of kinetic friction .
A system in which is described as a system in which friction behaves simply .
The transition from static friction to kinetic friction is illustrated in .
As you can see in , the coefficients of kinetic friction are less than their static counterparts .
The approximate values of are stated to only one or two digits to indicate the approximate description of friction given by the preceding two equations .
and include the dependence of friction on materials and the normal force .
The direction of friction is always opposite that of motion , parallel to the surface between objects , and perpendicular to the normal force .
For example , if the crate you try to push ( with a force parallel to the floor ) has a mass of 100 kg , then the normal force is equal to its weight , perpendicular to the floor .
If the coefficient of static friction is 0.45 , you would have to exert a force parallel to the floor greater than to move the crate .
Once there is motion , friction is less and the coefficient of kinetic friction might be 0.30 , so that a force of only keeps it moving at a constant speed .
If the floor is lubricated , both coefficients are considerably less than they would be without lubrication .
Coefficient of friction is a unitless quantity with a magnitude usually between 0 and 1.0 .
The actual value depends on the two surfaces that are in contact .
Many people have experienced the slipperiness of walking on ice .
However , many parts of the body , especially the joints , have much smaller coefficients of friction—often three or four times less than ice .
A joint is formed by the ends of two bones , which are connected by thick tissues .
The knee joint is formed by the lower leg bone ( the tibia ) and the thighbone ( the femur ) .
The hip is a ball ( at the end of the femur ) and socket ( part of the pelvis ) joint .
The ends of the bones in the joint are covered by cartilage , which provides a smooth , almost-glassy surface .
The joints also produce a fluid ( synovial fluid ) that reduces friction and wear .
A damaged or arthritic joint can be replaced by an artificial joint .
These replacements can be made of metals ( stainless steel or titanium ) or plastic ( polyethylene ) , also with very small coefficients of friction .
Natural lubricants include saliva produced in our mouths to aid in the swallowing process , and the slippery mucus found between organs in the body , allowing them to move freely past each other during heartbeats , during breathing , and when a person moves .
Hospitals and doctor ’ s clinics commonly use artificial lubricants , such as gels , to reduce friction .
The equations given for static and kinetic friction are empirical laws that describe the behavior of the forces of friction .
While these formulas are very useful for practical purposes , they do not have the status of mathematical statements that represent general principles ( e.g. , Newton ’ s second law ) .
In fact , there are cases for which these equations are not even good approximations .
For instance , neither formula is accurate for lubricated surfaces or for two surfaces siding across each other at high speeds .
Unless specified , we will not be concerned with these exceptions .
A 20.0-kg crate is at rest on a floor as shown in .
The coefficient of static friction between the crate and floor is 0.700 and the coefficient of kinetic friction is 0.600 .
A horizontal force is applied to the crate .
Find the force of friction if ( a ) ( b ) ( c ) and ( d ) The free-body diagram of the crate is shown in ( b ) .
We apply Newton ’ s second law in the horizontal and vertical directions , including the friction force in opposition to the direction of motion of the box .
Newton ’ s second law GIVES Here we are using the symbol f to represent the frictional force since we have not yet determined whether the crate is subject to station friction or kinetic friction .
We do this whenever we are unsure what type of friction is acting .
Now the weight of the crate is which is also equal to N .
Once the crate is in motion , kinetic friction acts .
Then and the acceleration is This example illustrates how we consider friction in a dynamics problem .
Notice that static friction has a value that matches the applied force , until we reach the maximum value of static friction .
Also , no motion can occur until the applied force equals the force of static friction , but the force of kinetic friction will then become smaller .
Check Your Understanding A block of mass 1.0 kg rests on a horizontal surface .
The frictional coefficients for the block and surface are and ( a ) What is the minimum horizontal force required to move the block ?
( b ) What is the block ’ s acceleration when this force is applied ?
One situation where friction plays an obvious role is that of an object on a slope .
It might be a crate being pushed up a ramp to a loading dock or a skateboarder coasting down a mountain , but the basic physics is the same .
We usually generalize the sloping surface and call it an inclined plane but then pretend that the surface is flat .
Let ’ s look at an example of analyzing motion on an inclined plane with friction .
A skier with a mass of 62 kg is sliding down a snowy slope at a constant velocity .
The normal force is always perpendicular to the surface , and since there is no motion perpendicular to the surface , the normal force should equal the component of the skier ’ s weight perpendicular to the slope .
( See , which repeats a figure from the chapter on Newton ’ s laws of motion . )
In situations like this , where an object of mass m slides down a slope that makes an angle with the horizontal , friction is given by All objects slide down a slope with constant acceleration under these circumstances .
We have discussed that when an object rests on a horizontal surface , the normal force supporting it is equal in magnitude to its weight .
Furthermore , simple friction is always proportional to the normal force .
When an object is not on a horizontal surface , as with the inclined plane , we must find the force acting on the object that is directed perpendicular to the surface ; it is a component of the weight .
We now derive a useful relationship for calculating coefficient of friction on an inclined plane .
Notice that the result applies only for situations in which the object slides at constant speed down the ramp .
An object slides down an inclined plane at a constant velocity if the net force on the object is zero .
We can use this fact to measure the coefficient of kinetic friction between two objects .
As shown in , the kinetic friction on a slope is .
The component of the weight down the slope is equal to ( see the free-body diagram in ) .
These forces act in opposite directions , so when they have equal magnitude , the acceleration is zero .
Writing these out , Solving for we find that Put a coin on a book and tilt it until the coin slides at a constant velocity down the book .
You might need to tap the book lightly to get the coin to move .
Measure the angle of tilt relative to the horizontal and find Note that the coin does not start to slide at all until an angle greater than is attained , since the coefficient of static friction is larger than the coefficient of kinetic friction .
Think about how this may affect the value for and its uncertainty .
The simpler aspects of friction dealt with so far are its macroscopic ( large-scale ) characteristics .
Great strides have been made in the atomic-scale explanation of friction during the past several decades .
Researchers are finding that the atomic nature of friction seems to have several fundamental characteristics .
These characteristics not only explain some of the simpler aspects of friction—they also hold the potential for the development of nearly friction-free environments that could save hundreds of billions of dollars in energy which is currently being converted ( unnecessarily ) into heat .
illustrates one macroscopic characteristic of friction that is explained by microscopic ( small-scale ) research .
We have noted that friction is proportional to the normal force , but not to the amount of area in contact , a somewhat counterintuitive notion .
When two rough surfaces are in contact , the actual contact area is a tiny fraction of the total area because only high spots touch .
When a greater normal force is exerted , the actual contact area increases , and we find that the friction is proportional to this area .
However , the atomic-scale view promises to explain far more than the simpler features of friction .
The mechanism for how heat is generated is now being determined .
In other words , why do surfaces get warmer when rubbed ?
Essentially , atoms are linked with one another to form lattices .
When surfaces rub , the surface atoms adhere and cause atomic lattices to vibrate—essentially creating sound waves that penetrate the material .
The sound waves diminish with distance , and their energy is converted into heat .
Chemical reactions that are related to frictional wear can also occur between atoms and molecules on the surfaces .
shows how the tip of a probe drawn across another material is deformed by atomic-scale friction .
The force needed to drag the tip can be measured and is found to be related to shear stress , which is discussed in .
The variation in shear stress is remarkable ( more than a factor of ) and difficult to predict theoretically , but shear stress is yielding a fundamental understanding of a large-scale phenomenon known since ancient times—friction .
Describe a on a molecular level .
Describe matter in terms of molecular motion .
The description should include diagrams to support the description ; how the temperature affects the image ; what are the differences and similarities between solid , liquid , and gas particle motion ; and how the size and speed of gas molecules relate to everyday objects .
The two blocks of are attached to each other by a massless string that is wrapped around a frictionless pulley .
When the bottom 4.00-kg block is pulled to the left by the constant force the top 2.00-kg block slides across it to the right .
Find the magnitude of the force necessary to move the blocks at constant speed .
Assume that the coefficient of kinetic friction between all surfaces is 0.400 .
We analyze the motions of the two blocks separately .
The top block is subjected to a contact force exerted by the bottom block .
The first contact force has components and which are simply reaction forces to the contact forces that the bottom block exerts on the top block .
The components of the contact force of the floor are and Other forces on this block are Since the top block is moving horizontally to the right at constant velocity , its acceleration is zero in both the horizontal and the vertical directions .
When these values are substituted into the second set of equations , we can determine and P .
They are Understanding what direction in which to draw the friction force is often troublesome .
Notice that each friction force labeled in acts in the direction opposite the motion of its corresponding block .
A 50.0-kg crate rests on the bed of a truck as shown in .
The coefficients of friction between the surfaces are and Find the frictional force on the crate when the truck is accelerating forward relative to the ground at ( a ) 2.00 m/s , and ( b ) 5.00 m/s .
The forces on the crate are its weight and the normal and frictional forces due to contact with the truck bed .
We start by assuming that the crate is not slipping .
In this case , the static frictional force acts on the crate .
Furthermore , the accelerations of the crate and the truck are equal .
Application of Newton ’ s second law to the crate , using the reference frame attached to the ground , yields We can now check the validity of our no-slip assumption .
The maximum value of the force of static friction is whereas the actual force of static friction that acts when the truck accelerates forward at is only Thus , the assumption of no slipping is valid .
If the crate is to move with the truck when it accelerates at the force of static friction must be Since this exceeds the maximum of 196 N , the crate must slip .
The frictional force is therefore kinetic and is The horizontal acceleration of the crate relative to the ground is now found from Relative to the ground , the truck is accelerating forward at and the crate is accelerating forward at .
Hence the crate is sliding backward relative to the bed of the truck with an acceleration Earlier , we analyzed the situation of a downhill skier moving at constant velocity to determine the coefficient of kinetic friction .
Now let ’ s do a similar analysis to determine acceleration .
The snowboarder of glides down a slope that is inclined at to the horizontal .
The coefficient of kinetic friction between the board and the snow is What is the acceleration of the snowboarder ?
The forces acting on the snowboarder are her weight and the contact force of the slope , which has a component normal to the incline and a component along the incline ( force of kinetic friction ) .
Because she moves along the slope , the most convenient reference frame for analyzing her motion is one with the x -axis along and the y -axis perpendicular to the incline .
Check Your Understanding The snowboarder is now moving down a hill with incline .
What is the skier ’ s acceleration ?
In , we examined the basic concepts of circular motion .
An object undergoing circular motion , like one of the race cars shown at the beginning of this chapter , must be accelerating because it is changing the direction of its velocity .
We proved that this centrally directed acceleration , called centripetal acceleration , is given by the formula where v is the velocity of the object , directed along a tangent line to the curve at any instant .
If we know the angular velocity , then we can use Angular velocity gives the rate at which the object is turning through the curve , in units of rad/s .
This acceleration acts along the radius of the curved path and is thus also referred to as a radial acceleration .
An acceleration must be produced by a force .
Any force or combination of forces can cause a centripetal or radial acceleration .
Any net force causing uniform circular motion is called a centripetal force .
The direction of a centripetal force is toward the center of curvature , the same as the direction of centripetal acceleration .
Centripetal force is always perpendicular to the path and points to the center of curvature , because is perpendicular to the velocity and points to the center of curvature .
Note that if you solve the first expression for r , you get This implies that for a given mass and velocity , a large centripetal force causes a small radius of curvature—that is , a tight curve , as in .
( a ) Calculate the centripetal force exerted on a 900.0-kg car that negotiates a 500.0-m radius curve at 25.00 m/s .
( b ) Assuming an unbanked curve , find the minimum static coefficient of friction between the tires and the road , static friction being the reason that keeps the car from slipping .
We know that Thus , shows the forces acting on the car on an unbanked ( level ground ) curve .
Friction is to the left , keeping the car from slipping , and because it is the only horizontal force acting on the car , the friction is the centripetal force in this case .
We know that the maximum static friction ( at which the tires roll but do not slip ) is where is the static coefficient of friction and N is the normal force .
The normal force equals the car ’ s weight on level ground , so Thus the centripetal force in this situation is Now we have a relationship between centripetal force and the coefficient of friction .
Using the equation we obtain We solve this for noting that mass cancels , and obtain Substituting the knowns , ( Because coefficients of friction are approximate , the answer is given to only two digits . )
The coefficient of friction found in ( b ) is much smaller than is typically found between tires and roads .
Note that mass cancels , implying that , in this example , it does not matter how heavily loaded the car is to negotiate the turn .
Mass cancels because friction is assumed proportional to the normal force , which in turn is proportional to mass .
If the surface of the road were banked , the normal force would be less , as discussed next .
Check Your Understanding A car moving at 96.8 km/h travels around a circular curve of radius 182.9 m on a flat country road .
What must be the minimum coefficient of static friction to keep the car from slipping ?
Let us now consider banked curves , where the slope of the road helps you negotiate the curve .
The greater the angle , the faster you can take the curve .
Race tracks for bikes as well as cars , for example , often have steeply banked curves .
In an “ ideally banked curve , ” the angle is such that you can negotiate the curve at a certain speed without the aid of friction between the tires and the road .
We will derive an expression for for an ideally banked curve and consider an example related to it .
For ideal banking , the net external force equals the horizontal centripetal force in the absence of friction .
The components of the normal force N in the horizontal and vertical directions must equal the centripetal force and the weight of the car , respectively .
In cases in which forces are not parallel , it is most convenient to consider components along perpendicular axes—in this case , the vertical and horizontal directions .
shows a free-body diagram for a car on a frictionless banked curve .
If the angle is ideal for the speed and radius , then the net external force equals the necessary centripetal force .
The only two external forces acting on the car are its weight and the normal force of the road ( A frictionless surface can only exert a force perpendicular to the surface—that is , a normal force . )
These two forces must add to give a net external force that is horizontal toward the center of curvature and has magnitude Because this is the crucial force and it is horizontal , we use a coordinate system with vertical and horizontal axes .
From , we see that the vertical component of the normal force is and the only other vertical force is the car ’ s weight .
These must be equal in magnitude ; thus , Now we can combine these two equations to eliminate N and get an expression for , as desired .
Solving the second equation for and substituting this into the first yields Taking the inverse tangent gives This expression can be understood by considering how depends on v and r .
A large is obtained for a large v and a small r. That is , roads must be steeply banked for high speeds and sharp curves .
Friction helps , because it allows you to take the curve at greater or lower speed than if the curve were frictionless .
Note that does not depend on the mass of the vehicle .
Curves on some test tracks and race courses , such as Daytona International Speedway in Florida , are very steeply banked .
This banking , with the aid of tire friction and very stable car configurations , allows the curves to be taken at very high speed .
To illustrate , calculate the speed at which a 100.0-m radius curve banked at should be driven if the road were frictionless .
We first note that all terms in the expression for the ideal angle of a banked curve except for speed are known ; thus , we need only rearrange it so that speed appears on the left-hand side and then substitute known quantities .
Starting with we get Noting that we obtain This is just about 165 km/h , consistent with a very steeply banked and rather sharp curve .
Tire friction enables a vehicle to take the curve at significantly higher speeds .
Airplanes also make turns by banking .
The lift force , due to the force of the air on the wing , acts at right angles to the wing .
When the airplane banks , the pilot is obtaining greater lift than necessary for level flight .
The vertical component of lift balances the airplane ’ s weight , and the horizontal component accelerates the plane .
The banking angle shown in is given by .
We analyze the forces in the same way we treat the case of the car rounding a banked curve .
Join the in an exploration of rotational motion .
Rotate the merry-go-round to change its angle or choose a constant angular velocity or angular acceleration .
Explore how circular motion relates to the bug ’ s xy -position , velocity , and acceleration using vectors or graphs .
A circular motion requires a force , the so-called centripetal force , which is directed to the axis of rotation .
This simplified demonstrates this force .
What do taking off in a jet airplane , turning a corner in a car , riding a merry-go-round , and the circular motion of a tropical cyclone have in common ?
Each exhibits inertial forces—forces that merely seem to arise from motion , because the observer ’ s frame of reference is accelerating or rotating .
When taking off in a jet , most people would agree it feels as if you are being pushed back into the seat as the airplane accelerates down the runway .
Yet a physicist would say that you tend to remain stationary while the seat pushes forward on you .
An even more common experience occurs when you make a tight curve in your car—say , to the right .
You feel as if you are thrown ( that is , forced ) toward the left relative to the car .
Again , a physicist would say that you are going in a straight line ( recall Newton ’ s first law ) but the car moves to the right , not that you are experiencing a force from the left .
We can reconcile these points of view by examining the frames of reference used .
Let us concentrate on people in a car .
Passengers instinctively use the car as a frame of reference , whereas a physicist might use Earth .
The physicist might make this choice because Earth is nearly an inertial frame of reference , in which all forces have an identifiable physical origin .
In such a frame of reference , Newton ’ s laws of motion take the form given in .
The car is a noninertial frame of reference because it is accelerated to the side .
The force to the left sensed by car passengers is an inertial force having no physical origin ( it is due purely to the inertia of the passenger , not to some physical cause such as tension , friction , or gravitation ) .
The car , as well as the driver , is actually accelerating to the right .
This inertial force is said to be an inertial force because it does not have a physical origin , such as gravity .
A physicist will choose whatever reference frame is most convenient for the situation being analyzed .
There is no problem to a physicist in including inertial forces and Newton ’ s second law , as usual , if that is more convenient , for example , on a merry-go-round or on a rotating planet .
Noninertial ( accelerated ) frames of reference are used when it is useful to do so .
Different frames of reference must be considered in discussing the motion of an astronaut in a spacecraft traveling at speeds near the speed of light , as you will appreciate in the study of the special theory of relativity .
Let us now take a mental ride on a merry-go-round—specifically , a rapidly rotating playground merry-go-round .
You take the merry-go-round to be your frame of reference because you rotate together .
When rotating in that noninertial frame of reference , you feel an inertial force that tends to throw you off ; this is often referred to as a centrifugal force ( not to be confused with centripetal force ) .
Centrifugal force is a commonly used term , but it does not actually exist .
You must hang on tightly to counteract your inertia ( which people often refer to as centrifugal force ) .
In Earth ’ s frame of reference , there is no force trying to throw you off ; we emphasize that centrifugal force is a fiction .
You must hang on to make yourself go in a circle because otherwise you would go in a straight line , right off the merry-go-round , in keeping with Newton ’ s first law .
But the force you exert acts toward the center of the circle .
This inertial effect , carrying you away from the center of rotation if there is no centripetal force to cause circular motion , is put to good use in centrifuges .
A centrifuge spins a sample very rapidly , as mentioned earlier in this chapter .
Viewed from the rotating frame of reference , the inertial force throws particles outward , hastening their sedimentation .
The greater the angular velocity , the greater the centrifugal force .
But what really happens is that the inertia of the particles carries them along a line tangent to the circle while the test tube is forced in a circular path by a centripetal force .
Let us now consider what happens if something moves in a rotating frame of reference .
For example , what if you slide a ball directly away from the center of the merry-go-round , as shown in ?
The ball follows a straight path relative to Earth ( assuming negligible friction ) and a path curved to the right on the merry-go-round ’ s surface .
A person standing next to the merry-go-round sees the ball moving straight and the merry-go-round rotating underneath it .
In the merry-go-round ’ s frame of reference , we explain the apparent curve to the right by using an inertial force , called the Coriolis force , which causes the ball to curve to the right .
The Coriolis force can be used by anyone in that frame of reference to explain why objects follow curved paths and allows us to apply Newton ’ s laws in noninertial frames of reference .
Up until now , we have considered Earth to be an inertial frame of reference with little or no worry about effects due to its rotation .
Yet such effects do exist—in the rotation of weather systems , for example .
Most consequences of Earth ’ s rotation can be qualitatively understood by analogy with the merry-go-round .
Viewed from above the North Pole , Earth rotates counterclockwise , as does the merry-go-round in .
As on the merry-go-round , any motion in Earth ’ s Northern Hemisphere experiences a Coriolis force to the right .
Just the opposite occurs in the Southern Hemisphere ; there , the force is to the left .
Because Earth ’ s angular velocity is small , the Coriolis force is usually negligible , but for large-scale motions , such as wind patterns , it has substantial effects .
The Coriolis force causes hurricanes in the Northern Hemisphere to rotate in the counterclockwise direction , whereas tropical cyclones in the Southern Hemisphere rotate in the clockwise direction .
( The terms hurricane , typhoon , and tropical storm are regionally specific names for cyclones , which are storm systems characterized by low pressure centers , strong winds , and heavy rains . )
helps show how these rotations take place .
Air flows toward any region of low pressure , and tropical cyclones contain particularly low pressures .
Thus winds flow toward the center of a tropical cyclone or a low-pressure weather system at the surface .
In the Northern Hemisphere , these inward winds are deflected to the right , as shown in the figure , producing a counterclockwise circulation at the surface for low-pressure zones of any type .
Low pressure at the surface is associated with rising air , which also produces cooling and cloud formation , making low-pressure patterns quite visible from space .
Conversely , wind circulation around high-pressure zones is clockwise in the Southern Hemisphere but is less visible because high pressure is associated with sinking air , producing clear skies .
The rotation of tropical cyclones and the path of a ball on a merry-go-round can just as well be explained by inertia and the rotation of the system underneath .
When noninertial frames are used , inertial forces , such as the Coriolis force , must be invented to explain the curved path .
There is no identifiable physical source for these inertial forces .
In an inertial frame , inertia explains the path , and no force is found to be without an identifiable source .
Either view allows us to describe nature , but a view in an inertial frame is the simplest in the sense that all forces have origins and explanations .
Another interesting force in everyday life is the force of drag on an object when it is moving in a fluid ( either a gas or a liquid ) .
You feel the drag force when you move your hand through water .
You might also feel it if you move your hand during a strong wind .
The faster you move your hand , the harder it is to move .
You feel a smaller drag force when you tilt your hand so only the side goes through the air—you have decreased the area of your hand that faces the direction of motion .
Like friction , the drag force always opposes the motion of an object .
Unlike simple friction , the drag force is proportional to some function of the velocity of the object in that fluid .
This functionality is complicated and depends upon the shape of the object , its size , its velocity , and the fluid it is in .
For most large objects such as cyclists , cars , and baseballs not moving too slowly , the magnitude of the drag force is proportional to the square of the speed of the object .
We can write this relationship mathematically as When taking into account other factors , this relationship becomes where C is the drag coefficient , A is the area of the object facing the fluid , and is the density of the fluid .
( Recall that density is mass per unit volume . )
As we shall see in , for small particles moving at low speeds in a fluid , the exponent n is equal to 1 .
Drag force is proportional to the square of the speed of the object .
Mathematically , where C is the drag coefficient , A is the area of the object facing the fluid , and is the density of the fluid .
Athletes as well as car designers seek to reduce the drag force to lower their race times .
Aerodynamic shaping of an automobile can reduce the drag force and thus increase a car ’ s gas mileage .
The value of the drag coefficient C is determined empirically , usually with the use of a wind tunnel .
The drag coefficient can depend upon velocity , but we assume that it is a constant here .
lists some typical drag coefficients for a variety of objects .
Notice that the drag coefficient is a dimensionless quantity .
At highway speeds , over of the power of a car is used to overcome air drag .
The most fuel-efficient cruising speed is about 70–80 km/h ( about 45–50 mi/h ) .
For this reason , during the 1970s oil crisis in the United States , maximum speeds on highways were set at about 90 km/h ( 55 mi/h ) .
Substantial research is under way in the sporting world to minimize drag .
The dimples on golf balls are being redesigned , as are the clothes that athletes wear .
Bicycle racers and some swimmers and runners wear full bodysuits .
Australian Cathy Freeman wore a full body suit in the 2000 Sydney Olympics and won a gold medal in the 400-m race .
Many swimmers in the 2008 Beijing Olympics wore ( Speedo ) body suits ; it might have made a difference in breaking many world records .
Most elite swimmers ( and cyclists ) shave their body hair .
Such innovations can have the effect of slicing away milliseconds in a race , sometimes making the difference between a gold and a silver medal .
One consequence is that careful and precise guidelines must be continuously developed to maintain the integrity of the sport .
Some interesting situations connected to Newton ’ s second law occur when considering the effects of drag forces upon a moving object .
For instance , consider a skydiver falling through air under the influence of gravity .
The two forces acting on him are the force of gravity and the drag force ( ignoring the small buoyant force ) .
The downward force of gravity remains constant regardless of the velocity at which the person is moving .
However , as the person ’ s velocity increases , the magnitude of the drag force increases until the magnitude of the drag force is equal to the gravitational force , thus producing a net force of zero .
A zero net force means that there is no acceleration , as shown by Newton ’ s second law .
At this point , the person ’ s velocity remains constant and we say that the person has reached his terminal velocity Since is proportional to the speed squared , a heavier skydiver must go faster for to equal his weight .
Let ’ s see how this works out more quantitatively .
At the terminal velocity , Thus , Using the equation for drag force , we have Solving for the velocity , we obtain Assume the density of air is A 75-kg skydiver descending head first has a cross-sectional area of approximately and a drag coefficient of approximately .
We find that This means a skydiver with a mass of 75 kg achieves a terminal velocity of about 350 km/h while traveling in a pike ( head first ) position , minimizing the area and his drag .
In a spread-eagle position , that terminal velocity may decrease to about 200 km/h as the area increases .
This terminal velocity becomes much smaller after the parachute opens .
Find the terminal velocity of an 85-kg skydiver falling in a spread-eagle position .
At terminal velocity , Thus , the drag force on the skydiver must equal the force of gravity ( the person ’ s weight ) .
Using the equation of drag force , we find The terminal velocity can be written as This result is consistent with the value for mentioned earlier .
The 75-kg skydiver going feet first had a terminal velocity of He weighed less but had a smaller frontal area and so a smaller drag due to the air .
Check Your Understanding Find the terminal velocity of a 50-kg skydiver falling in spread-eagle fashion .
The size of the object that is falling through air presents another interesting application of air drag .
If you fall from a 5-mhigh branch of a tree , you will likely get hurt—possibly fracturing a bone .
However , a small squirrel does this all the time , without getting hurt .
You do not reach a terminal velocity in such a short distance , but the squirrel does .
The following interesting quote on animal size and terminal velocity is from a 1928 essay by a British biologist , J .
B. S. Haldane , titled “ On Being the Right Size. ” “ To the mouse and any smaller animal , [ gravity ] presents practically no dangers .
You can drop a mouse down a thousandyard mine shaft ; and , on arriving at the bottom , it gets a slight shock and walks away , provided that the ground is fairly soft .
A rat is killed , a man is broken , and a horse splashes .
For the resistance presented to movement by the air is proportional to the surface of the moving object .
Divide an animal ’ s length , breadth , and height each by ten ; its weight is reduced to a thousandth , but its surface only to a hundredth .
Then we find that the drag force is proportional just to the velocity .
This relationship is given by Stokes ’ law .
For a spherical object falling in a medium , the drag force is where r is the radius of the object , is the viscosity of the fluid , and v is the object ’ s velocity .
Good examples of Stokes ’ law are provided by microorganisms , pollen , and dust particles .
Because each of these objects is so small , we find that many of these objects travel unaided only at a constant ( terminal ) velocity .
Terminal velocities for bacteria ( size about can be about To move at a greater speed , many bacteria swim using flagella ( organelles shaped like little tails ) that are powered by little motors embedded in the cell .
Sediment in a lake can move at a greater terminal velocity ( about the lake after being deposited on the surface .
If we compare animals living on land with those in water , you can see how drag has influenced evolution .
Fish , dolphins , and even massive whales are streamlined in shape to reduce drag forces .
Birds are streamlined and migratory species that fly large distances often have particular features such as long necks .
Flocks of birds fly in the shape of a spearhead as the flock forms a streamlined pattern .
In humans , one important example of streamlining is the shape of sperm , which need to be efficient in their use of energy .
so it can take days for it to reach the bottom of In lecture demonstrations , we do on different objects .
The objects are placed in a uniform airstream created by a fan .
Calculate the Reynolds number and the drag coefficient .
When a body slides across a surface , the frictional force on it is approximately constant and given by Unfortunately , the frictional force on a body moving through a liquid or a gas does not behave so simply .
This drag force is generally a complicated function of the body ’ s velocity .
Two situations for which the frictional force can be represented by this equation are a motorboat moving through water and a small object falling slowly through a liquid .
Let ’ s consider the object falling through a liquid .
The free-body diagram of this object with the positive direction downward is shown in .
Newton ’ s second law in the vertical direction gives the differential equation where we have written the acceleration as As v increases , the frictional force – bv increases until it matches mg .
At this point , there is no acceleration and the velocity remains constant at the terminal velocity From the previous equation , so We can find the object ’ s velocity by integrating the differential equation for v .
First , we rearrange terms in this equation to obtain Assuming that integration of this equation yields or where are dummy variables of integration .
With the limits given , we find Since and we obtain and Notice that as which is the terminal velocity .
The position at any time may be found by integrating the equation for v .
With Assuming which integrates to A motorboat is moving across a lake at a speed when its motor suddenly freezes up and stops .
The boat then slows down under the frictional force ( a ) What are the velocity and position of the boat as functions of time ?
( b ) If the boat slows down from 4.0 to 1.0 m/s in 10 s , how far does it travel before stopping ?
For example , at we have the boat effectively whereas we also have Therefore , the boat ’ s velocity and position have essentially reached their final values .
With and we have so and Now the boat ’ s limiting position is In the both of the previous examples , we found “ limiting ” values .
The terminal velocity is the same as the limiting velocity , which is the velocity of the falling object after a ( relatively ) long time has passed .
Similarly , the limiting distance of the boat is the distance the boat will travel after a long amount of time has passed .
Due to the properties of exponential decay , the time involved to reach either of these values is actually not too long ( certainly not an infinite amount of time ! )
but they are quickly found by taking the limit to infinity .
Check Your Understanding Suppose the resistive force of the air on a skydiver can be approximated by .
If the terminal velocity of a 100-kg skydiver is 60 m/s , what is the value of b ?
In this chapter , we discuss some basic physical concepts involved in every physical motion in the universe , going beyond the concepts of force and change in motion , which we discussed in and .
These concepts are work , kinetic energy , and power .
We explain how these quantities are related to one another , which will lead us to a fundamental relationship called the work-energy theorem .
In the next chapter , we generalize this idea to the broader principle of conservation of energy .
The application of Newton ’ s laws usually requires solving differential equations that relate the forces acting on an object to the accelerations they produce .
Often , an analytic solution is intractable or impossible , requiring lengthy numerical solutions or simulations to get approximate results .
In such situations , more general relations , like the work-energy theorem ( or the conservation of energy ) , can still provide useful answers to many questions and require a more modest amount of mathematical calculation .
In particular , you will see how the work-energy theorem is useful in relating the speeds of a particle , at different points along its trajectory , to the forces acting on it , even when the trajectory is otherwise too complicated to deal with .
Thus , some aspects of motion can be addressed with fewer equations and without vector decompositions .
In physics , work is done on an object when energy is transferred to the object .
In other words , work is done when a force acts on something that undergoes a displacement from one position to another .
Forces can vary as a function of position , and displacements can be along various paths between two points .
The work done by a force is the integral of the force with respect to displacement along the path of the displacement : The vectors involved in the definition of the work done by a force acting on a particle are illustrated in .
We choose to express the dot product in terms of the magnitudes of the vectors and the cosine of the angle between them , because the meaning of the dot product for work can be put into words more directly in terms of magnitudes and angles .
We could equally well have expressed the dot product in terms of the various components introduced in .
In two dimensions , these were the x and y -components in Cartesian coordinates , or the r and -components in polar coordinates ; in three dimensions , it was just x - , y - , and z -components .
Which choice is more convenient depends on the situation .
In words , you can express for the work done by a force acting over a displacement as a product of one component acting parallel to the other component .
From the properties of vectors , it doesn ’ t matter if you take the component of the force parallel to the displacement or the component of the displacement parallel to the force—you get the same result either way .
Recall that the magnitude of a force times the cosine of the angle the force makes with a given direction is the component of the force in the given direction .
The components of a vector can be positive , negative , or zero , depending on whether the angle between the vector and the component-direction is between and or and , or is equal to .
As a result , the work done by a force can be positive , negative , or zero , depending on whether the force is generally in the direction of the displacement , generally opposite to the displacement , or perpendicular to the displacement .
The maximum work is done by a given force when it is along the direction of the displacement , and zero work is done when the force is perpendicular to the displacement .
The units of work are units of force multiplied by units of length , which in the SI system is newtons times meters , This combination is called a joule , for historical reasons that we will mention later , and is abbreviated as J .
The horizontal displacement of the lawn mower , over which the force acts , is The work done on the lawn mower is , which the figure also illustrates as the horizontal component of the force times the magnitude of the displacement .
( b ) shows a person holding a briefcase .
The person must exert an upward force , equal in magnitude to the weight of the briefcase , but this force does no work , because the displacement over which it acts is zero .
How much work is done on the lawn mower by the person in ( a ) if he exerts a constant force of 75.0 N at an angle below the horizontal and pushes the mower 25.0 m on level ground ?
We can solve this problem by substituting the given values into the definition of work done on an object by a constant force , stated in the equation .
The force , angle , and displacement are given , so that only the work W is unknown .
When you mow the grass , other forces act on the lawn mower besides the force you exert—namely , the contact force of the ground and the gravitational force of Earth .
Let ’ s consider the work done by these forces in general .
For an object moving on a surface , the displacement is tangent to the surface .
The part of the contact force on the object that is perpendicular to the surface is the normal force Since the cosine of the angle between the normal and the tangent to a surface is zero , we have The normal force never does work under these circumstances .
( Note that if the displacement did have a relative component perpendicular to the surface , the object would either leave the surface or break through it , and there would no longer be any normal contact force .
However , if the object is more than a particle , and has an internal structure , the normal contact force can do work on it , for example , by displacing it or deforming its shape .
This will be mentioned in the next chapter . )
is opposite to If the magnitude of by friction is where is the path length on the surface .
The force of static friction does no work in the reference frame between two surfaces because there is never displacement between the surfaces .
As an external force , static friction can do work .
Static friction can keep someone from sliding off a sled when the sled is moving and perform positive work on the person .
If you ’ re driving your car at the speed limit on a straight , level stretch of highway , the negative work done by air resistance is balanced by the positive work done by the static friction of the road on the drive wheels .
You can pull the rug out from under an object in such a way that it slides backward relative to the rug , but forward relative to the floor .
In this case , kinetic friction exerted by the rug on the object could be in the same direction as the displacement of the object , relative to the floor , and do positive work .
The bottom line is that you need to analyze each particular case to determine the work done by the forces , whether positive , negative or zero .
You decide to move your couch to a new position on your horizontal living room floor .
The normal force on the couch is 1 kN and the coefficient of friction is 0.6 .
( a ) You first push the couch 3 m parallel to a wall and then 1 m perpendicular to the wall ( A to B in ) .
How much work is done by the frictional force ?
( b ) You don ’ t like the new position , so you move the couch straight back to its original position ( B to A in ) .
What was the total work done against friction moving the couch away from its original position and back again ?
The magnitude of the force of kinetic friction on the couch is constant , equal to the coefficient of friction times the .
Therefore , the work done by it is , where d is the path length traversed .
normal force , The segments of the paths are the sides of a right triangle , so the path lengths are easily calculated .
In part ( b ) , you can use the fact that the work done against a force is the negative of the work done by the force .
However , the total work was not zero .
The reason is that forces like friction are classified as nonconservative forces , or dissipative forces , as we discuss in the next chapter .
Check Your Understanding Can kinetic friction ever be a constant force for all paths ?
The other force on the lawn mower mentioned above was Earth ’ s gravitational force , or the weight of the mower .
Near the surface of Earth , the gravitational force on an object of mass m has a constant magnitude , mg , and constant direction , vertically down .
Therefore , the work done by gravity on an object is the dot product of its weight and its displacement .
In many cases , it is convenient to express the dot product for gravitational work in terms of the x - , y - , and z -components of the vectors .
A typical coordinate system has the x -axis horizontal and the y -axis vertically up .
Gravity does negative work on an object that moves upward , or , in other words , you must do positive work against gravity to lift an object upward .
Alternately , gravity does positive work on an object that moves downward , or you do negative work against gravity to “ lift ” an object downward , controlling its descent so it doesn ’ t drop to the ground .
( “ Lift ” is used as opposed to “ drop ” . )
You lift an oversized library book , weighing 20 N , 1 m vertically down from a shelf , and carry it 3 m horizontally to a table .
How much work does gravity do on the book ?
( b ) When you ’ re finished , you move the book in a straight line back to its original place on the shelf .
What was the total work done against gravity , moving the book away from its original position on the shelf and back again ?
We have just seen that the work done by a constant force of gravity depends only on the weight of the object moved and the difference in height for the path taken , .
We can evaluate the difference in height to answer ( a ) and ( b ) .
The gravitational force between two objects is an attractive force , which does positive work when the objects get closer together .
Gravity does zero work ( 0 J ) when the book moves horizontally from the shelf to the table and negative work ( −20 J ) when the book moves from the table back to the shelf .
The total work done by gravity is zero Unlike friction or other dissipative forces , described in , the total work done against gravity , over any closed path , is zero .
Positive work is done against gravity on the upward parts of a closed path , but an equal amount of negative work is done against gravity on the downward parts .
In other words , work done against gravity , lifting an object up , is “ given back ” when the object comes back down .
Forces like gravity ( those that do zero work over any closed path ) are classified as conservative forces and play an important role in physics .
Check Your Understanding Can Earth ’ s gravity ever be a constant force for all paths ?
In general , forces may vary in magnitude and direction at points in space , and paths between two points may be curved .
( Although we chose to illustrate dW in Cartesian coordinates , other coordinates are better suited to some situations . )
defines the total work as a line integral , or the limit of a sum of infinitesimal amounts of work .
The physical concept of work is straightforward : you calculate the work for tiny displacements and add them up .
Sometimes the mathematics can seem complicated , but the following example demonstrates how cleanly they can operate .
An object moves along a parabolic path to the point under the action of a force .
Calculate the work done .
from the origin The components of the force are given functions of x and y .
We can use the equation of the path to express y and dy in terms of x and dx ; namely , Then , the integral for the work is just a definite integral of a function of x .
The infinitesimal element of work is The integral of is so This integral was not hard to do .
You can follow the same steps , as in this example , to calculate line integrals representing work for more complicated forces and paths .
In this example , everything was given in terms of x and y -components , which are easiest to use in evaluating the work in this case .
In other situations , magnitudes and angles might be easier .
Check Your Understanding Find the work done by the same force in over a cubic path , , between the same points and You saw in that to evaluate a line integral , you could reduce it to an integral over a single variable or parameter .
Usually , there are several ways to do this , which may be more or less convenient , depending on the particular case .
In , we reduced the line integral to an integral over x , but we could equally well have chosen to reduce everything to a function of y .
We didn ’ t do that because the functions in y involve the square root and fractional exponents , which may be less familiar , but for illustrative purposes , we do this now .
One very important and widely applicable variable force is the force exerted by a perfectly elastic spring , which satisfies Hooke ’ s law where k is the spring constant , and is the displacement from the spring ’ s unstretched ( equilibrium ) position .
Note that the unstretched position is only the same as the equilibrium position if no other forces are acting ( or , if they are , they cancel one another ) .
Forces between molecules , or in any system undergoing small displacements from a stable equilibrium , behave approximately like a spring force .
That is , the actual path could involve going back and forth before ending .
Another interesting thing to notice about is that , for this one-dimensional case , you can readily see the correspondence between the work done by a force and the area under the curve of the force versus its displacement .
Recall that , in general , a one-dimensional integral is the limit of the sum of infinitesimals , , representing the area of strips , as shown in .
The magnitude of one of these “ areas ” is just one-half the triangle ’ s base , along the x -axis , times the triangle ’ s height , along the force axis .
( There are quotation marks around “ area ” because this base-height product has the units of work , rather than square meters . )
A perfectly elastic spring requires 0.54 J of work to stretch 6 cm from its equilibrium position , as in ( b ) .
( a ) What is its spring constant k ?
( b ) How much work is required to stretch it an additional 6 cm ?
Work “ required ” means work done against the spring force , which is the negative of the work in , that is For part ( a ) , and ; for part ( b ) , and .
In part ( a ) , the work is given and you can solve for the spring constant ; in part ( b ) , you can use the value of k , from part ( a ) , to solve for the work .
, so Since the work done by a spring force is independent of the path , you only needed to calculate the difference in the quantity at the end points .
Notice that the work required to stretch the spring from 0 to 12 cm is four times that required to stretch it from 0 to 6 cm , because that work depends on the square of the amount of stretch from equilibrium , .
In this circumstance , the work to stretch the spring from 0 to 12 cm is also equal to the work for a composite path from 0 to 6 cm followed by an additional stretch from 6 cm to 12 cm .
Therefore , , or , as we found above .
Check Your Understanding The spring in is compressed 6 cm from its equilibrium length .
( a ) Does the spring force do positive or negative work and ( b ) what is the magnitude ?
It ’ s plausible to suppose that the greater the velocity of a body , the greater effect it could have on other bodies .
This does not depend on the direction of the velocity , only its magnitude .
At the end of the seventeenth century , a quantity was introduced into mechanics to explain collisions between two perfectly elastic bodies , in which one body makes a head-on collision with an identical body at rest .
The first body stops , and the second body moves off with the initial velocity of the first body .
( If you have ever played billiards or croquet , or seen a model of Newton ’ s Cradle , you have observed this type of collision . )
The idea behind this quantity was related to the forces acting on a body and was referred to as “ the energy of motion. ” Later on , during the eighteenth century , the name kinetic energy was given to energy of motion .
With this history in mind , we can now state the classical definition of kinetic energy .
Note that when we say “ classical , ” we mean non-relativistic , that is , at speeds much less that the speed of light .
At speeds comparable to the speed of light , the special theory of relativity requires a different expression for the kinetic energy of a particle , as discussed in .
Since objects ( or systems ) of interest vary in complexity , we first define the kinetic energy of a particle with mass m .
Since , we see that also expresses the kinetic energy of a single particle .
Sometimes , this expression is more convenient to use than .
The units of kinetic energy are mass times the square of speed , or .
But the units of force are mass times acceleration , , so the units of kinetic energy are also the units of force times distance , which are the units of work , or joules .
You will see in the next section that work and kinetic energy have the same units , because they are different forms of the same , more general , physical property .
( a ) What is the kinetic energy of an 80-kg athlete , running at 10 m/s ?
( b ) The Chicxulub crater in Yucatan , one of the largest existing impact craters on Earth , is thought to have been created by an asteroid , traveling at 22 km/s and releasing of kinetic energy upon impact .
What was its mass ?
( c ) In nuclear reactors , thermal neutrons , traveling at about 2.2 km/s , play an important role .
What is the kinetic energy of such a particle ?
To answer these questions , you can use the definition of kinetic energy in .
You also have to look up the mass of a neutron .
Don ’ t forget to convert km into m to do these calculations , although , to save space , we omitted showing these conversions .
In this example , we used the way mass and speed are related to kinetic energy , and we encountered a very wide range of values for the kinetic energies .
Different units are commonly used for such very large and very small values .
The energy of the impactor in part ( b ) can be compared to the explosive yield of TNT and nuclear explosions , The Chicxulub asteroid ’ s kinetic energy was about a hundred million megatons .
At the other extreme , the energy of subatomic particle is expressed in electron-volts , The thermal neutron in part ( c ) has a kinetic energy of about one fortieth of an electronvolt .
Check Your Understanding ( a ) A car and a truck are each moving with the same kinetic energy .
Assume that the truck has more mass than the car .
Which has the greater speed ?
( b ) A car and a truck are each moving with the same speed .
Which has the greater kinetic energy ?
Because velocity is a relative quantity , you can see that the value of kinetic energy must depend on your frame of reference .
You can generally choose a frame of reference that is suited to the purpose of your analysis and that simplifies your calculations .
One such frame of reference is the one in which the observations of the system are made ( likely an external frame ) .
Another choice is a frame that is attached to , or moves with , the system ( likely an internal frame ) .
The equations for relative motion , discussed in , provide a link to calculating the kinetic energy of an object with respect to different frames of reference .
A 75.0-kg person walks down the central aisle of a subway car at a speed of 1.50 m/s relative to the car , whereas the train is moving at 15.0 m/s relative to the tracks .
( a ) What is the person ’ s kinetic energy relative to the car ?
( b ) What is the person ’ s kinetic energy relative to the tracks ?
( c ) What is the person ’ s kinetic energy relative to a frame moving with the person ?
Since speeds are given , we can use to calculate the person ’ s kinetic energy .
However , in part ( a ) , the person ’ s speed is relative to the subway car ( as given ) ; in part ( b ) , it is relative to the tracks ; and in part ( c ) , it is zero .
Therefore , the two possible values for kinetic energy relative to the car are and In a frame where as well .
You can see that the kinetic energy of an object can have very different values , depending on the frame of reference .
However , the kinetic energy of an object can never be negative , since it is the product of the mass and the square of the speed , both of which are always positive or zero .
Check Your Understanding You are rowing a boat parallel to the banks of a river .
Your kinetic energy relative to the banks is less than your kinetic energy relative to the water .
Are you rowing with or against the current ?
The kinetic energy of a particle is a single quantity , but the kinetic energy of a system of particles can sometimes be divided into various types , depending on the system and its motion .
For example , if all the particles in a system have the same velocity , the system is undergoing translational motion and has translational kinetic energy .
If an object is rotating , it could have rotational kinetic energy , or if it ’ s vibrating , it could have vibrational kinetic energy .
The kinetic energy of a system , relative to an internal frame of reference , may be called internal kinetic energy .
The kinetic energy associated with random molecular motion may be called thermal energy .
These names will be used in later chapters of the book , when appropriate .
Regardless of the name , every kind of kinetic energy is the same physical quantity , representing energy associated with motion .
( a ) A player lobs a mid-court pass with a 624-g basketball , which covers 15 m in 2 s. What is the basketball ’ s horizontal translational kinetic energy while in flight ?
( b ) An average molecule of air , in the basketball in part ( a ) , has a mass of 29 u , and an average speed of 500 m/s , relative to the basketball .
There are about molecules inside it , moving in random directions , when the ball is properly inflated .
What is the average translational kinetic energy of the random motion of all the molecules inside , relative to the basketball ?
( c ) How fast would the basketball have to travel relative to the court , as in part ( a ) , so as to have a kinetic energy equal to the amount in part ( b ) ?
Then multiply by the number of molecules to get the total result .
Finally , in part ( c ) , we can substitute the amount of kinetic energy in part ( b ) , and the mass of the basketball in part ( a ) , into the definition , and solve for v .
If the basketball were spinning , all parts of it would have not just the average speed , but it would also have rotational kinetic energy .
Part ( b ) reminds us that this kind of kinetic energy can be called internal or thermal kinetic energy .
Notice that this energy is about a hundred times the energy in part ( a ) .
How to make use of thermal energy will be the subject of the chapters on thermodynamics .
In part ( c ) , since the energy in part ( b ) is about 100 times that in part ( a ) , the speed should be about 10 times as big , which it is ( 76 compared to 7.5 m/s ) .
We have discussed how to find the work done on a particle by the forces that act on it , but how is that work manifested in the motion of the particle ?
According to Newton ’ s second law of motion , the sum of all the forces acting on a particle , or the net force , determines the rate of change in the momentum of the particle , or its motion .
Therefore , we should consider the work done by all the forces acting on a particle , or the net work , to see what effect it has on the particle ’ s motion .
Since derivatives and integrals of scalars are probably more familiar to you at this point , we express the dot product in terms of Cartesian coordinates before we integrate between any two points A and B on the particle ’ s trajectory .
This important result is called the work-energy theorem .
If an object speeds up , the net work done on it is positive .
When calculating the net work , you must include all the forces that act on an object .
If you leave out any forces that act on an object , or if you include any forces that don ’ t act on it , you will get a wrong result .
The importance of the work-energy theorem , and the further generalizations to which it leads , is that it makes some types of calculations much simpler to accomplish than they would be by trying to solve Newton ’ s second law .
For example , in , we found the speed of an object sliding down a frictionless plane by solving Newton ’ s second law for the acceleration and using kinematic equations for constant acceleration , obtaining where s is the displacement down the plane .
We can also get this result from the work-energy theorem in .
Since only two forces are acting on the objectgravity and the normal force-and the normal force does n't do any work , the net work is just the work done by gravity .
and the displacement .
After The work dW is the dot product of the force of gravity or taking the dot product and integrating from an initial position to a final position , one finds the net work as where y is positive up .
The work-energy theorem says that this equals the change in kinetic energy : Using a right triangle , we can see that What is gained by using the work-energy theorem ?
The answer is that for a frictionless plane surface , not much .
However , Newton ’ s second law is easy to solve only for this particular case , whereas the work-energy theorem gives the final speed for any shaped frictionless surface .
For an arbitrary curved surface , the normal force is not constant , and Newton ’ s second law may be difficult or impossible to solve analytically .
Constant or not , for motion along a surface , the normal force never does any work , because it ’ s perpendicular to the displacement .
A calculation using the work-energy theorem avoids this difficulty and applies to more general situations .
so the result for the final speed is the same .
Draw a free-body diagram for each force on the object .
Determine whether or not each force does work over the displacement in the diagram .
Be sure to keep any positive or negative signs in the work done .
Add up the total amount of work done by each force .
Set this total work equal to the change in kinetic energy and solve for any unknown parameter .
Check your answers .
If the object is traveling at a constant speed or zero acceleration , the total work done should be zero and match the change in kinetic energy .
If the total work is positive , the object must have sped up or increased kinetic energy .
If the total work is negative , the object must have slowed down or decreased kinetic energy .
The frictionless track for a toy car includes a loop-the-loop of radius R .
How high , measured from the bottom of the loop , must the car be placed to start from rest on the approaching section of track and go all the way around the loop ?
The free-body diagram at the final position of the object is drawn in .
The gravitational work is the only work done over the displacement that is not zero .
Since the weight points in the same direction as the net vertical displacement , the total work done by the gravitational force is positive .
From the work-energy theorem , the starting height determines the speed of the car at the top of the loop , where the notation is shown in the accompanying figure .
At the top of the loop , the normal force and gravity are both down and the acceleration is centripetal , so The condition for maintaining contact with the track is that there must be some normal force , however slight ; that is , .
Substituting for Implement the steps in the strategy to arrive at the desired result : and N , we can find the condition for .
On the surface of the loop , the normal component of gravity and the normal contact force must provide the centripetal acceleration of the car going around the loop .
The tangential component of gravity slows down or speeds up the car .
A child would find out how high to start the car by trial and error , but now that you know the work-energy theorem , you can predict the minimum height ( as well as other more useful results ) from physical principles .
By using the work-energy theorem , you did not have to solve a differential equation to determine the height .
Check Your Understanding Suppose the radius of the loop-the-loop in is 15 cm and the toy car starts from rest at a height of 45 cm above the bottom .
What is its speed at the top of the loop ?
Visit Carleton College ’ s site to see a of a looping rollercoaster .
In situations where the motion of an object is known , but the values of one or more of the forces acting on it are not known , you may be able to use the work-energy theorem to get some information about the forces .
Work depends on the force and the distance over which it acts , so the information is provided via their product .
A bullet from a 0.22LR-caliber cartridge has a mass of 40 grains ( 2.60 g ) and a muzzle velocity of 1100 ft./s ( 335 m/s ) .
It can penetrate eight 1-inch pine boards , each with thickness 0.75 inches .
What is the average stopping force exerted by the wood , as shown in ?
We can assume that under the general conditions stated , the bullet loses all its kinetic energy penetrating the boards , so the work-energy theorem says its initial kinetic energy is equal to the average stopping force times the distance penetrated .
The total thickness of eight 1-inch pine boards that the bullet penetrates is Applying the work-energy theorem , we get so We could have used Newton ’ s second law and kinematics in this example , but the work-energy theorem also supplies an answer to less simple situations .
The penetration of a bullet , fired vertically upward into a block of wood , is discussed in one section of Asif Shakur ’ s recent article [ “ Bullet-Block Science Video Puzzle. ” The Physics Teacher ( January 2015 ) 53 ( 1 ) : 15-16 ] .
If the bullet is fired dead center into the block , it loses all its kinetic energy and penetrates slightly farther than if fired off-center .
The reason is that if the bullet hits off-center , it has a little kinetic energy after it stops penetrating , because the block rotates .
The work-energy theorem implies that a smaller change in kinetic energy results in a smaller penetration .
You will understand more of the physics in this interesting article after you finish reading .
Learn more about work and energy in this called “ the ramp. ” Try changing the force pushing the box and the frictional force along the incline .
The work and energy plots can be examined to note the total work done and change in kinetic energy of the box .
The concept of work involves force and displacement ; the work-energy theorem relates the net work done on a body to the difference in its kinetic energy , calculated between two points on its trajectory .
None of these quantities or relations involves time explicitly , yet we know that the time available to accomplish a particular amount of work is frequently just as important to us as the amount itself .
In the chapter-opening figure , several sprinters may have achieved the same velocity at the finish , and therefore did the same amount of work , but the winner of the race did it in the least amount of time .
We express the relation between work done and the time interval involved in doing it , by introducing the concept of power .
Since work can vary as a function of time , we first define average power as the work done during a time interval , divided by the interval , Then , we can define the instantaneous power ( frequently referred to as just plain power ) .
If the power during an interval varies with time , then the work done is the time integral of the power , The work-energy theorem relates how work can be transformed into kinetic energy .
Since there are other forms of energy as well , as we discuss in the next chapter , we can also define power as the rate of transfer of energy .
Work and energy are measured in units of joules , so power is measured in units of joules per second , which has been given the SI name watts , abbreviation W : .
Another common unit for expressing the power capability of everyday devices is horsepower : .
An 80-kg army trainee does 10 pull-ups in 10 s .
How much average power do the trainee ’ s muscles supply moving his body ?
( Hint : Make reasonable estimates for any quantities needed . )
The work done against gravity , going up or down a distance , is ( If you lift and lower yourself at constant speed , the force you exert cancels gravity over the whole pull-up cycle . )
With these assumptions , we can calculate the work done for 10 pull-ups and divide by 10 s to get the average power .
If a force acts on a body that is displaced in a time dt , the power expended by the force is where is the velocity of the body .
The fact that the limits implied by the derivatives exist , for the motion of a real body , justifies the rearrangement of the infinitesimals .
How much power must an automobile engine expend to move a 1200-kg car up a 15 % grade at 90 km/h ?
Assume that 25 % of this power is dissipated overcoming air resistance and friction .
At constant velocity , there is no change in kinetic energy , so the net work done to move the car is zero .
Therefore the power supplied by the engine to move the car equals the power expended against gravity and air resistance .
By assumption , 75 % of the power is supplied against gravity , which equals where is the angle of the incline .
A 15 % grade means This reasoning allows us to solve for the power required .
Carrying out the suggested steps , we find or or about 78 hp .
( You should supply the steps used to convert units . )
This is a reasonable amount of power for the engine of a small to mid-size car to supply Note that this is only the power expended to move the car .
Much of the engine ’ s power goes elsewhere , for example , into waste heat .
That ’ s why cars need radiators .
Any remaining power could be used for acceleration , or to operate the car ’ s accessories .
In George Rhoads ’ rolling ball sculpture , the principle of conservation of energy governs the changes in the ball ’ s kinetic energy and relates them to changes and transfers for other types of energy associated with the ball ’ s interactions .
In this chapter , we introduce the important concept of potential energy .
This will enable us to formulate the law of conservation of mechanical energy and to apply it to simple systems , making solving problems easier .
In the final section on sources of energy , we will consider energy transfers and the general law of conservation of energy .
Throughout this book , the law of conservation of energy will be applied in increasingly more detail , as you encounter more complex and varied systems , and other forms of energy .
In , we saw that the work done on an object by the constant gravitational force , near the surface of Earth , over any displacement is a function only of the difference in the positions of the end-points of the displacement .
This property allows us to define a different kind of energy for the system than its kinetic energy , which is called potential energy .
We consider various properties and types of potential energy in the following subsections .
In , we analyzed the motion of a projectile , like kicking a football in .
For this example , let ’ s ignore friction and air resistance .
As the football rises , the work done by the gravitational force on the football is negative , because the ball ’ s displacement is positive vertically and the force due to gravity is negative vertically .
We also noted that the ball slowed down until it reached its highest point in the motion , thereby decreasing the ball ’ s kinetic energy .
This loss in kinetic energy translates to a gain in gravitational potential energy of the football-Earth system .
As the football falls toward Earth , the work done on the football is now positive , because the displacement and the gravitational force both point vertically downward .
The ball also speeds up , which indicates an increase in kinetic energy .
Therefore , energy is converted from gravitational potential energy back into kinetic energy .
Based on this scenario , we can define the difference of potential energy from point A to point B as the negative of the work done : This formula explicitly states a potential energy difference , not just an absolute potential energy .
Therefore , we need to define potential energy at a given position in such a way as to state standard values of potential energy on their own , rather than potential energy differences .
We do this by rewriting the potential energy function in terms of an arbitrary constant , The choice of the potential energy at a starting location of is made out of convenience in the given problem .
Most importantly , whatever choice is made should be stated and kept consistent throughout the given problem .
There are some well-accepted choices of initial potential energy .
For example , the lowest height in a problem is usually defined as zero potential energy , or if an object is in space , the farthest point away from the system is often defined as zero potential energy .
Then , the potential energy , with respect to zero at is just As long as there is no friction or air resistance , the change in kinetic energy of the football equals the change in gravitational potential energy of the football .
This can be generalized to any potential energy : Let ’ s look at a specific example , choosing zero potential energy for gravitational potential energy at convenient points .
A particle moves along the x -axis under the action of a force given by , where .
( a ) What is the difference in its potential energy as it moves from to ?
( b ) What is the particle ’ s potential energy at with respect to a given 0.5 J of potential energy at ?
( a ) The difference in potential energy is the negative of the work done , as defined by .
The work is defined in the previous chapter as the dot product of the force with the distance .
Since the particle is moving forward in the x -direction , the dot product simplifies to a multiplication .
To find the total work done , we need to integrate the function between the given limits .
After integration , we can state the work or the potential energy .
( b ) The potential energy function , with respect to zero at , is the indefinite integral encountered in part ( a ) , with the constant of integration determined from .
Notice how we applied the definition of potential energy difference to determine the potential energy function with respect to zero at a chosen point .
Also notice that the potential energy , as determined in part ( b ) , at is and at is ; their difference is the result in part ( a ) .
Check Your Understanding In , what are the potential energies of the particle at and with respect to zero at ?
Verify that the difference of potential energy is still 7 J .
In general , a system of interest could consist of several particles .
The difference in the potential energy of the system is the negative of the work done by gravitational or elastic forces , which , as we will see in the next section , are conservative forces .
The potential energy difference depends only on the initial and final positions of the particles , and on some parameters that characterize the interaction ( like mass for gravity or the spring constant for a Hooke ’ s law force ) .
It is important to remember that potential energy is a property of the interactions between objects in a chosen system , and not just a property of each object .
For each type of interaction present in a system , you can label a corresponding type of potential energy .
The total potential energy of the system is the sum of the potential energies of all the types .
( This follows from the additive property of the dot product in the expression for the work done . )
Let ’ s look at some specific examples of types of potential energy discussed in .
First , we consider each of these forces when acting separately , and then when both act together .
The system of interest consists of our planet , Earth , and one or more particles near its surface ( or bodies small enough to be considered as particles , compared to Earth ) .
The gravitational force on each particle ( or body ) is just its weight mg near the surface of Earth , acting vertically down .
According to Newton ’ s third law , each particle exerts a force on Earth of equal magnitude but in the opposite direction .
Newton ’ s second law tells us that the magnitude of the acceleration produced by each of these forces on Earth is mg divided by Earth ’ s mass .
Since the ratio of the mass of any ordinary object to the mass of Earth is vanishingly small , the motion of Earth can be completely neglected .
Therefore , we consider this system to be a group of single-particle systems , subject to the uniform gravitational force of Earth .
In , the work done on a body by Earth ’ s uniform gravitational force , near its surface , depended on the mass of the body , the acceleration due to gravity , and the difference in height the body traversed , as given by .
The summit of Great Blue Hill in Milton , MA , is 147 m above its base and has an elevation above sea level of 195 m .
( Its Native American name , Massachusett , was adopted by settlers for naming the Bay Colony and state near its location . )
A 75-kg hiker ascends from the base to the summit .
First , we need to pick an origin for the y -axis and then determine the value of the constant that makes the potential energy zero at the height of the base .
Then , we can determine the potential energies from , based on the relationship between the zero potential energy height and the height at which the hiker is located .
Let ’ s choose the origin for the y -axis at base height , where we also want the zero of potential energy to be .
This choice makes the constant equal to zero and At the summit , , so At sea level , , so Besides illustrating the use of and , the values of gravitational potential energy we found are reasonable .
The gravitational potential energy is higher at the summit than at the base , and lower at sea level than at the base .
Gravity does work on you on your way up , too !
It does negative work and not quite as much ( in magnitude ) , as your muscles do .
But it certainly does work .
Similarly , your muscles do work on your way down , as negative work .
The numerical values of the potential energies depend on the choice of zero of potential energy , but the physically meaningful differences of potential energy do not .
[ Note that since is a difference , the numerical values do not depend on the origin of coordinates . ]
Check Your Understanding What are the values of the gravitational potential energy of the hiker at the base , summit , and sea level , with respect to a sea-level zero of potential energy ?
In , we saw that the work done by a perfectly elastic spring , in one dimension , depends only on the spring constant and the squares of the displacements from the unstretched position , as given in .
This work involves only the properties of a Hooke ’ s law interaction and not the properties of real springs and whatever objects are attached to them .
Therefore , we can define the difference of elastic potential energy for a spring force as the negative of the work done by the spring force in this equation , before we consider systems that embody this type of force .
Thus , where the object travels from point A to point B .
The potential energy function corresponding to this difference is If the spring force is the only force acting , it is simplest to take the zero of potential energy at , when the spring is at its unstretched length .
Then , the constant is is zero .
( Other choices may be more convenient if other forces are acting . )
A system contains a perfectly elastic spring , with an unstretched length of 20 cm and a spring constant of 4 N/cm .
( a ) How much elastic potential energy does the spring contribute when its length is 23 cm ?
( b ) How much more potential energy does it contribute if its length increases to 26 cm ?
When the spring is at its unstretched length , it contributes nothing to the potential energy of the system , so we can use with the constant equal to zero .
The value of x is the length minus the unstretched length .
When the spring is expanded , the spring ’ s displacement or difference between its relaxed length and stretched length should be used for the x -value in calculating the potential energy of the spring .
The displacement of the spring is , so the contributed potential energy is displacement the .
energy spring ’ s is , which is a 0.54-J increase over the amount in part ( a ) .
When Calculating the elastic potential energy and potential energy differences from involves solving for the potential energies based on the given lengths of the spring .
Since U depends on , the potential energy for a compression ( negative x ) is the same as for an extension of equal magnitude .
, potential the is Check Your Understanding When the length of the spring in changes from an initial value of 22.0 cm to a final value , the elastic potential energy it contributes changes by Find the final length .
A simple system embodying both gravitational and elastic types of potential energy is a one-dimensional , vertical massspring system .
This consists of a massive particle ( or block ) , hung from one end of a perfectly elastic , massless spring , the other end of which is fixed , as illustrated in .
First , let 's consider the potential energy of the system .
We need to define the constant in the potential energy function of .
Often , the ground is a suitable choice for when the gravitational potential energy is zero ; however , in this case , the highest point or when is a convenient location for zero gravitational potential energy .
Note that this choice is arbitrary , and the problem can be solved correctly even if another choice is picked .
We must also define the elastic potential energy of the system and the corresponding constant , as detailed in .
This is where the spring is unstretched , or at the position .
If we consider that the total energy of the system is conserved , then the energy at point A equals point C. The block is placed just on the spring so its initial kinetic energy is zero .
By the setup of the problem discussed previously , both the gravitational potential energy and elastic potential energy are equal to zero .
Therefore , the initial energy of the system is zero .
When the block arrives at point C , its kinetic energy is zero .
However , it now has both gravitational potential energy and elastic potential energy .
Therefore , we can solve for the distance y that the block travels before coming to a stop : A block weighing is hung from a spring with a spring constant of , as shown in .
( a ) What is the maximum expansion of the spring , as seen at point C ?
( b ) What is the total potential energy at point B , halfway between A and C ?
( c ) What is the speed of the block at point B ?
In part ( a ) we calculate the distance as discussed in the previous text .
Then in part ( b ) , we use half of the y value to calculate the potential energy at point B using equations and .
This energy must be equal to the kinetic energy , , at point B since the initial energy of the system is zero .
By calculating the kinetic energy at point B , we can now calculate the speed of the block at point B .
Since the total energy of the system is zero at point A as discussed previously , the maximum expansion of the spring is calculated to be : The position of is half of the position at or .
The total potential energy at point B would therefore be : The mass of the block is the weight divided by gravity .
The kinetic energy at point B therefore is 0.12 J because the total energy is zero .
Therefore , the speed of the block at point B is equal to Even though the potential energy due to gravity is relative to a chosen zero location , the solutions to this problem would be the same if the zero energy points were chosen at different locations .
Check Your Understanding Suppose the mass in is doubled while keeping the all other conditions the same .
Would the maximum expansion of the spring increase , decrease , or remain the same ?
Would the speed at point B be larger , smaller , or the same compared to the original mass ?
View this to learn about conservation of energy with a skater !
Build tracks , ramps and jumps for the skater and view the kinetic energy , potential energy and friction as he moves .
You can also take the skater to different planets or even space !
A sample chart of a variety of energies is shown in to give you an idea about typical energy values associated with certain events .
Some of these are calculated using kinetic energy , whereas others are calculated by using quantities found in a form of potential energy that may not have been discussed at this point .
In , any transition between kinetic and potential energy conserved the total energy of the system .
This was path independent , meaning that we can start and stop at any two points in the problem , and the total energy of the system—kinetic plus potential—at these points are equal to each other .
This is characteristic of a conservative force .
We dealt with conservative forces in the preceding section , such as the gravitational force and spring force .
Non-conservative forces are dissipative forces such as friction or air resistance .
These forces take energy away from the system as the system progresses , energy that you can ’ t get back .
These forces are path dependent ; therefore it matters where the object starts and stops .
The work done by a conservative force is independent of the path ; in other words , the work done by a conservative force is the same for any path connecting two points : The work done by a non-conservative force depends on the path taken .
and are equivalent because any closed path is the sum of two paths : the first going from A to B , and the second going from B to A .
One answer is that the work done is independent of path if the infinitesimal work is an exact differential , the way the infinitesimal net work was equal to the exact differential of the kinetic energy , when we derived the work-energy theorem in .
There are mathematical conditions that you can use to test whether the infinitesimal work done by a force is an exact differential , and the force is conservative .
These conditions only involve differentiation and are thus relatively easy to apply .
In two dimensions , the condition for to be an exact differential is You may recall that the work done by the force in depended on the path .
For that force , Therefore , which indicates it is a non-conservative force .
Can you see what you could change to make it a conservative force ?
Which of the following two-dimensional forces are conservative and which are not ?
Assume a and b are constants with appropriate units : ( a ) ( b ) ( c ) Apply the condition stated in , namely , using the derivatives of the components of each force indicated .
and , so this force is non-conservative .
and so this force is conservative .
The conditions in are derivatives as functions of a single variable ; in three dimensions , similar conditions exist that involve more derivatives .
Check Your Understanding A two-dimensional , conservative force is zero on the x and y -axes , and .
So there is always a conservative force associated with every potential energy .
We have seen that potential energy is defined in relation to the work done by conservative forces .
That relation , , involved an integral for the work ; starting with the force and displacement , you integrated to get the work and the change in potential energy .
However , integration is the inverse operation of differentiation ; you could equally well have started with the potential energy and taken its derivative , with respect to displacement , to get the force .
The infinitesimal increment of potential energy is the dot product of the force and the infinitesimal displacement , Here , we chose to represent the displacement in an arbitrary direction by so as not to be restricted to any particular coordinate direction .
We also expressed the dot product in terms of the magnitude of the infinitesimal displacement and the component of the force in its direction .
Both these quantities are scalars , so you can divide by dl to get This equation gives the relation between force and the potential energy associated with it .
In words , the component of a conservative force , in a particular direction , equals the negative of the derivative of the corresponding potential energy , with respect to a displacement in that direction .
In general , a partial derivative notation is used .
If a function has many variables in it , the derivative is taken only of the variable the partial derivative specifies .
The other variables are held constant .
In three dimensions , you add another term for the z -component , and the result is that the force is the negative of the gradient of the potential energy .
However , we won ’ t be looking at three-dimensional examples just yet .
The potential energy for a particle undergoing one-dimensional motion along the x -axis is where Its total energy at and it is not subject to any non-conservative forces .
Find ( a ) the positions where its kinetic energy is zero and ( b ) the forces at those positions .
( a ) We can find the positions where so the potential energy equals the total energy of the given system .
( b ) Using , we can find the force evaluated at the positions found from the previous part , since the mechanical energy is conserved .
Finding the force from the potential energy is mathematically easier than finding the potential energy from the force , because differentiating a function is generally easier than integrating one .
This will lead us to a discussion of the important principle of the conservation of mechanical energy .
As you continue to examine other topics in physics , in later chapters of this book , you will see how this conservation law is generalized to encompass other types of energy and energy transfers .
The last section of this chapter provides a preview .
The terms ‘ conserved quantity ’ and ‘ conservation law ’ have specific , scientific meanings in physics , which are different from the everyday meanings associated with the use of these words .
( The same comment is also true about the scientific and everyday uses of the word ‘ work. ’ ) In everyday usage , you could conserve water by not using it , or by using less of it , or by re-using it .
Water is composed of molecules consisting of two atoms of hydrogen and one of oxygen .
Bring these atoms together to form a molecule and you create water ; dissociate the atoms in such a molecule and you destroy water .
However , in scientific usage , a conserved quantity for a system stays constant , changes by a definite amount that is transferred to other systems , and/or is converted into other forms of that quantity .
A conserved quantity , in the scientific sense , can be transformed , but not strictly created or destroyed .
Thus , there is no physical law of conservation of water .
We first consider a system with a single particle or object .
Returning to our development of , recall that we first separated all the forces acting on a particle into conservative and non-conservative types , and wrote the work done by each type of force as a separate term in the work-energy theorem .
We then replaced the work done by the conservative forces by the change in the potential energy of the particle , combining it with the change in the particle ’ s kinetic energy to get .
Now , we write this equation without the middle step and define the sum of the kinetic and potential energies , to be the mechanical energy of the particle .
Recall that a classical particle is just a point mass , is nonrelativistic , and obeys Newton ’ s laws of motion .
In , we will see that conservation of energy still applies to a nonclassical particle , but for that to happen , we have to make a slight adjustment to the definition of energy .
It is sometimes convenient to separate the case where the work done by non-conservative forces is zero , either because no such forces are assumed present , or , like the normal force , they do zero work when the motion is parallel to the surface .
Then In this case , the conservation of mechanical energy can be expressed as follows : The mechanical energy of a particle does not change if all the non-conservative forces that may act on it do no work .
Understanding the concept of energy conservation is the important thing , not the particular equation you use to express it .
Identify the body or bodies to be studied ( the system ) .
Often , in applications of the principle of mechanical energy conservation , we study more than one body at the same time .
Identify all forces acting on the body or bodies .
Determine whether each force that does work is conservative .
If a non-conservative force ( e.g. , friction ) is doing work , then mechanical energy is not conserved .
The system must then be analyzed with non-conservative work , .
For every force that does work , choose a reference point and determine the potential energy function for the force .
The reference points for the various potential energies do not have to be at the same location .
Apply the principle of mechanical energy conservation by setting the sum of the kinetic energies and potential energies equal at every point of interest .
A particle of mass m is hung from the ceiling by a massless string of length 1.0 m , as shown in .
The particle is released from rest , when the angle between the string and the downward vertical direction is What is its speed when it reaches the lowest point of its arc ?
Using our problem-solving strategy , the first step is to define that we are interested in the particle-Earth system .
Second , only the gravitational force is acting on the particle , which is conservative ( step 3 ) .
We neglect air resistance in the problem , and no work is done by the string tension , which is perpendicular to the arc of the motion .
Therefore , the mechanical energy of the system is conserved , as represented by , .
Because the particle starts from rest , the increase in the kinetic energy is just the kinetic energy at the lowest point .
This increase in kinetic energy equals the decrease in the gravitational potential energy , which we can calculate from the geometry .
In step 4 , we choose a reference point for zero gravitational potential energy to be at the lowest vertical point the particle achieves , which is mid-swing .
Lastly , in step 5 , we set the sum of energies at the highest point ( initial ) of the swing to the lowest point ( final ) of the swing to ultimately solve for the final speed .
We are neglecting non-conservative forces , so we write the energy conservation formula relating the particle at the highest point ( initial ) and the lowest point in the swing ( final ) as Since the particle is released from rest , the initial kinetic energy is zero .
At the lowest point , we define the gravitational potential energy to be zero .
Therefore our conservation of energy formula reduces to The vertical height of the particle is not given directly in the problem .
This can be solved for by using trigonometry and two givens : the length of the pendulum and the angle through which the particle is vertically pulled up .
Looking at the diagram , the vertical dashed line is the length of the pendulum string .
The vertical height is labeled h .
The other partial length of the vertical string can be calculated with trigonometry .
We can approach this problem in terms of bar graphs of total energy .
Initially , the particle has all potential energy , being at the highest point , and no kinetic energy .
When the particle crosses the lowest point at the bottom of the swing , the energy moves from the potential energy column to the kinetic energy column .
Therefore , we can imagine a progression of this transfer as the particle moves between its highest point , lowest point of the swing , and back to the highest point .
As the particle travels from the lowest point in the swing to the highest point on the far right hand side of the diagram , the energy bars go in reverse order from ( c ) to ( b ) to ( a ) .
Check Your Understanding How high above the bottom of its arc is the particle in the simple pendulum above , when its speed is A helicopter is hovering at an altitude of when a panel from its underside breaks loose and plummets to the ground .
The mass of the panel is and it hits the ground with a speed of .
How much mechanical energy was dissipated by air resistance during the panel ’ s descent ?
Step 1 : Here only one body is being investigated .
Step 2 : Gravitational force is acting on the panel , as well as air resistance , which is stated in the problem .
Step 3 : Gravitational force is conservative ; however , the non-conservative force of air resistance does negative work on the falling panel , so we can use the conservation of mechanical energy , in the form expressed by , to find the energy dissipated .
This energy is the magnitude of the work : is zero .
We set the gravitational potential energy to zero at Step 4 : The initial kinetic energy , at ground level out of convenience .
Step 5 : The non-conservative work is set equal to the energies to solve for the work dissipated by air resistance .
The mechanical energy dissipated by air resistance is the algebraic sum of the gain in the kinetic energy and loss in potential energy .
Therefore the calculation of this energy is Most of the initial mechanical energy of the panel , 147 kJ , was lost to air resistance .
Notice that we were able to calculate the energy dissipated without knowing what the force of air resistance was , only that it was dissipative .
Check Your Understanding You probably recall that , neglecting air resistance , if you throw a projectile straight up , the time it takes to reach its maximum height equals the time it takes to fall from the maximum height back to the starting height .
Suppose you can not neglect air resistance , as in .
Is the time the projectile takes to go up ( a ) greater than , ( b ) less than , or ( c ) equal to the time it takes to come back down ?
In these examples , we were able to use conservation of energy to calculate the speed of a particle just at particular points in its motion .
But the method of analyzing particle motion , starting from energy conservation , is more powerful than that .
More advanced treatments of the theory of mechanics allow you to calculate the full time dependence of a particle ’ s motion , for a given potential energy .
In fact , it is often the case that a better model for particle motion is provided by the form of its kinetic and potential energies , rather than an equation for force acting on it .
( This is especially true for the quantum mechanical description of particles like electrons or atoms . )
We can illustrate some of the simplest features of this energy-based approach by considering a particle in one-dimensional motion , with potential energy U ( x ) and no non-conservative interactions present .
and the definition of velocity require Separate the variables x and t and integrate , from an initial time to an arbitrary time , to get If you can do the integral in , then you can solve for x as a function of t .
for in to find the position x of a particle Use the potential energy as a function of time t .
Since we know how the potential energy changes as a function of x , we can substitute for in , integrate , and then solve for x .
Check Your Understanding What potential energy can you substitute in that will result in motion with constant velocity of 2 m/s for a particle of mass 1 kg and mechanical energy 1 J ?
We will look at another more physically appropriate example of the use of after we have explored some further implications that can be drawn from the functional form of a particle ’ s potential energy .
Systems generally consist of more than one particle or object .
However , the conservation of mechanical energy , in one of the forms in or , is a fundamental law of physics and applies to any system .
You just have to include the kinetic and potential energies of all the particles , and the work done by all the non-conservative forces acting on them .
Until you learn more about the dynamics of systems composed of many particles , in , , and , it is better to postpone discussing the application of energy conservation to then .
Often , you can get a good deal of useful information about the dynamical behavior of a mechanical system just by interpreting a graph of its potential energy as a function of position , called a potential energy diagram .
This is most easily accomplished for a one-dimensional system , whose potential energy can be plotted in one two-dimensional graph—for example , U ( x ) versus x —on a piece of paper or a computer program .
For systems whose motion is in more than one dimension , the motion needs to be studied in three-dimensional space .
We will simplify our procedure for one-dimensional motion only .
First , let ’ s look at an object , freely falling vertically , near the surface of Earth , in the absence of air resistance .
The mechanical energy of the object is conserved , and the potential energy , with respect to zero at ground level , is which is a straight line through the origin with slope .
In the graph shown in , the x -axis is the height above the ground y and the y -axis is the object ’ s energy .
Consider a mass-spring system on a frictionless , stationary , horizontal surface , so that gravity and the normal contact force do no work and can be ignored .
This is like a one-dimensional system , whose mechanical energy E is a constant and whose potential energy , with respect to zero energy at zero displacement from the spring ’ s unstretched length , .
You can read off the same type of information from the potential energy diagram in this case , as in the case for the body in vertical free fall , but since the spring potential energy describes a variable force , you can learn more from this graph .
For this reason , as well as the shape of the potential energy curve , U ( x ) is called an infinite potential well .
At the bottom of the potential well , and the kinetic energy is a maximum , However , from the slope of this potential energy curve , you can also deduce information about the force on the glider and its acceleration .
We saw earlier that the negative of the slope of the potential energy is the spring force , which in this case is also the net force , and thus is proportional to the acceleration .
When , the slope , the force , and the acceleration are all zero , so this is an equilibrium point .
The negative of the slope , on either side of the equilibrium point , gives a force pointing back to the equilibrium point , so the equilibrium is termed stable and the force is called a restoring force .
This implies that U ( x ) has a relative minimum there .
If the force on either side of an equilibrium point has a direction opposite from that direction of position change , the equilibrium is termed unstable , and this implies that U ( x ) has a relative maximum there .
The potential energy for a particle undergoing one-dimensional motion along the x -axis is where U is in joules and x is in meters .
The particle is not subject to any non-conservative forces and its mechanical energy is constant at .
( a ) Is the motion of the particle confined to any regions on the x -axis , and if so , what are they ?
( b ) Are there any equilibrium points , and if so , where are they and are they stable or unstable ?
First , we need to graph the potential energy as a function of x .
The function is zero at the origin , becomes negative as x increases in the positive or negative directions ( is larger than for ) , and then becomes positive at sufficiently large .
Your graph should look like a double potential well , with the zeros determined by solving the equation , and the extremes determined by examining the first and second derivatives of U ( x ) , as shown in .
You can just eyeball the graph to reach qualitative answers to the questions in this example .
That , after all , is the value of potential energy diagrams .
To find the equilibrium points , we solve the equation and find and , where ( meters ) .
The second derivative is negative at , so that position is a relative maximum and the equilibrium there is unstable .
The second derivative is positive at , so these positions are relative minima and represent stable equilibria .
The particle in this example can oscillate in the allowed region about either of the two stable equilibrium points we found , but it does not have enough energy to escape from whichever potential well it happens to initially be in .
Find x ( t ) for a particle moving with a constant mechanical energy and a potential energy when the particle starts from rest at time .
We follow the same steps as we did in .
Substitute the potential energy U into and factor out the constants , like m or k .
Integrate the function and solve the resulting expression for position , which is now a function of time .
Here , we anticipate that a harmonic oscillator executes sinusoidal oscillations with a maximum displacement of ( called the amplitude ) and a rate of oscillation of ( called the frequency ) .
Further discussions about oscillations can be found in .
Check Your Understanding Find for the mass-spring system in if the particle starts from at What is the particle ’ s initial velocity ?
In this chapter , we have studied energy .
We learned that energy can take different forms and can be transferred from one form to another .
You will find that energy is discussed in many everyday , as well as scientific , contexts , because it is involved in all physical processes .
It will also become apparent that many situations are best understood , or most easily conceptualized , by considering energy .
So far , no experimental results have contradicted the conservation of energy .
In fact , whenever measurements have appeared to conflict with energy conservation , new forms of energy have been discovered or recognized in accordance with this principle .
What are some other forms of energy ?
Many of these are covered in later chapters ( also see ) , but let ’ s detail a few here : Atoms and molecules inside all objects are in random motion .
The internal kinetic energy from these random motions is called thermal energy , because it is related to the temperature of the object .
Note that thermal energy can also be transferred from one place to another , not transformed or converted , by the familiar processes of conduction , convection , and radiation .
In this case , the energy is known as heat energy .
Electrical energy is a common form that is converted to many other forms and does work in a wide range of practical situations .
Fuels , such as gasoline and food , have chemical energy , which is potential energy arising from their molecular structure .
Chemical energy can be converted into thermal energy by reactions like oxidation .
Chemical reactions can also produce electrical energy , such as in batteries .
Electrical energy can , in turn , produce thermal energy and light , such as in an electric heater or a light bulb .
Light is just one kind of electromagnetic radiation , or radiant energy , which also includes radio , infrared , ultraviolet , X-rays , and gamma rays .
All bodies with thermal energy can radiate energy in electromagnetic waves .
Nuclear energy comes from reactions and processes that convert measurable amounts of mass into energy .
Nuclear energy is transformed into radiant energy in the Sun , into thermal energy in the boilers of nuclear power plants , and then into electrical energy in the generators of power plants .
These and all other forms of energy can be transformed into one another and , to a certain degree , can be converted into mechanical work .
The transformation of energy from one form into another happens all the time .
The chemical energy in food is converted into thermal energy through metabolism ; light energy is converted into chemical energy through photosynthesis .
Another example of energy conversion occurs in a solar cell .
Sunlight impinging on a solar cell produces electricity , which can be used to run electric motors or heat water .
In an example encompassing many steps , the chemical energy contained in coal is converted into thermal energy as it burns in a furnace , to transform water into steam , in a boiler .
Some of the thermal energy in the steam is then converted into mechanical energy as it expands and spins a turbine , which is connected to a generator to produce electrical energy .
In these examples , not all of the initial energy is converted into the forms mentioned , because some energy is always transferred to the environment .
Energy is an important element at all levels of society .
We live in a very interdependent world , and access to adequate and reliable energy resources is crucial for economic growth and for maintaining the quality of our lives .
The principal energy resources used in the world are shown in .
The figure distinguishes between two major types of energy sources : renewable and non-renewable , and further divides each type into a few more specific kinds .
Renewable sources are energy sources that are replenished through naturally occurring , ongoing processes , on a time scale that is much shorter than the anticipated lifetime of the civilization using the source .
Non-renewable sources are depleted once some of the energy they contain is extracted and converted into other kinds of energy .
The natural processes by which non-renewable sources are formed typically take place over geological time scales .
Our most important non-renewable energy sources are fossil fuels , such as coal , petroleum , and natural gas .
These account for about 81 % of the world ’ s energy consumption , as shown in the figure .
Burning fossil fuels creates chemical reactions that transform potential energy , in the molecular structures of the reactants , into thermal energy and products .
This thermal energy can be used to heat buildings or to operate steam-driven machinery .
Internal combustion and jet engines convert some of the energy of rapidly expanding gases , released from burning gasoline , into mechanical work .
Electrical power generation is mostly derived from transferring energy in expanding steam , via turbines , into mechanical work , which rotates coils of wire in magnetic fields to generate electricity .
Nuclear energy is the other non-renewable source shown in and supplies about 3 % of the world ’ s consumption .
Nuclear reactions release energy by transforming potential energy , in the structure of nuclei , into thermal energy , analogous to energy release in chemical reactions .
The thermal energy obtained from nuclear reactions can be transferred and converted into other forms in the same ways that energy from fossil fuels are used .
An unfortunate byproduct of relying on energy produced from the combustion of fossil fuels is the release of carbon dioxide into the atmosphere and its contribution to global warming .
Nuclear energy poses environmental problems as well , including the safety and disposal of nuclear waste .
Besides these important consequences , reserves of non-renewable sources of energy are limited and , given the rapidly growing rate of world energy consumption , may not last for more than a few hundred years .
Considerable effort is going on to develop and expand the use of renewable sources of energy , involving a significant percentage of the world ’ s physicists and engineers .
Four of the renewable energy sources listed in —those using material from plants as fuel ( biomass heat , ethanol , biodiesel , and biomass electricity ) —involve the same types of energy transformations and conversions as just discussed for fossil and nuclear fuels .
The other major types of renewable energy sources are hydropower , wind power , geothermal power , and solar power .
Hydropower is produced by converting the gravitational potential energy of falling or flowing water into kinetic energy and then into work to run electric generators or machinery .
Converting the mechanical energy in ocean surface waves and tides is in development .
Wind power also converts kinetic energy into work , which can be used directly to generate electricity , operate mills , and propel sailboats .
The interior of Earth has a great deal of thermal energy , part of which is left over from its original formation ( gravitational potential energy converted into thermal energy ) and part of which is released from radioactive minerals ( a form of natural nuclear energy ) .
It will take a very long time for this geothermal energy to escape into space , so people generally regard it as a renewable source , when actually , it ’ s just inexhaustible on human time scales .
The source of solar power is energy carried by the electromagnetic waves radiated by the Sun .
Most of this energy is carried by visible light and infrared ( heat ) radiation .
When suitable materials absorb electromagnetic waves , radiant energy is converted into thermal energy , which can be used to heat water , or when concentrated , to make steam and generate electricity .
However , in another important physical process , known as the photoelectric effect , energetic radiation impinging on certain materials is directly converted into electricity .
Materials that do this are called photovoltaics ( PV in ) .
Some solar power systems use lenses or mirrors to concentrate the Sun ’ s rays , before converting their energy through photovoltaics , and these are qualified as CSP in .
As we finish this chapter on energy and work , it is relevant to draw some distinctions between two sometimes misunderstood terms in the area of energy use .
As we mentioned earlier , the “ law of conservation of energy ” is a very useful principle in analyzing physical processes .
It can not be proven from basic principles but is a very good bookkeeping device , and no exceptions have ever been found .
It states that the total amount of energy in an isolated system always remains constant .
Related to this principle , but remarkably different from it , is the important philosophy of energy conservation .
Since energy in an isolated system is not destroyed , created , or generated , you might wonder why we need to be concerned about our energy resources , since energy is a conserved quantity .
The problem is that the final result of most energy transformations is waste heat , that is , work that has been “ degraded ” in the energy transformation .
We will discuss this idea in more detail in the chapters on thermodynamics .
In other words , a system can not evolve randomly ; it can only change in ways that conserve energy .
In this chapter , we develop and define another conserved quantity , called linear momentum , and another relationship ( the impulse-momentum theorem ) , which will put an additional constraint on how a system evolves in time .
Conservation of momentum is useful for understanding collisions , such as that shown in the above image .
It is just as powerful , just as important , and just as useful as conservation of energy and the work-energy theorem .
Our study of kinetic energy showed that a complete understanding of an object ’ s motion must include both its mass and its velocity .
However , as powerful as this concept is , it does not include any information about the direction of the moving object ’ s velocity vector .
We ’ ll now define a physical quantity that includes direction .
Like kinetic energy , this quantity includes both mass and velocity ; like kinetic energy , it is a way of characterizing the “ quantity of motion ” of an object .
It is given the name momentum ( from the Latin word movimentum , meaning “ movement ” ) , and it is represented by the symbol p .
The momentum p of an object is the product of its mass and its velocity : As shown in , momentum is a vector quantity ( since velocity is ) .
This is one of the things that makes momentum useful and not a duplication of kinetic energy .
It is perhaps most useful when determining whether an object ’ s motion is difficult to change or easy to change .
Unlike kinetic energy , momentum depends equally on an object ’ s mass and velocity .
We have defined momentum to be the product of mass and velocity .
Therefore , if an object ’ s velocity should change ( due to the application of a force on the object ) , then necessarily , its momentum changes as well .
This indicates a connection between momentum and force .
The purpose of this section is to explore and describe that connection .
Suppose you apply a force on a free object for some amount of time .
Clearly , the larger the force , the larger the object ’ s change of momentum will be .
Alternatively , the more time you spend applying this force , again the larger the change of momentum will be , as depicted in .
The amount by which the object ’ s motion changes is therefore proportional to the magnitude of the force , and also to the time interval over which the force is applied .
Mathematically , if a quantity is proportional to two ( or more ) things , then it is proportional to the product of those things .
The product of a force and a time interval ( over which that force acts ) is called impulse , and is given the symbol Let be the force applied to an object over some differential time interval dt .
To calculate the impulse using , we need to know the force function F ( t ) , which we often don ’ t .
However , a result from calculus is useful here : Recall that the average value of a function over some interval is calculated by where .
In fact , though , the process is usually reversed : You determine the impulse ( by measurement or calculation ) and then calculate the average force that caused that impulse .
Approximately 50,000 years ago , a large ( radius of 25 m ) iron-nickel meteorite collided with Earth at an estimated speed of in what is now the northern Arizona desert , in the United States .
The impact produced a crater that is still visible today ; it is approximately 1200 m ( three-quarters of a mile ) in diameter , 170 m deep , and has a rim that rises 45 m above the surrounding desert plain .
Iron-nickel meteorites typically have a density of .
Use impulse considerations to estimate the average force and the maximum force that the meteor applied to Earth during the impact .
It is conceptually easier to reverse the question and calculate the force that Earth applied on the meteor in order to stop it .
Therefore , we ’ ll calculate the force on the meteor and then use Newton ’ s third law to argue that the force from the meteor on Earth was equal in magnitude and opposite in direction .
Using the given data about the meteor , and making reasonable guesses about the shape of the meteor and impact time , we first calculate the impulse using .
We then use the relationship between force and impulse to estimate the average force during impact .
Next , we choose a reasonable force function for the impact event , calculate the average value of that function , and set the resulting expression equal to the calculated average force .
This enables us to solve for the maximum force .
Define upward to be the + y -direction .
For simplicity , assume the meteor is traveling vertically downward prior to , and the force Earth exerts on the meteor points upward , impact .
In that case , its initial velocity is .
The situation at is depicted below .
Substituting these values gives This is the average force applied during the collision .
Notice that this force vector points in the same direction as the change of velocity vector .
Next , we calculate the maximum force .
The impulse is related to the force function by We need to make a reasonable choice for the force as a function of time .
We define to be the moment the meteor first touches the ground .
Then we assume the force is a maximum at impact , and rapidly drops to zero .
A function that does this is ( The parameter represents how rapidly the force decreases to zero . )
The average force is where .
Since we already have a numeric value for , we can use the result of the integral to obtain .
The graph of this function contains important information .
Let ’ s graph ( the magnitude of ) both this function and the average force together .
Notice that the area under each plot has been filled in .
For the plot of the ( constant ) force , the area is a rectangle , corresponding to .
As for the plot of F ( t ) , recall from calculus that the area under the plot of a function is numerically equal to the integral of that function , over the specified interval ; so here , that .
Thus , the areas are equal , and both represent the impulse that the meteor applied to Earth is during the two-second impact .
The average force on Earth sounds like a huge force , and it is .
Nevertheless , Earth barely noticed it .
The acceleration Earth obtained was just which is completely immeasurable .
That said , the impact created seismic waves that nowadays could be detected by modern monitoring equipment .
A car traveling at 27 m/s collides with a building .
The collision with the building causes the car to come to a stop in approximately 1 second .
The driver , who weighs 860 N , is protected by a combination of a variable-tension seatbelt and an airbag .
( In effect , the driver collides with the seatbelt and airbag and not with the building . )
The airbag and seatbelt slow his velocity , such that he comes to a stop in approximately 2.5 s. What average force does the driver experience during the collision ?
Without the seatbelt and airbag , his collision time ( with the steering wheel ) would have been approximately 0.20 s. What force would he experience in this case ?
We are given the driver ’ s weight , his initial and final velocities , and the time of collision ; we are asked to calculate a force .
Impulse seems the right way to tackle this ; we can combine and .
Define the + x -direction to be the direction the car is initially moving .
For perspective , this is about 1.1 times his own weight .
Same calculation , just the different time interval : which is about 14 times his own weight .
You see that the value of an airbag is how greatly it reduces the force on the vehicle occupants .
For this reason , they have been required on all passenger vehicles in the United States since 1991 , and have been commonplace throughout Europe and Asia since the mid-1990s .
The change of momentum in a crash is the same , with or without an airbag ; the force , however , is vastly different .
Since an impulse is a force acting for some amount of time , it causes an object ’ s motion to change .
Recall : Because is the momentum of a system , is the change of momentum .
This gives us the following relation , called the impulse-momentum theorem ( or relation ) .
An impulse applied to a system changes the system ’ s momentum , and that change of momentum is exactly equal to the impulse that was applied : The impulse-momentum theorem is depicted graphically in .
There are two crucial concepts in the impulse-momentum theorem : Impulse is a vector quantity ; an impulse of , say , is very different from an impulse of ; they cause completely opposite changes of momentum .
An impulse does not cause momentum ; rather , it causes a change in the momentum of an object .
Thus , you must subtract the final momentum from the initial momentum , and—since momentum is also a vector quantity—you must take careful account of the signs of the momentum vectors .
The most common questions asked in relation to impulse are to calculate the applied force , or the change of velocity that occurs as a result of applying an impulse .
The general approach is the same .
Express the impulse as force times the relevant time interval .
Express the impulse as the change of momentum , usually .
Equate these and solve for the desired quantity .
“ Mister Sulu , take us out ; ahead one-quarter impulse. ” With this command , Captain Kirk of the starship Enterprise has his ship start from rest to a final speed of .
Assuming this maneuver is completed in 60 s , what average force did the impulse engines apply to the ship ?
We are asked for a force ; we know the initial and final speeds ( and hence the change in speed ) , and we know the time interval over which this all happened .
In particular , we know the amount of time that the force acted .
This suggests using the impulse-momentum relation .
To use that , though , we need the mass of the Enterprise .
An internet search gives a best estimate of the mass of the Enterprise ( in the 2009 movie ) as .
It goes almost without saying that such a force would kill everyone on board instantly , as well as destroying every piece of equipment .
Fortunately , the Enterprise has “ inertial dampeners. ” It is left as an exercise for the reader ’ s imagination to determine how these work .
Check Your Understanding The U.S. Air Force uses “ 10 g s ” ( an acceleration equal to ) as the maximum acceleration a human can withstand ( but only for several seconds ) and survive .
How much time must the Enterprise spend accelerating if the humans on board are to experience an average of at most 10 g s of acceleration ?
( Assume the inertial dampeners are offline . )
Apple released its iPhone 6 Plus in November 2014 .
According to many reports , it was originally supposed to have a screen made from sapphire , but that was changed at the last minute for a hardened glass screen .
Reportedly , this was because the sapphire screen cracked when the phone was dropped .
What force did the iPhone 6 Plus experience as a result of being dropped ?
The force the phone experiences is due to the impulse applied to it by the floor when the phone collides with the floor .
Our strategy then is to use the impulse-momentum relationship .
We calculate the impulse , estimate the impact time , and use this to calculate the force .
We need to make a couple of reasonable estimates , as well as find technical data on the phone itself .
First , let ’ s suppose that the phone is most often dropped from about chest height on an average-height person .
Second , assume that it is dropped from rest , that is , with an initial vertical velocity of zero .
Finally , we assume that the phone bounces very little—the height of its bounce is assumed to be negligible .
Define upward to be the + y -direction .
A typical height collision : is approximately and , as stated , .
But the phone also has an initial drop velocity [ ] , so we label our velocities .
We ’ ll use conservation of energy here ; you should re-do this part of the problem using kinematics and prove that you get the same answer .
First , define the zero of potential energy to be located at the floor .
Conservation of energy then gives us : gives Defining and using Because is a vector magnitude , it must be positive .
Inserting this result into the expression for force gives Finally , we need to estimate the collision time .
One common way to estimate a collision time is to calculate how long the object would take to travel its own length .
Check Your Understanding What if we had assumed the phone did bounce on impact ?
Would this have increased the force on the iPhone , decreased it , or made no difference ?
In , we obtained an important relationship : In words , the average force applied to an object is equal to the change of the momentum that the force causes , divided by the time interval over which this change of momentum occurs .
This relationship is very useful in situations where the collision time is small , but measureable ; typical values would be 1/10th of a second , or even one thousandth of a second .
Car crashes , punting a football , or collisions of subatomic particles would meet this criterion .
For a continuously changing momentum—due to a continuously changing force—this becomes a powerful conceptual tool .
In the limit , becomes This says that the rate of change of the system ’ s momentum ( implying that momentum is a function of time ) is exactly equal to the net applied force ( also , in general , a function of time ) .
This is , in fact , Newton ’ s second law , written in terms of momentum rather than acceleration .
This is the relationship Newton himself presented in his Principia Mathematica ( although he called it “ quantity of motion ” rather than “ momentum ” ) .
If the mass of the system remains constant , reduces to the more familiar form of Newton ’ s second law .
We can see this by substituting the definition of momentum : The assumption of constant mass allowed us to pull m out of the derivative .
If the mass is not constant , we can not use this form of the second law , but instead must start from .
Thus , one advantage to expressing force in terms of changing momentum is that it allows for the mass of the system to change , as well as the velocity ; this is a concept we ’ ll explore when we study the motion of rockets .
During the 2007 French Open , Venus Williams hit the fastest recorded serve in a premier women ’ s match , reaching a speed of 58 m/s ( 209 km/h ) .
What is the average force exerted on the 0.057-kg tennis ball by Venus Williams ’ racquet ?
Assume that the ball ’ s speed just after impact is 58 m/s , as shown in , that the initial horizontal component of the velocity before impact is negligible , and that the ball remained in contact with the racquet for 5.0 ms .
This problem involves only one dimension because the ball starts from having no horizontal velocity component before impact .
Newton ’ s second law stated in terms of momentum is then written as As noted above , when mass is constant , the change in momentum is given by where we have used scalars because this problem involves only one dimension .
In this example , the velocity just after impact and the time interval are given ; thus , once is calculated , we can use to find the force .
To determine the change in momentum , insert the values for the initial and final velocities into the equation above : Now the magnitude of the net external force can be determined by using where we have retained only two significant figures in the final step .
This quantity was the average force exerted by Venus Williams ’ racquet on the tennis ball during its brief impact ( note that the ball also experienced the 0.57-N force of gravity , but that force was not due to the racquet ) .
This problem could also be solved by first finding the acceleration and then using , but one additional step would be required compared with the strategy used in this example .
Let : the force on from the force on from Then , in symbols , Newton ’ s third law says ( Recall that these two forces do not cancel because they are applied to different objects .
causes to accelerate , and causes to accelerate . )
Although the magnitudes of the forces on the objects are the same , the accelerations are not , simply because the masses ( in general ) are different .
Because of the interaction , each object ends up getting its velocity changed , by an amount dv .
Furthermore , the interaction occurs over a time interval dt , which means that the change of velocities also occurs over dt .
This time interval is the same for each object .
Let ‘ s assume , for the moment , that the masses of the objects do not change during the interaction .
( We ’ ll relax this restriction later . )
In that case , we can pull the masses inside the derivatives : and thus This says that the rate at which momentum changes is the same for both objects .
The masses are different , and the changes of velocity are different , but the rate of change of the product of m and are the same .
Physically , this means that during the interaction of the two objects , both objects have their momentum changed ; but those changes are identical in magnitude , though opposite in sign .
For example , the momentum of object 1 might increase , which means that the momentum of object 2 decreases by exactly the same amount .
Since the total combined momentum of the two objects together never changes , then we could write from which it follows that As shown in , the total momentum of the system before and after the collision remains the same .
If the value of a physical quantity is constant in time , we say that the quantity is conserved .
There is a complication , however .
A system must meet two requirements for its momentum to be conserved : The mass of the system must remain constant during the interaction .
As the objects interact ( apply forces on each other ) , they may transfer mass from one to another ; but any mass one object gains is balanced by the loss of that mass from another .
The total mass of the system of objects , therefore , remains unchanged as time passes : The net external force on the system must be zero .
As the objects collide , or explode , and move around , they exert forces on each other .
However , all of these forces are internal to the system , and thus each of these internal forces is balanced by another internal force that is equal in magnitude and opposite in sign .
As a result , the change in momentum caused by each internal force is cancelled by another momentum change that is equal in magnitude and opposite in direction .
Therefore , internal forces can not change the total momentum of a system because the changes sum to zero .
Thus , for the momentum of the system to be conserved , we must have A system of objects that meets these two requirements is said to be a closed system ( also called an isolated system ) .
Thus , the more compact way to express this is shown below .
The total momentum of a closed system is conserved : This statement is called the Law of Conservation of Momentum .
Along with the conservation of energy , it is one of the foundations upon which all of physics stands .
All our experimental evidence supports this statement : from the motions of galactic clusters to the quarks that make up the proton and the neutron , and at every scale in between .
In a closed system , the total momentum never changes .
Note that there absolutely can be external forces acting on the system ; but for the system ’ s momentum to remain constant , these external forces have to cancel , so that the net external force is zero .
Billiard balls on a table all have a weight force acting on them , but the weights are balanced ( canceled ) by the normal forces , so there is no net force .
A system ( mechanical ) is the collection of objects in whose motion ( kinematics and dynamics ) you are interested .
If you are analyzing the bounce of a ball on the ground , you are probably only interested in the motion of the ball , and not of Earth ; thus , the ball is your system .
If you are analyzing a car crash , the two cars together compose your system .
Using conservation of momentum requires four basic steps .
The first step is crucial : Identify a closed system ( total mass is constant , no net external force acts on the system ) .
Write down an expression representing the total momentum of the system before the “ event ” ( explosion or collision ) .
Write down an expression representing the total momentum of the system after the “ event. ” Set these two expressions equal to each other , and solve this equation for the desired quantity .
Two carts in a physics lab roll on a level track , with negligible friction .
These carts have small magnets at their ends , so that when they collide , they stick together .
The first cart has a mass of 675 grams and is rolling at 0.75 m/s to the right ; the second has a mass of 500 grams and is rolling at 1.33 m/s , also to the right .
After the collision , what is the velocity of the two joined carts ?
We have a collision .
We ’ re given masses and initial velocities ; we ’ re asked for the final velocity .
This all suggests using conservation of momentum as a method of solution .
However , we can only use it if we have a closed system .
So we need to be sure that the system we choose has no net external force on it , and that its mass is not changed by the collision .
In the vertical direction , the weights of the carts are canceled by the normal forces on the carts from the track .
Conservation of momentum is Define the direction of their initial velocity vectors to be the + x -direction .
The initial momentum is then The final momentum of the now-linked carts is Equating : Substituting the given numbers : The principles that apply here to two laboratory carts apply identically to all objects of whatever type or size .
Even for photons , the concepts of momentum and conservation of momentum are still crucially important even at that scale .
( Since they are massless , the momentum of a photon is defined very differently from the momentum of ordinary objects .
You will learn about this when you study quantum physics . )
Check Your Understanding Suppose the second , smaller cart had been initially moving to the left .
What would the sign of the final velocity have been in this case ?
A superball of mass 0.25 kg is dropped from rest from a height of above the floor .
It bounces with no loss of energy and returns to its initial height .
What is the superball ’ s change of momentum during its bounce on the floor ?
What was Earth ’ s change of momentum due to the ball colliding with the floor ?
What was Earth ’ s change of velocity as a result of this collision ?
( This example shows that you have to be careful about defining your system . )
Since we are asked only about the ball ’ s change of momentum , we define our system to be the ball .
But this is clearly not a closed system ; gravity applies a downward force on the ball while it is falling , and the normal force from the floor applies a force during the bounce .
Thus , we can not use conservation of momentum as a strategy .
Instead , we simply determine the ball ’ s momentum just before it collides with the floor and just after , and calculate the difference .
We have the ball ’ s mass , so we need its velocities .
Since this is a one-dimensional problem , we use the scalar form of the equations .
Let : the magnitude of the ball ’ s momentum at time , the moment it was released ; since it was dropped from rest , this is zero .
the magnitude of the ball ’ s momentum at time , the instant just before it hits the floor .
the magnitude of the ball ’ s momentum at time , just after it loses contact with the floor after the bounce .
The ball ’ s change of momentum is Its velocity just before it hits the floor can be determined from either conservation of energy or kinematics .
We use kinematics here ; you should re-solve it using conservation of energy and confirm you get the same result .
We want the velocity just before it hits the ground ( at time ) .
We know its initial velocity ( at time ) , the height it falls , and its acceleration ; we don ’ t know the fall time .
We could calculate that , but instead we use Thus the ball has a momentum of We don ’ t have an easy way to calculate the momentum after the bounce .
Instead , we reason from the symmetry of the situation .
Before the bounce , the ball starts with zero velocity and falls 1.50 m under the influence of gravity , achieving some amount of momentum just before it hits the ground .
On the return trip ( after the bounce ) , it starts with some amount of momentum , rises the same 1.50 m it fell , and ends with zero velocity .
Thus , the motion after the bounce was the mirror image of the motion before the bounce .
From this symmetry , it must be true that the ball ’ s momentum after the bounce must be equal and opposite to its momentum before the bounce .
( This is a subtle but crucial argument ; make sure you understand it before you go on . )
Therefore , Thus , the ball ’ s change of velocity during the bounce is What was Earth ’ s change of momentum due to the ball colliding with the floor ?
Therefore , Earth ’ s change of momentum is exactly the same magnitude : What was Earth ’ s change of velocity as a result of this collision ?
This is where your instinctive feeling is probably correct : This change of Earth ’ s velocity is utterly negligible .
It is important to realize that the answer to part ( c ) is not a velocity ; it is a change of velocity , which is a very different thing .
Nevertheless , to give you a feel for just how small that change of velocity is , suppose you were moving with a velocity of .
At this speed , it would take you about 7 million years to travel a distance equal to the diameter of a hydrogen atom .
Check Your Understanding Would the ball ’ s change of momentum have been larger , smaller , or the same , if it had collided with the floor and stopped ( without bouncing ) ?
Would the ball ’ s change of momentum have been larger , smaller , or the same , if it had collided with the floor and stopped ( without bouncing ) ?
Two hockey pucks of identical mass are on a flat , horizontal ice hockey rink .
The red puck is motionless ; the blue puck is moving at 2.5 m/s to the left .
It collides with the motionless red puck .
The pucks have a mass of 15 g. After the collision , the red puck is moving at 2.5 m/s , to the left .
What is the final velocity of the blue puck ?
We ’ re told that we have two colliding objects , we ’ re told the masses and initial velocities , and one final velocity ; we ’ re asked for both final velocities .
Conservation of momentum seems like a good strategy .
Define the system to be the two pucks ; there ’ s no friction , so we have a closed system .
Before you look at the solution , what do you think the answer will be ?
The blue puck final velocity will be : zero 2.5 m/s to the left 2.5 m/s to the right 1.25 m/s to the left 1.25 m/s to the right something else Define the + x -direction to point to the right .
Conservation of momentum then reads Before the collision , the momentum of the system is entirely and only in the blue puck .
Thus , ( Remember that the masses of the pucks are equal . )
Substituting numbers : Evidently , the two pucks simply exchanged momentum .
The blue puck transferred all of its momentum to the red puck .
What is that additional condition ?
On November 12 , 2014 , the European Space Agency successfully landed a probe named Philae on Comet 67P/ Churyumov/Gerasimenko .
During the landing , however , the probe actually landed three times , because it bounced twice .
Let ’ s calculate how much the comet ’ s speed changed as a result of the first bounce .
Let ’ s define upward to be the + y -direction , perpendicular to the surface of the comet , and to be at the surface of the comet .
However , we are told that the Philae lander collides with ( lands on ) the comet , and bounces off of it .
A collision suggests momentum as a strategy for solving this problem .
If we define a system that consists of both Philae and Comet 67/P , then there is no net external force on this system , and thus the momentum of this system is conserved .
( We ’ ll neglect the gravitational force of the sun . )
Thus , if we calculate the change of momentum of the lander , we automatically have the change of momentum of the comet .
Also , the comet ’ s change of velocity is directly related to its change of momentum as a result of the lander “ colliding ” with it .
Let the first bounce .
Now for the comet .
Crucially , however , it is not zero .
Check Your Understanding The changes of momentum for Philae and for Comet 67/P were equal ( in magnitude ) .
Were the impulses experienced by Philae and the comet equal ?
How about the forces ?
How about the changes of kinetic energies ?
Although momentum is conserved in all interactions , not all interactions ( collisions or explosions ) are the same .
The possibilities include : A single object can explode into multiple objects ( one-to-many ) .
Multiple objects can collide and stick together , forming a single object ( many-to-one ) .
Multiple objects can collide and bounce off of each other , remaining as multiple objects ( many-to-many ) .
If they do bounce off each other , then they may recoil at the same speeds with which they approached each other before the collision , or they may move off more slowly .
It ’ s useful , therefore , to categorize different types of interactions , according to how the interacting objects move before and after the interaction .
The first possibility is that a single object may break apart into two or more pieces .
An example of this is a firecracker , or a bow and arrow , or a rocket rising through the air toward space .
These can be difficult to analyze if the number of fragments after the collision is more than about three or four ; but nevertheless , the total momentum of the system before and after the explosion is identical .
Note that if the object is initially motionless , then the system ( which is just the object ) has no momentum and no kinetic energy .
After the explosion , the net momentum of all the pieces of the object must sum to zero ( since the momentum of this closed system can not change ) .
However , the system will have a great deal of kinetic energy after the explosion , although it had none before .
Thus , we see that , although the momentum of the system is conserved in an explosion , the kinetic energy of the system most definitely is not ; it increases .
This interaction—one object becoming many , with an increase of kinetic energy of the system—is called an explosion .
Where does the energy come from ?
Does conservation of energy still hold ?
Yes ; some form of potential energy is converted to kinetic energy .
In the case of gunpowder burning and pushing out a bullet , chemical potential energy is converted to kinetic energy of the bullet , and of the recoiling gun .
For a bow and arrow , it is elastic potential energy in the bowstring .
The second possibility is the reverse : that two or more objects collide with each other and stick together , thus ( after the collision ) forming one single composite object .
The total mass of this composite object is the sum of the masses of the original objects , and the new single object moves with a velocity dictated by the conservation of momentum .
However , it turns out again that , although the total momentum of the system of objects remains constant , the kinetic energy doesn ’ t ; but this time , the kinetic energy decreases .
This type of collision is called inelastic .
In the extreme case , multiple objects collide , stick together , and remain motionless after the collision .
Since the objects are all motionless after the collision , the final kinetic energy is also zero ; the loss of kinetic energy is a maximum .
Such a collision is said to be perfectly inelastic .
The extreme case on the other end is if two or more objects approach each other , collide , and bounce off each other , moving away from each other at the same relative speed at which they approached each other .
In this case , the total kinetic energy of the system is conserved .
Such an interaction is called elastic .
In any interaction of a closed system of objects , the total momentum of the system is conserved kinetic energy may not be : but the If , the collision is inelastic .
If , the collision is perfectly inelastic .
If , the collision is elastic .
If , the interaction is an explosion .
The point of all this is that , in analyzing a collision or explosion , you can use both momentum and kinetic energy .
A closed system always conserves momentum ; it might also conserve kinetic energy , but very often it doesn ’ t .
Energymomentum problems confined to a plane ( as ours are ) usually have two unknowns .
Generally , this approach works well : Define a closed system .
Write down the expression for conservation of momentum .
If kinetic energy is conserved , write down the expression for conservation of kinetic energy ; if not , write down the expression for the change of kinetic energy .
You now have two equations in two unknowns , which you solve by standard methods .
A proton ( mass ) collides with a neutron ( with essentially the same mass as the proton ) to form a particle called a deuteron .
What is the velocity of the deuteron if it is formed from a proton moving with velocity to the left and a neutron moving with velocity to the right ?
Define the system to be the two particles .
This is a collision , so we should first identify what kind .
Since we are told the two particles form a single particle after the collision , this means that the collision is perfectly inelastic .
Thus , kinetic energy is not conserved , but momentum is .
Thus , we use conservation of energy to determine the final velocity of the system .
Treat the two particles as having identical masses M .
Use the subscripts p , n , and d for proton , neutron , and deuteron , respectively .
This is a one-dimensional problem , so we have The masses divide out : .
The velocity is thus This is essentially how particle colliders like the Large Hadron Collider work : They accelerate particles up to very high speeds ( large momenta ) , but in opposite directions .
This maximizes the creation of so-called “ daughter particles. ” ( This is a variation of an earlier example . )
Two ice hockey pucks of different masses are on a flat , horizontal hockey rink .
The red puck has a mass of 15 grams , and is motionless ; the blue puck has a mass of 12 grams , and is moving at 2.5 m/s to the left .
It collides with the motionless red puck .
If the collision is perfectly elastic , what are the final velocities of the two pucks ?
We ’ re told that we have two colliding objects , and we ’ re told their masses and initial velocities , and one final velocity ; we ’ re asked for both final velocities .
Conservation of momentum seems like a good strategy ; define the system to be the two pucks .
There is no friction , so we have a closed system .
We have two unknowns ( the two final velocities ) , but only one equation .
The comment about the collision being perfectly elastic is the clue ; it suggests that kinetic energy is also conserved in this collision .
That gives us our second equation .
The initial momentum and initial kinetic energy of the system resides entirely and only in the second puck ( the blue one ) ; the collision transfers some of this momentum and energy to the first puck .
Conservation of momentum , in this case , reads Conservation of kinetic energy reads There are our two equations in two unknowns .
The algebra is tedious but not terribly difficult ; you definitely should work it through .
The solution is Substituting the given numbers , we obtain Notice that after the collision , the blue puck is moving to the right ; its direction of motion was reversed .
The red puck is now moving to the left .
Check Your Understanding There is a second solution to the system of equations solved in this example ( because the energy equation is quadratic ) : .
This solution is unacceptable on physical grounds ; what ’ s wrong with it ?
The 2012 movie “ The Avengers ” has a scene where Iron Man and Thor fight .
At the beginning of the fight , Thor throws his hammer at Iron Man , hitting him and throwing him slightly up into the air and against a small tree , which breaks .
From the video , Iron Man is standing still when the hammer hits him .
The distance between Thor and Iron Man is approximately 10 m , and the hammer takes about 1 s to reach Iron Man after Thor releases it .
The tree is about 2 m behind Iron Man , which he hits in about 0.75 s. Also from the video , Iron Man ’ s trajectory to the tree is very close to horizontal .
Thus , with the correct choice of a closed system , we expect momentum is conserved , but not kinetic energy .
We use the given numbers to estimate the initial momentum , the initial kinetic energy , and the final kinetic energy .
Because this is a one-dimensional problem , we can go directly to the scalar form of the equations .
First , we posit conservation of momentum .
For that , we need a closed system .
The choice here is the system ( hammer + Iron Man ) , from the time of collision to the moment just before Iron Man and the hammer hit the tree .
Let : mass of the hammer mass of Iron Man velocity of the hammer before hitting Iron Man v combined velocity of Iron Man + hammer after the collision Again , Iron Man ’ s initial velocity was zero .
Conservation of momentum here reads : We are asked to find the mass of the hammer , so we have Considering the uncertainties in our estimates , this should be expressed with just one significant figure ; thus , .
The initial kinetic energy of the system , like the initial momentum , is all in the hammer : After the collision , Thus , there was a loss of .
From other scenes in the movie , Thor apparently can control the hammer ’ s velocity with his mind .
It is possible , therefore , that he mentally causes the hammer to maintain its initial velocity of 10 m/s while Iron Man is being driven backward toward the tree .
If so , this would represent an external force on our system , so it would not be closed .
Thor ’ s mental control of his hammer is beyond the scope of this book , however .
At a stoplight , a large truck ( 3000 kg ) collides with a motionless small car ( 1200 kg ) .
The truck comes to an instantaneous stop ; the car slides straight ahead , coming to a stop after sliding 10 meters .
The measured coefficient of friction between the car ’ s tires and the road was 0.62 .
How fast was the truck moving at the moment of impact ?
At first it may seem we don ’ t have enough information to solve this problem .
Although we know the initial speed of the car , we don ’ t know the speed of the truck ( indeed , that ’ s what we ’ re asked to find ) , so we don ’ t know the initial momentum of the system .
Similarly , we know the final speed of the truck , but not the speed of the car immediately after impact .
The fact that the car eventually slid to a speed of zero doesn ’ t help with the final momentum , since an external friction force caused that .
Nor can we calculate an impulse , since we don ’ t know the collision time , or the amount of time the car slid before stopping .
A useful strategy is to impose a restriction on the analysis .
Suppose we define a system consisting of just the truck and the car .
The momentum of this system isn ’ t conserved , because of the friction between the car and the road .
But if we could find the speed of the car the instant after impact—before friction had any measurable effect on the car—then we could consider the momentum of the system to be conserved , with that restriction .
Can we find the final speed of the car ?
Yes ; we invoke the work-kinetic energy theorem .
First , define some variables .
d be the distance the car slides after the collision before eventually coming to a stop .
Since we actually want the initial speed of the truck , and since the truck is not part of the work-energy calculation , let ’ s start with conservation of momentum .
For the car + truck system , conservation of momentum reads Since the car ’ s initial velocity was zero , as was the truck ’ s final velocity , this simplifies to So now we need the car ’ s speed immediately after impact .
Recall that where Also , The work is done over the distance the car slides , which we ’ ve called d .
Equating : Friction is the force on the car that does the work to stop the sliding .
Solving for the car ’ s speed immediately after the collision gives Substituting the given numbers : Now we can calculate the initial speed of the truck : This is an example of the type of analysis done by investigators of major car accidents .
A great deal of legal and financial consequences depend on an accurate analysis and calculation of momentum and energy .
Check Your Understanding Suppose there had been no friction ( the collision happened on ice ) ; that would make zero , and thus , which is obviously wrong .
What is the mistake in this conclusion ?
Conservation of momentum is crucial to our understanding of atomic and subatomic particles because much of what we know about these particles comes from collision experiments .
At the beginning of the twentieth century , there was considerable interest in , and debate about , the structure of the atom .
It was known that atoms contain two types of electrically charged particles : negatively charged electrons and positively charged protons .
( The existence of an electrically neutral particle was suspected , but would not be confirmed until 1932 . )
The question was , how were these particles arranged in the atom ?
The New Zealand physicist Ernest Rutherford ( along with the German physicist Hans Geiger and the British physicist Ernest Marsden ) performed the crucial experiment in 1909 .
They bombarded a thin sheet of gold foil with a beam of highenergy ( that is , high-speed ) alpha-particles ( the nucleus of a helium atom ) .
The alpha-particles collided with the gold atoms , and their subsequent velocities were detected and analyzed , using conservation of momentum and conservation of energy .
If the charges of the gold atoms were distributed uniformly ( per Thomson ) , then the alpha-particles should collide with them and nearly all would be deflected through many angles , all small ; the Nagaoka model would produce a similar result .
If the atoms were arranged as regular polygons ( Lewis ) , the alpha-particles would deflect at a relatively small number of angles .
What actually happened is that nearly none of the alpha-particles were deflected .
Those that were , were deflected at large angles , some close to —those alpha-particles reversed direction completely .
None of the existing atomic models could explain this .
Eventually , Rutherford developed a model of the atom that was much closer to what we now have—again , using conservation of momentum and energy as his starting point .
It is far more common for collisions to occur in two dimensions ; that is , the angle between the initial velocity vectors is neither zero nor .
Let ’ s see what complications arise from this .
The first idea we need is that momentum is a vector ; like all vectors , it can be expressed as a sum of perpendicular components ( usually , though not always , an x -component and a y -component , and a z -component if necessary ) .
Thus , when we write down the statement of conservation of momentum for a problem , our momentum vectors can be , and usually will be , expressed in component form .
The second idea we need comes from the fact that momentum is related to force : Expressing both the force and the momentum in component form , Remember , these equations are simply Newton ’ s second law , in vector form and in component form .
We know that Newton ’ s second law is true in each direction , independently of the others .
It follows therefore ( via Newton ’ s third law ) that conservation of momentum is also true in each direction independently .
These two ideas motivate the solution to two-dimensional problems : We write down the expression for conservation of momentum twice : once in the x -direction and once in the y -direction .
This procedure is shown graphically in .
We solve each of these two component equations independently to obtain the x and y -components of the desired velocity vector : ( Here , m represents the total mass of the system . )
Write down the equation that represents conservation of momentum in the x -direction , and solve it for the desired quantity .
If you are calculating a vector quantity ( velocity , usually ) , this will give you the x -component of the vector .
Write down the equation that represents conservation of momentum in the y -direction , and solve .
This will give you the y -component of your vector quantity .
Assuming you are calculating a vector quantity , use the Pythagorean theorem to calculate its magnitude , using the results of steps 3 and 4 .
A small car of mass 1200 kg traveling east at 60 km/hr collides at an intersection with a truck of mass 3000 kg that is traveling due north at 40 km/hr .
The two vehicles are locked together .
What is the velocity of the combined wreckage ?
First off , we need a closed system .
The natural system to choose is the ( car + truck ) , but this system is not closed ; friction from the road acts on both vehicles .
We avoid this problem by restricting the question to finding the velocity at the instant just after the collision , so that friction has not yet had any effect on the system .
With that restriction , momentum is conserved for this system .
Since there are two directions involved , we do conservation of momentum twice : once in the x -direction and once in the y -direction .
Before the collision the total momentum is After the collision , the wreckage has momentum Since the system is closed , momentum must be conserved , so we have We have to be careful ; the two initial momenta are not parallel .
We must add vectorially .
We saw that analysis in an earlier section .
Check Your Understanding Suppose the initial velocities were not at right angles to each other .
How would this change both the physical result and the mathematical analysis of the collision ?
A common scuba tank is an aluminum cylinder that weighs 31.7 pounds empty .
When full of compressed air , the internal pressure is between 2500 and 3000 psi ( pounds per square inch ) .
Suppose such a tank , which had been sitting motionless , suddenly explodes into three pieces .
The first piece , weighing 10 pounds , shoots off horizontally at 235 miles per hour ; the second piece ( 7 pounds ) shoots off at 172 miles per hour , also in the horizontal plane , but at a angle to the first piece .
What is the mass and initial velocity of the third piece ?
( Do all work , and express your final answer , in SI units . )
To use conservation of momentum , we need a closed system .
If we define the system to be the scuba tank , this is not a closed system , since gravity is an external force .
However , the problem asks for the just the initial velocity of the third piece , so we can neglect the effect of gravity and consider the tank by itself as a closed system .
Notice that , for this system , the initial momentum vector is zero .
We choose a coordinate system where all the motion happens in the xy -plane .
We then write down the equations for conservation of momentum in each direction , thus obtaining the x and y -components of the momentum of the third piece , from which we obtain its magnitude ( via the Pythagorean theorem ) and its direction .
Finally , dividing this momentum by the mass of the third piece gives us the velocity .
First , let ’ s get all the conversions to SI units out of the way : Now apply conservation of momentum in each direction .
The enormous velocities here are typical ; an exploding tank of any compressed gas can easily punch through the wall of a house and cause significant injury , or death .
Fortunately , such explosions are extremely rare , on a percentage basis .
Check Your Understanding Notice that the mass of the air in the tank was neglected in the analysis and solution .
How would the solution method changed if the air was included ?
How large a difference do you think it would make in the final answer ?
A car has an engine , steering wheel , seats , passengers ; a football is leather and rubber surrounding air ; a brick is made of atoms .
There are many different types of particles , and they are generally not distributed uniformly in the object .
How do we include these facts into our calculations ?
Then too , an extended object might change shape as it moves , such as a water balloon or a cat falling .
This implies that the constituent particles are applying internal forces on each other , in addition to the external force that is acting on the object as a whole .
We want to be able to handle this , as well .
Be warned : To treat this new situation correctly , we must be rigorous and completely general .
We won ’ t make any assumptions about the nature of the object , or of its constituent particles , or either the internal or external forces .
Thus , the arguments will be complex .
Suppose we have an extended object of mass M , made of N interacting particles .
Let ’ s label their masses as , where .
Note that If we apply some net external force external force .
Let : on the object , every particle experiences some “ share ” or some fraction of that Notice that these fractions of the total force are not necessarily equal ; indeed , they virtually never are .
( They can be , but they usually aren ’ t . )
In general , therefore , Next , we assume that each of the particles making up our object can interact ( apply forces on ) every other particle of the object .
Now , the net force , internal plus external , on the j th particle is the vector sum of these : where again , this is for all N particles ; .
First consider the internal forces term ; remember that each on the j th particle from the other particles in the object .
But by Newton ’ s third law , for every one of these forces , there must be another force that has the same magnitude , but the opposite sign ( points in the opposite direction ) .
These forces do not cancel ; however , that ’ s not what we ’ re doing in the summation .
Rather , we ’ re simply mathematically adding up all the internal force vectors .
That is , in general , the internal forces for any individual part of the object won ’ t cancel , but when all the internal forces are added up , the internal forces must cancel in pairs .
It follows , therefore , that the sum of all the internal forces must be zero : ( This argument is subtle , but crucial ; take plenty of time to completely understand it . )
For the external forces , this summation is simply the total external force that was applied to the whole object : As a result , This is an important result .
tells us that the total change of momentum of the entire object ( all N particles ) is due only to the external forces ; the internal forces do not change the momentum of the object as a whole .
This is why you can ’ t lift yourself in the air by standing in a basket and pulling up on the handles : For the system of you + basket , your upward pulling force is an internal force .
Remember that our actual goal is to determine the equation of motion for the entire object ( the entire system of particles ) .
This is Newton ’ s second law , but now for the entire extended object .
Our next task is to determine what part of the extended object , if any , is obeying .
It ’ s tempting to take the next step ; does the following equation mean anything ?
If it does mean something ( acceleration of what , exactly ?
) , then we could write and thus which follows because the derivative of a sum is equal to the sum of the derivatives .
Now , coordinate system ) as , we thus have is the momentum of the j th particle .
Looking at this calculation , notice that ( inside the parentheses ) we are calculating the product of each particle ’ s mass with its position , adding all N of these up , and dividing this sum by the total mass of particles we summed .
This is reminiscent of an average ; inspired by this , we ’ ll ( loosely ) interpret it to be the weighted average position of the mass of the extended object .
It ’ s actually called the center of mass of the object .
Notice that the position of the center of mass has units of meters ; that suggests a definition : So , the point that obeys ( and therefore as well ) is the center of mass of the object , which is located at the position vector .
It may surprise you to learn that there does not have to be any actual mass at the center of mass of an object .
For example , a hollow steel sphere with a vacuum inside it is spherically symmetrical ( meaning its mass is uniformly distributed about the center of the sphere ) ; all of the sphere ’ s mass is out on its surface , with no mass inside .
But it can be shown that the center of mass of the sphere is at its geometric center , which seems reasonable .
Thus , there is no mass at the position of the center of mass of the sphere .
( Another example is a doughnut . )
The procedure to find the center of mass is illustrated in .
Since , it follows that : and thus Therefore , you can calculate the components of the center of mass vector individually .
Finally , to complete the kinematics , the instantaneous velocity of the center of mass is calculated exactly as you might suspect : and this , like the position , has x - , y - , and z -components .
To calculate the center of mass in actual situations , we recommend the following procedure : The center of mass of an object is a position vector .
Thus , to calculate it , do these steps : Define your coordinate system .
Typically , the origin is placed at the location of one of the particles .
This is not required , however .
Determine the x , y , z -coordinates of each particle that makes up the object .
Determine the mass of each particle , and sum them to obtain the total mass of the object .
Note that the mass of the object at the origin must be included in the total mass .
Calculate the x - , y - , and z -components of the center of mass vector , using , , and .
If required , use the Pythagorean theorem to determine its magnitude .
Here are two examples that will give you a feel for what the center of mass is .
Using data from text appendix , determine how far the center of mass of the Earth-moon system is from the center of Earth .
Compare this distance to the radius of Earth , and comment on the result .
Ignore the other objects in the solar system .
We get the masses and separation distance of the Earth and moon , impose a coordinate system , and use with just objects .
We use a subscript “ e ” to refer to Earth , and subscript “ m ” to refer to the moon .
Define the origin of the coordinate system as the center of Earth .
Then , with just two objects , becomes From , We defined the center of Earth as the origin , so .
Inserting these into the equation for R gives The radius of Earth is , so the center of mass of the Earth-moon system is ( 6.37 − 4.64 ) ( roughly 1080 miles ) below the surface of Earth .
The location of the center of mass is shown ( not to scale ) .
Check Your Understanding Suppose we included the sun in the system .
Approximately where would the center of mass of the Earth-moon-sun system be located ?
( Feel free to actually calculate it . )
shows a single crystal of sodium chloride—ordinary table salt .
The sodium and chloride ions form a single unit , NaCl .
When multiple NaCl units group together , they form a cubic lattice .
The smallest possible cube ( called the unit cell ) consists of four sodium ions and four chloride ions , alternating .
The length of one edge of this cube ( i.e. , the bond length ) is .
Find the location of the center of mass of the unit cell .
Specify it either by its coordinates , or by and two angles .
We can look up all the ion masses .
If we impose a coordinate system on the unit cell , this will give us the positions of the ions .
We can then apply , , and ( along with the Pythagorean theorem ) .
Define the origin to be at the location of the chloride ion at the bottom left of the unit cell .
shows the coordinate system .
Although this is a great exercise to determine the center of mass given a Chloride ion at the origin , in fact the origin could be chosen at any location .
Therefore , there is no meaningful application of the center of mass of a unit cell beyond as an exercise .
Check Your Understanding Suppose you have a macroscopic salt crystal ( that is , a crystal that is large enough to be visible with your unaided eye ) .
It is made up of a huge number of unit cells .
Is the center of mass of this crystal necessarily at the geometric center of the crystal ?
Two crucial concepts come out of these examples : As with all problems , you must define your coordinate system and origin .
For center-of-mass calculations , it often makes sense to choose your origin to be located at one of the masses of your system .
That choice automatically defines its distance in to be zero .
However , you must still include the mass of the object at your origin in your calculation of M , the total mass .
In the Earth-moon system example , this means including the mass of Earth .
If you hadn ’ t , you ’ d have ended up with the center of mass of the system being at the center of the moon , which is clearly wrong .
In the second example ( the salt crystal ) , notice that there is no mass at all at the location of the center of mass .
This is an example of what we stated above , that there does not have to be any actual mass at the center of mass of an object .
To generate an integrand that can actually be calculated , you need to express the differential mass element dm as a function of the mass density of the continuous object , and the dimension r .
An example will clarify this .
Find the center of mass of a uniform thin hoop ( or ring ) of mass M and radius r .
First , the hoop ’ s symmetry suggests the center of mass should be at its geometric center .
If we define our coordinate system such that the origin is located at the center of the hoop , the integral should evaluate to zero .
We replace dm with an expression involving the density of the hoop and the radius of the hoop .
We then have an expression we can actually integrate .
Since the hoop is described as “ thin , ” we treat it as a one-dimensional object , neglecting the thickness of the hoop .
Therefore , its density is expressed as the number of kilograms of material per meter .
Such a density is called a linear mass density , and is given the symbol ; this is the Greek letter “ lambda , ” which is the equivalent of the English letter “ l ” ( for “ linear ” ) .
Since the hoop is described as uniform , this means that the linear mass density is constant .
Thus , to get our expression for the differential mass element dm , we multiply by a differential length of the hoop , substitute , and integrate ( with appropriate limits for the definite integral ) .
First , define our coordinate system and the relevant variables .
The center of mass is calculated with : We have to determine the limits of integration a and b .
Expressing in component form gives us In the diagram , we highlighted a piece of the hoop that is of differential length ds ; it therefore has a differential mass .
This tells us that the limits of integration ( around the circular hoop ) are , so and .
Also , for convenience , we separate the integral into the x and y -components of .
The final integral expression is as expected .
How does all this connect to conservation of momentum ?
Suppose you have N objects with masses and initial velocities center of mass of the objects is .
Notice that as an object moves through space with no net external force acting on it , an individual particle of the object may accelerate in various directions , with various magnitudes , depending on the net internal force acting on that object at any time .
( Remember , it is only the vector sum of all the internal forces that vanishes , not the internal force on a single particle . )
Thus , such a particle ’ s momentum will not be constant—but the momentum of the entire extended object will be , in accord with .
implies another important result : Since M represents the mass of the entire system of particles , it is necessarily constant .
( If it isn ’ t , we don ’ t have a closed system , so we can ’ t expect the system ’ s momentum to be conserved . )
As a result , implies that , for a closed system , That is to say , in the absence of an external force , the velocity of the center of mass never changes .
So , this really is a remarkable result .
When a fireworks rocket explodes , thousands of glowing fragments fly outward in all directions , and fall to Earth in an elegant and beautiful display .
Describe what happens , in terms of conservation of momentum and center of mass .
The picture shows radial symmetry about the central points of the explosions ; this suggests the idea of center of mass .
We can also see the parabolic motion of the glowing particles ; this brings to mind projectile motion ideas .
Initially , the fireworks rocket is launched and flies more or less straight upward ; this is the cause of the more-orless-straight , white trail going high into the sky below the explosion in the upper-right of the picture ( the yellow explosion ) .
This trail is not parabolic because the explosive shell , during its launch phase , is actually a rocket ; the impulse applied to it by the ejection of the burning fuel applies a force on the shell during the rise-time interval .
( This is a phenomenon we will study in the next section . )
The shell has multiple forces on it ; thus , it is not in free-fall prior to the explosion .
At the instant of the explosion , the thousands of glowing fragments fly outward in a radially symmetrical pattern .
for every The symmetry of the explosion is the result of all the internal forces summing to zero internal force , there is another that is equal in magnitude and opposite in direction .
However , as we learned above , these internal forces can not change the momentum of the center of mass of the ( now exploded ) shell .
Since the rocket force has now vanished , the center of mass of the shell is now a projectile ( the only force on it is gravity ) , so its trajectory does become parabolic .
The two red explosions on the left show the path of their centers of mass at a slightly longer time after explosion compared to the yellow explosion on the upper right .
In fact , if you look carefully at all three explosions , you can see that the glowing trails are not truly radially symmetric ; rather , they are somewhat denser on one side than the other .
Specifically , the yellow explosion and the lower middle explosion are slightly denser on their right sides , and the upper-left explosion is denser on its left side .
This is because of the momentum of their centers of mass ; the differing trail densities are due to the momentum each piece of the shell had at the moment of its explosion .
Finally , each fragment is a projectile on its own , thus tracing out thousands of glowing parabolas .
This is actually just verbal shorthand for describing the fact that the gravitational forces on all the particles act so that the center of mass changes position exactly as if all the mass of the shell were always located at the position of the center of mass .
Check Your Understanding How would the firework display change in deep space , far away from any source of gravity ?
Phrased this way , it would be hard to believe no explosion ever does anything differently .
The explanation of this apparently astonishing coincidence is : We defined the center of mass precisely so this is exactly what we would get .
Recall that first we defined the momentum of the system : We then concluded that the net external force on the system ( if any ) changed this momentum : and then—and here ’ s the point—we defined an acceleration that would obey Newton ’ s second law .
That is , we demanded that we should be able to write which requires that where the quantity inside the parentheses is the center of mass of our system .
So , it ’ s not astonishing that the center of mass obeys Newton ’ s second law ; we defined it so that it would .
Now we deal with the case where the mass of an object is changing .
We analyze the motion of a rocket , which changes its velocity ( and hence its momentum ) by ejecting burned fuel gases , thus causing it to accelerate in the opposite direction of the velocity of the ejected fuel ( see ) .
Specifically : A fully fueled rocket ship in deep space has a total mass ( this mass includes the initial mass of the fuel ) .
At some moment in time , the rocket has a velocity and mass m ; this mass is a combination of the mass of the empty rocket and the mass of the remaining unburned fuel it contains .
( We refer to m as the “ instantaneous mass ” and as the “ instantaneous velocity. ” ) The rocket accelerates by burning the fuel it carries and ejecting the burned exhaust gases .
If the burn rate of the fuel is constant , and the velocity at which the exhaust is ejected is also constant , what is the change of velocity of the rocket as a result of burning all of its fuel ?
Here ’ s a description of what happens , so that you get a feel for the physics involved .
As the rocket engines operate , they are continuously ejecting burned fuel gases , which have both mass and velocity , and therefore some momentum .
By conservation of momentum , the rocket ’ s momentum changes by this same amount ( with the opposite sign ) .
We will assume the burned fuel is being ejected at a constant rate , which means the rate of change of the rocket ’ s momentum is also constant .
By , this represents a constant force on the rocket .
However , as time goes on , the mass of the rocket ( which includes the mass of the remaining fuel ) continuously decreases .
Thus , even though the force on the rocket is constant , the resulting acceleration is not ; it is continuously increasing .
So , the total change of the rocket ’ s velocity will depend on the amount of mass of fuel that is burned , and that dependence is not linear .
The problem has the mass and velocity of the rocket changing ; also , the total mass of ejected gases is changing .
If we define our system to be the rocket + fuel , then this is a closed system ( since the rocket is in deep space , there are no external forces acting on this system ) ; as a result , momentum is conserved for this system .
Thus , we can apply conservation of momentum to answer the question .
Thus , the initial momentum of the system is The rocket ’ s engines are burning fuel at a constant rate and ejecting the exhaust gases in the − x -direction .
During an infinitesimal time interval dt , the engines eject a ( positive ) infinitesimal mass of gas at velocity ; note that although the rocket velocity is measured with respect to Earth , the exhaust gas velocity is measured with respect to the ( moving ) rocket .
Measured with respect to the Earth , therefore , the exhaust gas has velocity .
As a consequence of the ejection of the fuel gas , the rocket ’ s mass decreases by , and its velocity increases by .
Therefore , including both the change for the rocket and the change for the exhaust gas , the final momentum of the system is Since all vectors are in the x -direction , we drop the vector notation .
Applying conservation of momentum , we obtain Now , and dv are each very small ; thus , their product is very , very small , much smaller than the other two terms in this expression .
It was originally derived by the Soviet physicist Konstantin Tsiolkovsky in 1897 .
It gives us the change of velocity that the rocket obtains from burning a mass of fuel that decreases the total rocket mass from down to m .
As expected , the relationship between and the change of mass of the rocket is nonlinear .
In rocket problems , the most common questions are finding the change of velocity due to burning some amount of fuel for some amount of time ; or to determine the acceleration that results from burning fuel .
To determine the change of velocity , use the rocket equation .
To determine the acceleration , determine the force by using the impulse-momentum theorem , using the rocket equation to determine the change of velocity .
A spacecraft is moving in gravity-free space along a straight path when its pilot decides to accelerate forward .
He turns on the thrusters , and burned fuel is ejected at a constant rate of , at a speed ( relative to the rocket ) of .
The initial mass of the spacecraft and its unburned fuel is , and the thrusters are on for 30 s. What is the thrust ( the force applied to the rocket by the ejected fuel ) on the spacecraft ?
What is the spacecraft ’ s acceleration as a function of time ?
What are the spacecraft ’ s accelerations at t = 0 , 15 , 30 , and 35 s ?
The force on the spacecraft is equal to the rate of change of the momentum of the fuel .
Knowing the force from part ( a ) , we can use Newton ’ s second law to calculate the consequent acceleration .
We expect to get a function a ( t ) , therefore .
We ’ ll use the function we obtain in part ( b ) , and just substitute the numbers given .
Important : We expect that the acceleration will get larger as time goes on , since the mass being accelerated is continuously decreasing ( fuel is being ejected from the rocket ) .
The momentum of the ejected fuel gas is The ejection velocity is constant , and therefore the force is Now , Substituting , we get is the rate of change of the mass of the fuel ; the problem states that this is .
Above , we defined m to be the combined mass of the empty rocket plus however much unburned fuel it contained : .
From Newton ’ s second law , The force is constant and the empty rocket mass is constant , but the fuel mass is decreasing at a uniform rate ; specifically : This gives us Notice that , as expected , the acceleration is a function of time .
Substituting the given numbers : At : At .
Acceleration is increasing , as we expected .
Notice that the acceleration is not constant ; as a result , any dynamical quantities must be calculated either using integrals , or ( more easily ) conservation of total energy .
Check Your Understanding What is the physical difference ( or relationship ) between in this example ?
and Let ’ s now analyze the velocity change of the rocket during the launch phase , from the surface of Earth .
To keep the math manageable , we ’ ll restrict our attention to distances for which the acceleration caused by gravity can be treated as a constant g .
The analysis is similar , except that now there is an external force of acting on our system .
This force applies an impulse , which is equal to the change of momentum .
This gives us and so where we have again neglected the term and dropped the vector notation .
Next we replace with : Dividing through by m gives and integrating , we have Unsurprisingly , the rocket ’ s velocity is affected by the ( constant ) acceleration of gravity .
Remember that is the burn time of the fuel .
Now , in the absence of gravity , implies that it makes no difference how much time it takes to burn the entire mass of fuel ; the change of velocity does not depend on .
However , in the presence of gravity , it matters a lot .
The − g term in tells us that the longer the burn time is , the smaller the rocket ’ s change of velocity will be .
This is the reason that the launch of a rocket is so spectacular at the first moment of liftoff : It ’ s essential to burn the fuel as quickly as possible , to get as large a as possible .
In previous chapters , we described motion ( kinematics ) and how to change motion ( dynamics ) , and we defined important concepts such as energy for objects that can be considered as point masses .
Point masses , by definition , have no shape and so can only undergo translational motion .
However , we know from everyday life that rotational motion is also very important and that many objects that move have both translation and rotation .
The wind turbines in our chapter opening image are a prime example of how rotational motion impacts our daily lives , as the market for clean energy sources continues to grow .
We begin to address rotational motion in this chapter , starting with fixed-axis rotation .
Fixed-axis rotation describes the rotation around a fixed axis of a rigid body ; that is , an object that does not deform as it moves .
We will show how to apply all the ideas we ’ ve developed up to this point about translational motion to an object rotating around a fixed axis .
In the next chapter , we extend these ideas to more complex rotational motion , including objects that both rotate and translate , and objects that do not have a fixed rotational axis .
So far in this text , we have mainly studied translational motion , including the variables that describe it : displacement , velocity , and acceleration .
Now we expand our description of motion to rotation—specifically , rotational motion about a fixed axis .
We will find that rotational motion is described by a set of related variables similar to those we used in translational motion .
Uniform circular motion ( discussed previously in ) is motion in a circle at constant speed .
Although this is the simplest case of rotational motion , it is very useful for many situations , and we use it here to introduce rotational variables .
In , we show a particle moving in a circle .
The coordinate system is fixed and serves as a frame of reference to define the particle ’ s position .
Its position vector from the origin of the circle to the particle sweeps out the angle , which increases in the counterclockwise direction as the particle moves along its circular path .
The angle is called the angular position of the particle .
As the particle moves in its circular path , it also traces an arc length s .
The angle is related to the radius of the circle and the arc length by The angle , the angular position of the particle along its path , has units of radians ( rad ) .
There are radians in Note that the radian measure is a ratio of length measurements , and therefore is a dimensionless quantity .
As the particle moves along its circular path , its angular position changes and it undergoes angular displacements We can assign vectors to the quantities in .
The angle is a vector out of the page in .
The both lie in the plane of the page .
These three vectors are related to angular position vector each other by and the arc length That is , the arc length is the cross product of the angle vector and the position vector , as shown in .
The magnitude of the angular velocity , denoted by , is the time rate of change of the angle as the particle moves in its circular path .
The instantaneous angular velocity is defined as the limit in which in the average angular velocity : where is the angle of rotation .
The units of angular velocity are radians per second ( rad/s ) .
Angular velocity can also be referred to as the rotation rate in radians per second .
In many situations , we are given the rotation rate in revolutions/s or cycles/s .
To find the angular velocity , we must multiply revolutions/s by , since there are radians in one complete revolution .
Since the direction of a positive angle in a circle is counterclockwise , we take counterclockwise rotations as being positive and clockwise rotations as negative .
We can see how angular velocity is related to the tangential speed of the particle by differentiating with respect to time .
We rewrite as Taking the derivative with respect to time and noting that the radius r is a constant , we have .
Here where we arrive at is just the tangential speed of the particle in .
Thus , by using , That is , the tangential speed of the particle is its angular velocity times the radius of the circle .
From , we see that the tangential speed of the particle increases with its distance from the axis of rotation for a constant angular velocity .
This effect is shown in .
Two particles are placed at different radii on a rotating disk with a constant angular velocity .
As the disk rotates , the tangential speed increases linearly with the radius from the axis of rotation .
In , we see that and .
But the disk has a constant angular velocity , so .
Thus , since , .
or Up until now , we have discussed the magnitude of the angular velocity which is a scalar quantity—the change in angular position with respect to time .
The vector is the vector associated with the angular velocity and points along the axis of rotation .
This is useful because when a rigid body is rotating , we want to know both the axis of rotation and the direction that the body is rotating about the axis , clockwise or counterclockwise .
The angular velocity gives us this information .
The angular velocity has a direction determined by what is called the right-hand rule .
The right-hand rule is such that if the fingers of your right hand wrap counterclockwise from the x -axis ( the direction in which increases ) toward the yaxis , your thumb points in the direction of the positive z -axis .
An angular velocity that points along the positive z -axis therefore corresponds to a counterclockwise rotation , whereas an angular velocity that points along the negative z -axis corresponds to a clockwise rotation .
Similar to , one can state a cross product relation to the vector of the tangential velocity as stated in .
Therefore , we have That is , the tangential velocity is the cross product of the angular velocity and the position vector , as shown in .
From part ( a ) of this figure , we see that with the angular velocity in the positive z -direction , the rotation in the xy -plane is counterclockwise .
In part ( b ) , the angular velocity is in the negative zdirection , giving a clockwise rotation in the xyplane .
A flywheel rotates such that it sweeps out an angle at the rate of radians .
The wheel rotates counterclockwise when viewed in the plane of the page .
( a ) What is the angular velocity of the flywheel ?
( b ) What direction is the angular velocity ?
( c ) How many radians does the flywheel rotate through in 30 s ?
( d ) What is the tangential speed of a point on the flywheel 10 cm from the axis of rotation ?
The functional form of the angular position of the flywheel is given in the problem as , so by taking the derivative with respect to time , we can find the angular velocity .
We use the right-hand rule to find the angular velocity .
We see that the angular velocity is a constant .
By the right-hand rule , we curl the fingers in the direction of rotation , which is counterclockwise in the plane of the page , and the thumb points in the direction of the angular velocity , which is out of the page .
In 30 s , the flywheel has rotated through quite a number of revolutions , about 215 if we divide the angular displacement by .
A massive flywheel can be used to store energy in this way , if the losses due to friction are minimal .
Recent research has considered superconducting bearings on which the flywheel rests , with zero energy loss due to friction .
We have just discussed angular velocity for uniform circular motion , but not all motion is uniform .
Envision an ice skater spinning with his arms outstretched—when he pulls his arms inward , his angular velocity increases .
Or think about a computer ’ s hard disk slowing to a halt as the angular velocity decreases .
We will explore these situations later , but we can already see a need to define an angular acceleration for describing situations where changes .
The faster the change in , the greater the angular acceleration .
We define the instantaneous angular acceleration as the derivative of angular velocity with respect to time : where we have taken the limit of the average angular acceleration , as .
The units of angular acceleration are ( rad/s ) /s , or .
In the same way as we defined the vector associated with angular velocity , we can define , the vector associated with angular acceleration .
If the angular velocity is along the positive zaxis , as in , and is positive , then the angular acceleration is positive and points along the axis .
Similarly , if the angular velocity is along the positive zaxis and is negative , then the angular acceleration is negative and points along the axis .
We can express the tangential acceleration vector as a cross product of the angular acceleration and the position vector .
This expression can be found by taking the time derivative of and is left as an exercise : The vector relationships for the angular acceleration and tangential acceleration are shown in .
We can relate the tangential acceleration of a point on a rotating body at a distance from the axis of rotation in the same way that we related the tangential speed to the angular velocity .
If we differentiate with respect to time , noting that the radius r is constant , we obtain Thus , the tangential acceleration is the radius times the angular acceleration .
and are important for the discussion of rolling motion ( see ) .
Let ’ s apply these ideas to the analysis of a few simple fixed-axis rotation scenarios .
Before doing so , we present a problemsolving strategy that can be applied to rotational kinematics : the description of rotational motion .
Examine the situation to determine that rotational kinematics ( rotational motion ) is involved .
Identify exactly what needs to be determined in the problem ( identify the unknowns ) .
A sketch of the situation is useful .
Make a complete list of what is given or can be inferred from the problem as stated ( identify the knowns ) .
Solve the appropriate equation or equations for the quantity to be determined ( the unknown ) .
It can be useful to think in terms of a translational analog , because by now you are familiar with the equations of translational motion .
Substitute the known values along with their units into the appropriate equation and obtain numerical solutions complete with units .
Be sure to use units of radians for angles .
Check your answer to see if it is reasonable : Does your answer make sense ?
Now let ’ s apply this problem-solving strategy to a few specific examples .
A bicycle mechanic mounts a bicycle on the repair stand and starts the rear wheel spinning from rest to a final angular velocity of 250 rpm in 5.00 s. ( a ) Calculate the average angular acceleration in .
( b ) If she now hits the brakes , causing an angular acceleration of −87.3 , how long does it take the wheel to stop ?
The average angular acceleration can be found directly from its definition because the final angular velocity and time are given .
We see that and is 5.00 s. For part ( b ) , we know the angular acceleration and the initial angular velocity .
Thus , Note that the angular acceleration as the mechanic spins the wheel is small and positive ; it takes 5 s to produce an appreciable angular velocity .
When she hits the brake , the angular acceleration is large and negative .
The angular velocity quickly goes to zero .
Check Your Understanding The fan blades on a turbofan jet engine ( shown below ) accelerate from rest up to a rotation rate of 40.0 rev/s in 20 s. The increase in angular velocity of the fan is constant in time .
( The GE90-110B1 turbofan engine mounted on a Boeing 777 , as shown , is currently the largest turbofan engine in the world , capable of thrusts of 330–510 kN . )
( a ) What is the average angular acceleration ?
( b ) What is the instantaneous angular acceleration at any time during the first 20 s ?
A wind turbine in a wind farm is being shut down for maintenance .
It takes 30 s for the turbine to go from its operating angular velocity to a complete stop in which the angular velocity function is .
If the turbine is rotating counterclockwise looking into the page , ( a ) what are the directions of the angular velocity and acceleration vectors ?
( b ) What is the average angular acceleration ?
( c ) What is the instantaneous angular acceleration at We are given the rotational sense of the turbine , which is counterclockwise in the plane of the page .
Using the right hand rule , we can establish the directions of the angular velocity and acceleration vectors .
We calculate the initial and final angular velocities to get the average angular acceleration .
We establish the sign of the angular acceleration from the results in ( a ) .
We are given the functional form of the angular velocity , so we can find the functional form of the angular acceleration function by taking its derivative with respect to time .
Since the turbine is rotating counterclockwise , angular velocity points out of the page .
But since the angular velocity is decreasing , the angular acceleration points into the page , in the opposite sense to the angular velocity .
The initial angular velocity of the turbine , setting .
The turbine has an angular acceleration in the opposite sense to its angular velocity .
We now have a basic vocabulary for discussing fixed-axis rotational kinematics and relationships between rotational variables .
We discuss more definitions and connections in the next section .
In the preceding section , we defined the rotational variables of angular displacement , angular velocity , and angular acceleration .
In this section , we work with these definitions to derive relationships among these variables and use these relationships to analyze rotational motion for a rigid body about a fixed axis under a constant angular acceleration .
This analysis forms the basis for rotational kinematics .
If the angular acceleration is constant , the equations of rotational kinematics simplify , similar to the equations of linear kinematics discussed in and .
We can then use this simplified set of equations to describe many applications in physics and engineering where the angular acceleration of the system is constant .
Rotational kinematics is also a prerequisite to the discussion of rotational dynamics later in this chapter .
Using our intuition , we can begin to see how the rotational quantities , and t are related to one another .
For example , we saw in the preceding section that if a flywheel has an angular acceleration in the same direction as its angular velocity vector , its angular velocity increases with time and its angular displacement also increases .
On the contrary , if the angular acceleration is opposite to the angular velocity vector , its angular velocity decreases with time .
We can describe these physical situations and many others with a consistent set of rotational kinematic equations under a constant angular acceleration .
The method to investigate rotational motion in this way is called kinematics of rotational motion .
To begin , we note that if the system is rotating under a constant acceleration , then the average angular velocity follows a simple relation because the angular velocity is increasing linearly with time .
This equation can be very useful if we know the average angular velocity of the system .
Then we could find the angular displacement over a given time period .
Next , we find an equation relating , , and t .
To determine this equation , we start with the definition of angular acceleration : We rearrange this to get and then we integrate both sides of this equation from initial values to final values , that is , from to t and .
In uniform rotational motion , the angular acceleration is constant so it can be pulled out of the integral , yielding two definite integrals : Setting , we have We rearrange this to obtain where is the initial angular velocity .
is the rotational counterpart to the linear kinematics equation .
With , we can find the angular velocity of an object at any specified time t given the initial angular velocity and the angular acceleration .
Let ’ s now do a similar treatment starting with the equation .
We rearrange it to obtain and integrate both sides from initial to final values again , noting that the angular acceleration is constant and does not have a time dependence .
However , this time , the angular velocity is not constant ( in general ) , so we substitute in what we derived above : where we have set .
Now we rearrange to obtain is the rotational counterpart to the linear kinematics equation found in for position as a function of time .
This equation gives us the angular position of a rotating rigid body at any time t given the initial conditions ( initial angular position and initial angular velocity ) and the angular acceleration .
We can find an equation that is independent of time by solving for t in and substituting into .
becomes or through describe fixed-axis rotation for constant acceleration and are summarized in .
Now we can apply the key kinematic relations for rotational motion to some simple examples to get a feel for how the equations can be applied to everyday situations .
A deep-sea fisherman hooks a big fish that swims away from the boat , pulling the fishing line from his fishing reel .
The whole system is initially at rest , and the fishing line unwinds from the reel at a radius of 4.50 cm from its axis of rotation .
The reel is given an angular acceleration of for 2.00 s .
( a ) What is the final angular velocity of the reel after 2 s ?
( b ) How many revolutions does the reel make ?
Identify the knowns and compare with the kinematic equations for constant acceleration .
Look for the appropriate equation that can be solved for the unknown , using the knowns given in the problem description .
We are given and t and want to determine .
The most straightforward equation to use is , since all terms are known besides the unknown variable we are looking for .
We are given that ( it starts from rest ) , so We are asked to find the number of revolutions .
Because , we can find the number of revolutions by finding in radians .
We are given and t , and we know is zero , so we can obtain by using Converting radians to revolutions gives This example illustrates that relationships among rotational quantities are highly analogous to those among linear quantities .
The answers to the questions are realistic .
After unwinding for two seconds , the reel is found to spin at 220 rad/s , which is 2100 rpm .
( No wonder reels sometimes make high-pitched sounds . )
In the preceding example , we considered a fishing reel with a positive angular acceleration .
Now let us consider what happens with a negative angular acceleration .
Now the fisherman applies a brake to the spinning reel , achieving an angular acceleration of .
How long does it take the reel to come to a stop ?
We are asked to find the time t for the reel to come to a stop .
The initial and final conditions are different from those in the previous problem , which involved the same fishing reel .
Now we see that the initial angular velocity is and the final angular velocity is zero .
The angular acceleration is given as Examining the available equations , we see all quantities but t are known in , making it easiest to use this equation .
The equation states We solve the equation algebraically for t and then substitute the known values as usual , yielding Note that care must be taken with the signs that indicate the directions of various quantities .
Also , note that the time to stop the reel is fairly small because the acceleration is rather large .
Fishing lines sometimes snap because of the accelerations involved , and fishermen often let the fish swim for a while before applying brakes on the reel .
A tired fish is slower , requiring a smaller acceleration .
Check Your Understanding A centrifuge used in DNA extraction spins at a maximum rate of 7000 rpm , producing a “ g-force ” on the sample that is 6000 times the force of gravity .
If the centrifuge takes 10 seconds to come to rest from the maximum spin rate : ( a ) What is the angular acceleration of the centrifuge ?
( b ) What is the angular displacement of the centrifuge during this time ?
shows a graph of the angular velocity of a propeller on an aircraft as a function of time .
Its angular velocity starts at 30 rad/s and drops linearly to 0 rad/s over the course of 5 seconds .
( a ) Find the angular acceleration of the object and verify the result using the kinematic equations .
( b ) Find the angle through which the propeller rotates during these 5 seconds and verify your result using the kinematic equations .
Since the angular velocity varies linearly with time , we know that the angular acceleration is constant and does not depend on the time variable .
The angular acceleration is the slope of the angular velocity vs. time graph , .
To calculate the slope , we read directly from , and see that at and at .
Then , we can verify the result using .
We use the equation since the time derivative of the angle is the angular velocity , we can find the angular displacement by integrating the angular velocity , which from the figure means taking the area under the angular velocity graph .
In other words : Then we use the kinematic equations for constant acceleration to verify the result .
Calculating the slope , we get We see that this is exactly with a little rearranging of terms .
We can find the area under the curve by calculating the area of the right triangle , as shown in .
We verify the solution using : Setting , we have This verifies the solution found from finding the area under the curve .
We see from part ( b ) that there are alternative approaches to analyzing fixed-axis rotation with constant acceleration .
We started with a graphical approach and verified the solution using the rotational kinematic equations .
Since , we could do the same graphical analysis on an angular acceleration-vs.-time curve .
The area under an curve gives us the change in angular velocity .
Since the angular acceleration is constant in this section , this is a straightforward exercise .
In this section , we relate each of the rotational variables to the translational variables defined in and .
This will complete our ability to describe rigid-body rotations .
In , we introduced angular variables .
If we compare the rotational definitions with the definitions of linear kinematic variables from and , we find that there is a mapping of the linear variables to the rotational ones .
Linear position , velocity , and acceleration have their rotational counterparts , as we can see when we write them side by side : Let ’ s compare the linear and rotational variables individually .
The linear variable of position has physical units of meters , whereas the angular position variable has dimensionless units of radians , as can be seen from the definition of , which is the ratio of two lengths .
The linear velocity has units of m/s , and its counterpart , the angular velocity , has units of rad/s .
In , we saw in the case of circular motion that the linear tangential speed of a particle at a radius r from the axis of rotation is related to the angular velocity by the relation .
This could also apply to points on a rigid body rotating about a fixed axis .
Here , we consider only circular motion .
In circular motion , both uniform and nonuniform , there exists a centripetal acceleration .
The centripetal acceleration vector points inward from the particle executing circular motion toward the axis of rotation .
The derivation of the magnitude of the centripetal acceleration is given in .
From that derivation , the magnitude of the centripetal acceleration was found to be where r is the radius of the circle .
Thus , in uniform circular motion when the angular velocity is constant and the angular acceleration is zero , we have a linear acceleration—that is , centripetal acceleration—since the tangential speed in is a constant .
If nonuniform circular motion is present , the rotating system has an angular acceleration , and we have both a linear centripetal acceleration that is changing ( because is changing ) as well as a linear tangential acceleration .
These relationships are shown in , where we show the centripetal and tangential accelerations for uniform and nonuniform circular motion .
The centripetal acceleration is due to the change in the direction of tangential velocity , whereas the tangential acceleration is due to any change in the magnitude of the tangential velocity .
The tangential and centripetal acceleration vectors and are always perpendicular to each other , as seen in .
To complete this description , we can assign a total linear acceleration vector to a point on a rotating rigid body or a particle executing circular motion at a radius r from a fixed axis .
The total linear acceleration vector is the vector sum of the centripetal and tangential accelerations , The total linear acceleration vector in the case of nonuniform circular motion points at an angle between the centripetal and tangential acceleration vectors , as shown in .
Since , the magnitude of the total linear acceleration is Note that if the angular acceleration is zero , the total linear acceleration is equal to the centripetal acceleration .
We can look at two relationships between rotational and translational motion .
Generally speaking , the linear kinematic equations have their rotational counterparts .
lists the four linear kinematic equations and the corresponding rotational counterpart .
The two sets of equations look similar to each other , but describe two different physical situations , that is , rotation and translation .
The second correspondence has to do with relating linear and rotational variables in the special case of circular motion .
This is shown in , where in the third column , we have listed the connecting equation that relates the linear variable to the rotational variable .
The rotational variables of angular velocity and acceleration have subscripts that indicate their definition in circular motion .
A centrifuge has a radius of 20 cm and accelerates from a maximum rotation rate of 10,000 rpm to rest in 30 seconds under a constant angular acceleration .
It is rotating counterclockwise .
What is the magnitude of the total acceleration of a point at the tip of the centrifuge at What is the direction of the total acceleration vector ?
With the information given , we can calculate the angular acceleration , which then will allow us to find the by calculating the tangential speed tangential acceleration .
We can find the centripetal acceleration at at this time .
With the magnitudes of the accelerations , we can calculate the total linear acceleration .
From the description of the rotation in the problem , we can sketch the direction of the total acceleration vector .
The total acceleration vector is as shown in .
The angle with respect to the centripetal acceleration vector is The negative sign means that the total acceleration vector is angled toward the clockwise direction .
From , we see that the tangential acceleration vector is opposite the direction of rotation .
The magnitude of the tangential acceleration is much smaller than the centripetal acceleration , so the total linear acceleration vector will make a very small angle with respect to the centripetal acceleration vector .
Check Your Understanding A boy jumps on a merry-go-round with a radius of 5 m that is at rest .
It starts accelerating at a constant rate up to an angular velocity of 5 rad/s in 20 seconds .
What is the distance travelled by the boy ?
Check out this to change the parameters of a rotating disk ( the initial angle , angular velocity , and angular acceleration ) , and place bugs at different radial distances from the axis .
The simulation then lets you explore how circular motion relates to the bugs ’ xy -position , velocity , and acceleration using vectors or graphs .
So far in this chapter , we have been working with rotational kinematics : the description of motion for a rotating rigid body with a fixed axis of rotation .
In this section , we define two new quantities that are helpful for analyzing properties of rotating objects : moment of inertia and rotational kinetic energy .
With these properties defined , we will have two important tools we need for analyzing rotational dynamics .
Any moving object has kinetic energy .
We know how to calculate this for a body undergoing translational motion , but how about for a rigid body undergoing rotation ?
This might seem complicated because each point on the rigid body has a different velocity .
However , we can make use of angular velocity—which is the same for the entire rigid body—to express the kinetic energy for a rotating object .
shows an example of a very energetic rotating body : an electric grindstone propelled by a motor .
Sparks are flying , and noise and vibration are generated as the grindstone does its work .
This system has considerable energy , some of it in the form of heat , light , sound , and vibration .
However , most of this energy is in the form of rotational kinetic energy .
Energy in rotational motion is not a new form of energy ; rather , it is the energy associated with rotational motion , the same as kinetic energy in translational motion .
For a single particle rotating around a fixed axis , this is straightforward to calculate .
We can relate the angular velocity to the magnitude of the translational velocity using the relation , where r is the distance of the particle from the axis of rotation and is its tangential speed .
Each smaller mass has tangential speed , where we have dropped the subscript t for the moment .
The total kinetic energy of the rigid rotating body is and since for all masses , The units of are joules ( J ) .
The equation in this form is complete , but awkward ; we need to find a way to generalize it .
If we compare to the way we wrote kinetic energy in , , this suggests we have a new rotational variable to add to our list of our relations between rotational and translational variables .
The quantity is the counterpart for mass in the equation for rotational kinetic energy .
This is an important new term for rotational motion .
This quantity is called the moment of inertia I , with units of : For now , we leave the expression in summation form , representing the moment of inertia of a system of point particles rotating about a fixed axis .
We note that the moment of inertia of a single point particle about a fixed axis is simply , with r being the distance from the point particle to the axis of rotation .
In the next section , we explore the integral form of this equation , which can be used to calculate the moment of inertia of some regular-shaped rigid bodies .
Similarly , the greater the moment of inertia of a rigid body or system of particles , the greater is its resistance to change in angular velocity about a fixed axis of rotation .
It is interesting to see how the moment of inertia varies with r , the distance to the axis of rotation of the mass particles in .
Rigid bodies and systems of particles with more mass concentrated at a greater distance from the axis of rotation have greater moments of inertia than bodies and systems of the same mass , but concentrated near the axis of rotation .
In this way , we can see that a hollow cylinder has more rotational inertia than a solid cylinder of the same mass when rotating about an axis through the center .
Substituting into , the expression for the kinetic energy of a rotating rigid body becomes We see from this equation that the kinetic energy of a rotating rigid body is directly proportional to the moment of inertia and the square of the angular velocity .
This is exploited in flywheel energy-storage devices , which are designed to store large amounts of rotational kinetic energy .
Many carmakers are now testing flywheel energy storage devices in their automobiles , such as the flywheel , or kinetic energy recovery system , shown in .
The rotational and translational quantities for kinetic energy and inertia are summarized in .
The relationship column is not included because a constant doesn ’ t exist by which we could multiply the rotational quantity to get the translational quantity , as can be done for the variables in .
Six small washers are spaced 10 cm apart on a rod of negligible mass and 0.5 m in length .
The mass of each washer is 20 g. The rod rotates about an axis located at 25 cm , as shown in .
( a ) What is the moment of inertia of the system ?
( b ) If the two washers closest to the axis are removed , what is the moment of inertia of the remaining four washers ?
( c ) If the system with six washers rotates at 5 rev/s , what is its rotational kinetic energy ?
We use the definition for moment of inertia for a system of particles and perform the summation to evaluate this quantity .
The masses are all the same so we can pull that quantity in front of the summation symbol .
We do a similar calculation .
We insert the result from ( a ) into the expression for rotational kinetic energy .
We can see the individual contributions to the moment of inertia .
The masses close to the axis of rotation have a very small contribution .
When we removed them , it had a very small effect on the moment of inertia .
In the next section , we generalize the summation equation for point particles and develop a method to calculate moments of inertia for rigid bodies .
For now , though , gives values of rotational inertia for common object shapes around specified axes .
Now let ’ s apply the ideas of rotational kinetic energy and the moment of inertia table to get a feeling for the energy associated with a few rotating objects .
The following examples will also help get you comfortable using these equations .
First , let ’ s look at a general problem-solving strategy for rotational energy .
Determine that energy or work is involved in the rotation .
Determine the system of interest .
A sketch usually helps .
Analyze the situation to determine the types of work and energy involved .
If there are no losses of energy due to friction and other nonconservative forces , mechanical energy is conserved , that is , .
If nonconservative forces are present , mechanical energy is not conserved , and other forms of energy , such as heat and light , may enter or leave the system .
Determine what they are and calculate them as necessary .
Eliminate terms wherever possible to simplify the algebra .
Evaluate the numerical solution to see if it makes sense in the physical situation presented in the wording of the problem .
A typical small rescue helicopter has four blades : Each is 4.00 m long and has a mass of 50.0 kg .
The blades can be approximated as thin rods that rotate about one end of an axis perpendicular to their length .
The helicopter has a total loaded mass of 1000 kg .
( a ) Calculate the rotational kinetic energy in the blades when they rotate at 300 rpm .
( b ) Calculate the translational kinetic energy of the helicopter when it flies at 20.0 m/s , and compare it with the rotational energy in the blades .
Rotational and translational kinetic energies can be calculated from their definitions .
The wording of the problem gives all the necessary constants to evaluate the expressions for the rotational and translational kinetic energies .
The rotational kinetic energy is We must convert the angular velocity to radians per second and calculate the moment of inertia before we can find K .
The angular velocity is The moment of inertia of one blade is that of a thin rod rotated about its end , listed in .
The total I is four times this moment of inertia because there are four blades .
Thus , Entering and I into the expression for rotational kinetic energy gives Entering the given values into the equation for translational kinetic energy , we obtain To compare kinetic energies , we take the ratio of translational kinetic energy to rotational kinetic energy .
This ratio is The ratio of translational energy to rotational kinetic energy is only 0.380 .
This ratio tells us that most of the kinetic energy of the helicopter is in its spinning blades .
A person hurls a boomerang into the air with a velocity of 30.0 m/s at an angle of with respect to the horizontal .
It has a mass of 1.0 kg and is rotating at 10.0 rev/s .
The moment of inertia of the boomerang is given as where .
( a ) What is the total energy of the boomerang when it leaves the hand ?
( b ) How high does the boomerang go from the elevation of the hand , neglecting air resistance ?
We use the definitions of rotational and linear kinetic energy to find the total energy of the system .
The problem states to neglect air resistance , so we don ’ t have to worry about energy loss .
In part ( b ) , we use conservation of mechanical energy to find the maximum height of the boomerang .
Moment of inertia : .
Angular velocity : .
The rotational kinetic energy is therefore The translational kinetic energy is Thus , the total energy in the boomerang is We use conservation of mechanical energy .
Since the boomerang is launched at an angle , we need to write the total energies of the system in terms of its linear kinetic energies using the velocity in the x and y -directions .
In the absence of air resistance , the rotational kinetic energy was not a factor in the solution for the maximum height .
Check Your Understanding A nuclear submarine propeller has a moment of inertia of .
If the submerged propeller has a rotation rate of 4.0 rev/s when the engine is cut , what is the rotation rate of the propeller after 5.0 s when water resistance has taken 50,000 J out of the system ?
In the preceding section , we defined the moment of inertia but did not show how to calculate it .
In this section , we show how to calculate the moment of inertia for several standard types of objects , as well as how to use known moments of inertia to find the moment of inertia for a shifted axis or for a compound object .
This section is very useful for seeing how to apply a general equation to complex objects ( a skill that is critical for more advanced physics and engineering courses ) .
We defined the moment of inertia I of an object to be for all the point masses that make up the object .
Because r is the distance to the axis of rotation from each piece of mass that makes up the object , the moment of inertia for any object depends on the chosen axis .
To see this , let ’ s take a simple example of two masses at the end of a massless ( negligibly small mass ) rod and calculate the moment of inertia about two different axes .
In this case , the summation over the masses is simple because the two masses at the end of the barbell can be approximated as point masses , and the sum therefore has only two terms .
In this example , we had two point masses and the sum was simple to calculate .
However , to deal with objects that are not point-like , we need to think carefully about each of the terms in the equation .
The equation asks us to sum over each ‘ piece of mass ’ a certain distance from the axis of rotation .
But what exactly does each ‘ piece of mass ’ mean ?
Recall that in our derivation of this equation , each piece of mass had the same magnitude of velocity , which means the whole piece had to have a single distance r to the axis of rotation .
However , this is not possible unless we take an infinitesimally small piece of mass dm , as shown in .
It is best to work out specific examples in detail to get a feel for how to calculate the moment of inertia for specific shapes .
This is the focus of most of the rest of this section .
Consider a uniform ( density and shape ) thin rod of mass M and length L as shown in .
We want a thin rod so that we can assume the cross-sectional area of the rod is small and the rod can be thought of as a string of masses along a one-dimensional straight line .
In this example , the axis of rotation is perpendicular to the rod and passes through the midpoint for simplicity .
Our task is to calculate the moment of inertia about this axis .
We orient the axes so that the z -axis is the axis of rotation and the x -axis passes through the length of the rod , as shown in the figure .
This is a convenient choice because we can then integrate along the x -axis .
We define dm to be a small element of mass making up the rod .
The moment of inertia integral is an integral over the mass distribution .
However , we know how to integrate over space , not over mass .
We therefore need to find a way to relate mass to spatial variables .
We do this using the linear mass density of the object , which is the mass per unit length .
Since the mass density of this object is uniform , we can write If we take the differential of each side of this equation , we find since is constant .
We chose to orient the rod along the x -axis for convenience—this is where that choice becomes very helpful .
Note that a piece of the rod dl lies completely along the x -axis and has a length dx ; in fact , in this situation .
We can therefore write , giving us an integration variable that we know how to deal with .
The distance of each piece of mass dm from the axis is given by the variable x , as shown in the figure .
Putting this all together , we obtain The last step is to be careful about our limits of integration .
The rod extends from to , since the axis is in the middle of the rod at .
This gives us Next , we calculate the moment of inertia for the same uniform thin rod but with a different axis choice so we can compare the results .
We would expect the moment of inertia to be smaller about an axis through the center of mass than the endpoint axis , just as it was for the barbell example at the start of this section .
This happens because more mass is distributed farther from the axis of rotation .
Now consider the same uniform thin rod of mass M and length L , but this time we move the axis of rotation to the end of the rod .
We wish to ﬁnd the moment of inertia about this new axis .
The quantity dm is again defined to be a small element of mass making up the rod .
Just as before , we obtain However , this time we have different limits of integration .
The rod extends from to , since the axis is at the end of the rod at .
Therefore we find Note the rotational inertia of the rod about its endpoint is larger than the rotational inertia about its center ( consistent with the barbell example ) by a factor of four .
Such an axis is called a parallel axis .
There is a theorem for this , called the parallel-axis theorem , which we state here but do not derive in this text .
Let m be the mass of an object and let d be the distance from an axis through the object ’ s center of mass to a new axis .
Then we have Let ’ s apply this to the rod examples solved above : This result agrees with our more lengthy calculation from above .
This is a useful equation that we apply in some of the examples and problems .
Check Your Understanding What is the moment of inertia of a cylinder of radius R and mass m about an axis through a point on the surface , as shown below ?
Integrating to find the moment of inertia of a two-dimensional object is a little bit trickier , but one shape is commonly done at this level of study—a uniform thin disk about an axis through its center .
Since the disk is thin , we can take the mass as distributed entirely in the xy -plane .
We again start with the relationship for the surface mass density , which is the mass per unit surface area .
Since it is uniform , the surface mass density is constant : Now we use a simplification for the area .
The area can be thought of as made up of a series of thin rings , where each ring is a mass increment dm of radius r equidistanct from the axis , as shown in part ( b ) of the figure .
This radius range then becomes our limits of integration for dr , that is , we integrate from to .
Putting this all together , we have Note that this agrees with the value given in .
Now consider a compound object such as that in , which depicts a thin disk at the end of a thin rod .
This can not be easily integrated to find the moment of inertia because it is not a uniformly shaped object .
In the case of this object , that would be a rod of length L rotating about its end , and a thin disk of radius R rotating about an axis shifted off of the center by a distance , where R is the radius of the disk .
Let ’ s define the mass of the rod to be and the mass of the disk to be The moment of inertia of the rod is simply inertia of the disk about the axis shown .
A 25-kg child stands at a distance from the axis of a rotating merry-go-round .
The merry-go-round can be approximated as a uniform solid disk with a mass of 500 kg and a radius of 2.0 m. Find the moment of inertia of this system .
This problem involves the calculation of a moment of inertia .
We are given the mass and distance to the axis of rotation of the child as well as the mass and radius of the merry-go-round .
Since the mass and size of the child are much smaller than the merry-go-round , we can approximate the child as a point mass .
The notation we use is .
Our goal is to find .
For the child , , and for the merry-go-round , .
Therefore The value should be close to the moment of inertia of the merry-go-round by itself because it has much more mass distributed away from the axis than the child does .
Find the moment of inertia of the rod and solid sphere combination about the two axes as shown below .
The rod has length 0.5 m and mass 2.0 kg .
The radius of the sphere is 20.0 cm and has mass 1.0 kg .
Since we have a compound object in both cases , we can use the parallel-axis theorem to find the moment of inertia about each axis .
In ( a ) , the center of mass of the sphere is located at a distance from the axis of rotation .
In ( b ) , the center of mass of the sphere is located a distance R from the axis of rotation .
In both cases , the moment of inertia of the rod is about an axis at one end .
Refer to for the moments of inertia for the individual objects .
; ; ; ; ; Using the parallel-axis theorem eases the computation of the moment of inertia of compound objects .
We see that the moment of inertia is greater in ( a ) than ( b ) .
This is because the axis of rotation is closer to the center of mass of the system in ( b ) .
The simple analogy is that of a rod .
The moment of inertia about one end is , but the moment of inertia through the center of mass along its length is .
A pendulum in the shape of a rod is released from rest at an angle of .
It has a length 30 cm and mass 300 g. What is its angular velocity at its lowest point ?
Use conservation of energy to solve the problem .
At the point of release , the pendulum has gravitational potential energy , which is determined from the height of the center of mass above its lowest point in the swing .
At the bottom of the swing , all of the gravitational potential energy is converted into rotational kinetic energy .
The change in potential energy is equal to the change in rotational kinetic energy , .
At the top of the swing : At the top of the swing , the rotational kinetic energy is .
At the bottom of the swing , Therefore : .
At the bottom of the swing , .
or Solving for , we have Inserting numerical values , we have Note that the angular velocity of the pendulum does not depend on its mass .
An important quantity for describing the dynamics of a rotating rigid body is torque .
We see the application of torque in many ways in our world .
We all have an intuition about torque , as when we use a large wrench to unscrew a stubborn bolt .
Torque is at work in unseen ways , as when we press on the accelerator in a car , causing the engine to put additional torque on the drive train .
Or every time we move our bodies from a standing position , we apply a torque to our limbs .
In this section , we define torque and make an argument for the equation for calculating torque for a rigid body with fixed-axis rotation .
So far we have defined many variables that are rotational equivalents to their translational counterparts .
Let ’ s consider what the counterpart to force must be .
Since forces change the translational motion of objects , the rotational counterpart must be related to changing the rotational motion of an object about an axis .
We call this rotational counterpart torque .
In everyday life , we rotate objects about an axis all the time , so intuitively we already know much about torque .
Consider , for example , how we rotate a door to open it .
First , we know that a door opens slowly if we push too close to its hinges ; it is more efficient to rotate a door open if we push far from the hinges .
Second , we know that we should push perpendicular to the plane of the door ; if we push parallel to the plane of the door , we are not able to rotate it .
Third , the larger the force , the more effective it is in opening the door ; the harder you push , the more rapidly the door opens .
Note that for rotation in a plane , torque has two possible directions .
Torque is either clockwise or counterclockwise relative to the chosen pivot point .
shows counterclockwise rotations .
Now let ’ s consider how to define torques in the general three-dimensional case .
When a force is applied to a point P whose position is O is relative to O , the torque around From the definition of the cross product , the torque magnitude is perpendicular to the plane containing and has and .
The SI unit of torque is newtons times meters , usually written as where is the angle between the vectors .
The quantity is the perpendicular distance from O to the line determined by the vector and is called the lever arm .
Note that the greater the lever arm , the greater the magnitude of the torque .
In terms of the lever arm , the magnitude of the torque is also tells us the sign of the torque .
In , the cross product is along is along the negative z -axis , this produces a The cross product the positive z -axis , which by convention is a positive torque .
If negative torque .
If we consider a disk that is free to rotate about an axis through the center , as shown in , we can see how the and the force affects the magnitude of the torque .
If the angle is zero , the torque is zero ; angle between the radius if the angle is , the torque is maximum .
The torque in is positive because the direction of the torque by the right-hand rule is out of the page along the positive z -axis .
The disk rotates counterclockwise due to the torque , in the same direction as a positive angular acceleration .
Any number of torques can be calculated about a given axis .
The individual torques add to produce a net torque about the axis .
We first introduce a problem-solving strategy .
Choose a coordinate system with the pivot point or axis of rotation as the origin of the selected coordinate system .
Determine the angle between the lever arm and the force vector .
Take the cross product of to determine if the torque is positive or negative about the pivot point or axis .
Evaluate the magnitude of the torque using .
Assign the appropriate sign , positive or negative , to the magnitude .
Sum the torques to find the net torque .
Four forces are shown in at particular locations and orientations with respect to a given xy -coordinate system .
Find the torque due to each force about the origin , then use your results to find the net torque about the origin .
This problem requires calculating torque .
All known quantities––forces with directions and lever arms––are given in the figure .
The goal is to find each individual torque and the net torque by summing the individual torques .
Be careful to assign the correct sign to each torque by using the cross product of and the force vector .
Use to find the magnitude and to determine the sign of the torque .
The torque from force 40 N in the first quadrant is given by .
The cross product of The torque from force 20 N in the third quadrant is given by .
and is out of the page , positive .
The cross product of The torque from force 30 N in the third quadrant is given by .
and is into the page , so it is negative .
The cross product of The torque from force 20 N in the second quadrant is given by .
and is out of the page , positive .
and is out of the page .
The cross product of The net torque is therefore Note that each force that acts in the counterclockwise direction has a positive torque , whereas each force that acts in the clockwise direction has a negative torque .
The torque is greater when the distance , force , or perpendicular components are greater .
shows several forces acting at different , axis through the center .
locations and angles on a flywheel .
We have , and .
Find the net torque on the flywheel about an We calculate each torque individually , using the cross product , and determine the sign of the torque .
Then we sum the torques to find the net torque .
We start with radius vector from calculating its magnitude : makes an angle of with the .
Taking the cross product , we see that it is out of the page and so is positive .
We also see this .
If we look at , we see that Next we look at torque is negative .
Its value is .
The axis of rotation is at the center of mass of the flywheel .
Since the flywheel is on a fixed axis , it is not free to translate .
If it were on a frictionless surface and not fixed in place , would cause the flywheel to translate , as well as .
Its motion would be a combination of translation and rotation .
Check Your Understanding A large ocean-going ship runs aground near the coastline , similar to the fate of the Costa Concordia , and lies at an angle as shown below .
Salvage crews must apply a torque to right the ship in order to float the vessel for transport .
A force of acting at point A must be applied to right the ship .
What is the torque about the point of contact of the ship with the ground ?
In this section , we put together all the pieces learned so far in this chapter to analyze the dynamics of rotating rigid bodies .
We have analyzed motion with kinematics and rotational kinetic energy but have not yet connected these ideas with force and/or torque .
In this section , we introduce the rotational equivalent to Newton ’ s second law of motion and apply it to rigid bodies with fixed-axis rotation .
We have thus far found many counterparts to the translational terms used throughout this text , most recently , torque , the rotational analog to force .
This raises the question : Is there an analogous equation to Newton ’ s second law , which involves torque and rotational motion ?
To investigate this , we start with Newton ’ s second law for a single particle rotating around an axis and executing circular motion .
Let ’ s exert a force on a point mass m that is at a distance r from a pivot point .
The particle is constrained to move in a circular path with fixed radius and the force is tangent to the circle .
We apply Newton ’ s second law to determine the magnitude of the acceleration in the direction of .
Recall that the magnitude of the tangential acceleration is proportional to the magnitude of the angular acceleration by .
Recall that the moment of inertia for a point particle is .
The torque applied perpendicularly to the point mass in is therefore The torque on the particle is equal to the moment of inertia about the rotation axis times the angular acceleration .
We can generalize this equation to a rigid body rotating about a fixed axis .
Remember the convention that counterclockwise angular acceleration is positive .
Thus , if a rigid body is rotating clockwise and experiences a positive torque ( counterclockwise ) , the angular acceleration is positive .
is Newton ’ s second law for rotation and tells us how to relate torque , moment of inertia , and rotational kinematics .
This is called the equation for rotational dynamics .
With this equation , we can solve a whole class of problems involving force and rotation .
It makes sense that the relationship for how much force it takes to rotate a body would include the moment of inertia , since that is the quantity that tells us how easy or hard it is to change the rotational motion of an object .
As before , when we found the angular acceleration , we may also find the torque vector .
The second law tells us the relationship between net force and how to change the translational motion of an object .
We have a vector rotational equivalent of this equation , which can be found by using and .
An important point is that the torque vector is in the same direction as the angular acceleration .
Before we apply the rotational dynamics equation to some everyday situations , let ’ s review a general problem-solving strategy for use with this category of problems .
Examine the situation to determine that torque and mass are involved in the rotation .
Draw a careful sketch of the situation .
Determine the system of interest .
Draw a free-body diagram .
That is , draw and label all external forces acting on the system of interest .
Identify the pivot point .
If the object is in equilibrium , it must be in equilibrium for all possible pivot points––chose the one that simplifies your work the most .
Apply , the rotational equivalent of Newton ’ s second law , to solve the problem .
Care must be taken to use the correct moment of inertia and to consider the torque about the point of rotation .
As always , check the solution to see if it is reasonable .
Consider the father pushing a playground merry-go-round in .
He exerts a force of 250 N at the edge of the 50.0-kg merry-go-round , which has a 1.50-m radius .
Calculate the angular acceleration produced ( a ) when no one is on the merry-go-round and ( b ) when an 18.0-kg child sits 1.25 m away from the center .
Consider the merry-go-round itself to be a uniform disk with negligible friction .
The net torque is given directly by the expression torque ( which is the same in both cases ) and moment of inertia I ( which is greater in the second case ) .
To find the total moment of inertia I , we first find the child ’ s moment of inertia by approximating the child as a point mass at a distance of 1.25 m from the axis .
The angular accelerations found are quite large , partly due to the fact that friction was considered to be negligible .
If , for example , the father kept pushing perpendicularly for 2.00 s , he would give the merry-goround an angular velocity of 13.3 rad/s when it is empty but only 8.89 rad/s when the child is on it .
In terms of revolutions per second , these angular velocities are 2.12 rev/s and 1.41 rev/s , respectively .
The father would end up running at about 50 km/h in the first case .
Check Your Understanding The fan blades on a jet engine have a moment of inertia .
In 10 s , they rotate counterclockwise from rest up to a rotation rate of 20 rev/s .
( a ) What torque must be applied to the blades to achieve this angular acceleration ?
( b ) What is the torque required to bring the fan blades rotating at 20 rev/s to a rest in 20 s ?
Thus far in the chapter , we have extensively addressed kinematics and dynamics for rotating rigid bodies around a fixed axis .
In this final section , we define work and power within the context of rotation about a fixed axis , which has applications to both physics and engineering .
The discussion of work and power makes our treatment of rotational motion almost complete , with the exception of rolling motion and angular momentum , which are discussed in .
We begin this section with a treatment of the work-energy theorem for rotation .
Now that we have determined how to calculate kinetic energy for rotating rigid bodies , we can proceed with a discussion of the work done on a rigid body rotating about a fixed axis .
shows a rigid body that has rotated through an angle from A to B while under the influence of a force .
The external force is applied to point P , , and the rigid body is constrained to rotate about a fixed axis that is perpendicular to the page and whose position is moves in a circle of radius r , and the vector is passes through O .
The rotational axis is fixed , so the vector perpendicular to From , we have Thus , Note that is zero because we obtain is fixed on the rigid body from the origin O to point P .
Using the definition of work , where we used the identity .
Noting that , we arrive at the expression for the rotational work done on a rigid body : The total work done on a rigid body is the sum of the torques integrated over the angle through which the body rotates .
The incremental work is where we have taken the dot product in , leaving only torques along the axis of rotation .
In a rigid body , all particles rotate through the same angle ; thus the work of every external force is equal to the torque times the common incremental angle .
The quantity is the net torque on the body due to external forces .
Similarly , we found the kinetic energy of a rigid body rotating around a fixed axis by summing the kinetic energy of each particle that makes up the rigid body .
Since the work-energy theorem is valid for each particle , it is valid for the sum of the particles and the entire body .
The work-energy theorem for a rigid body rotating around a fixed axis is where and the rotational work done by a net force rotating a body from point A to point B is We give a strategy for using this equation when analyzing rotational motion .
Identify the forces on the body and draw a free-body diagram .
Calculate the torque for each force .
Calculate the work done during the body ’ s rotation by every torque .
Apply the work-energy theorem by equating the net work done on the body to the change in rotational kinetic energy .
Let ’ s look at two examples and use the work-energy theorem to analyze rotational motion .
A torque is applied to a flywheel that rotates about a fixed axis and has a moment of inertia of .
If the flywheel is initially at rest , what is its angular velocity after it has turned through eight revolutions ?
We apply the work-energy theorem .
We know from the problem description what the torque is and the angular displacement of the flywheel .
Then we can solve for the final angular velocity .
The flywheel turns through eight revolutions , which is radians .
The work done by the torque , which is constant and therefore can come outside the integral in , is We apply the work-energy theorem : With , we have Therefore , This is the angular velocity of the flywheel after eight revolutions .
The work-energy theorem provides an efficient way to analyze rotational motion , connecting torque with rotational kinetic energy .
A string wrapped around the pulley in is pulled with a constant downward force of magnitude 50 N. The radius R and moment of inertia I of the pulley are 0.10 m and , respectively .
If the string does not slip , what is the angular velocity of the pulley after 1.0 m of string has unwound ?
Assume the pulley starts from rest .
Looking at the free-body diagram , we see that neither , the force on the bearings of the pulley , nor , the weight of the pulley , exerts a torque around the rotational axis , and therefore does no work on the pulley .
Power for rotational motion is equally as important as power in linear motion and can be derived in a similar way as in linear motion when the force is a constant .
The linear power when the force is a constant is .
If the net torque is constant over the angular displacement , simplifies and the net torque can be taken out of the integral .
In the following discussion , we assume the net torque is constant .
We can apply the definition of power derived in to rotational motion .
From , the instantaneous power ( or just power ) is defined as the rate of doing work , If we have a constant net torque , becomes and the power is or A boat engine operating at is running at 300 rev/min .
What is the torque on the propeller shaft ?
We are given the rotation rate in rev/min and the power consumption , so we can easily calculate the torque .
It is important to note the radian is a dimensionless unit because its definition is the ratio of two lengths .
It therefore does not appear in the solution .
Check Your Understanding A constant torque of is applied to a wind turbine to keep it rotating at 6 rad/s .
What is the power required to keep the turbine rotating ?
The rotational quantities and their linear analog are summarized in three tables .
summarizes the rotational variables for circular motion about a fixed axis with their linear analogs and the connecting equation , except for the centripetal acceleration , which stands by itself .
summarizes the rotational and translational kinematic equations .
summarizes the rotational dynamics equations with their linear analogs .
time rate of change of angular velocity angle a body has rotated through in a fixed coordinate system time rate of change of angular position Angular momentum is the rotational counterpart of linear momentum .
Any massive object that rotates about an axis carries angular momentum , including rotating flywheels , planets , stars , hurricanes , tornadoes , whirlpools , and so on .
The helicopter shown in the chapter-opening picture can be used to illustrate the concept of angular momentum .
The lift blades spin about a vertical axis through the main body and carry angular momentum .
The body of the helicopter tends to rotate in the opposite sense in order to conserve angular momentum .
The small rotors at the tail of the aircraft provide a counter thrust against the body to prevent this from happening , and the helicopter stabilizes itself .
The concept of conservation of angular momentum is discussed later in this chapter .
In the main part of this chapter , we explore the intricacies of angular momentum of rigid bodies such as a top , and also of point particles and systems of particles .
But to be complete , we start with a discussion of rolling motion , which builds upon the concepts of the previous chapter .
Rolling motion is that common combination of rotational and translational motion that we see everywhere , every day .
Think about the different situations of wheels moving on a car along a highway , or wheels on a plane landing on a runway , or wheels on a robotic explorer on another planet .
Understanding the forces and torques involved in rolling motion is a crucial factor in many different types of situations .
For analyzing rolling motion in this chapter , refer to in to find moments of inertia of some common geometrical objects .
You may also find it useful in other calculations involving rotation .
People have observed rolling motion without slipping ever since the invention of the wheel .
For example , we can look at the interaction of a car ’ s tires and the surface of the road .
If the driver depresses the accelerator to the floor , such that the tires spin without the car moving forward , there must be kinetic friction between the wheels and the surface of the road .
If the driver depresses the accelerator slowly , causing the car to move forward , then the tires roll without slipping .
It is surprising to most people that , in fact , the bottom of the wheel is at rest with respect to the ground , indicating there must be static friction between the tires and the road surface .
In , the bicycle is in motion with the rider staying upright .
The tires have contact with the road surface , and , even though they are rolling , the bottoms of the tires deform slightly , do not slip , and are at rest with respect to the road surface for a measurable amount of time .
There must be static friction between the tire and the road surface for this to be so .
To analyze rolling without slipping , we first derive the linear variables of velocity and acceleration of the center of mass of the wheel in terms of the angular variables that describe the wheel ’ s motion .
The situation is shown in .
From ( a ) , we see the force vectors involved in preventing the wheel from slipping .
In ( b ) , point P that touches the surface is at rest relative to the surface .
Relative to the center of mass , point P has velocity , where R is the radius of the wheel and is the wheel ’ s angular velocity about its axis .
We show the correspondence of the linear variable on the left side of the equation with the angular variable on the right side of the equation .
This is done below for the linear acceleration .
If we differentiate on the left side of the equation , we obtain an expression for the linear acceleration of the center of mass .
On the right side of the equation , R is a constant and since we have Furthermore , we can find the distance the wheel travels in terms of angular variables by referring to .
As the wheel rolls from point A to point B , its outer surface maps onto the ground by exactly the distance travelled , which is We see from that the length of the outer surface that maps onto the ground is the arc length .
Equating the two distances , we obtain A solid cylinder rolls down an inclined plane without slipping , starting from rest .
It has mass m and radius r .
( a ) What is its acceleration ?
( b ) What condition must the coefficient of static friction satisfy so the cylinder does not slip ?
Draw a sketch and free-body diagram , and choose a coordinate system .
We put x in the direction down the plane and y upward perpendicular to the plane .
Identify the forces involved .
These are the normal force , the force of gravity , and the force due to friction .
Write down Newton ’ s laws in the x and y -directions , and Newton ’ s law for rotation , and then solve for the acceleration and force due to friction .
The free-body diagram and sketch are shown in , including the normal force , components of the weight , and the static friction force .
There is barely enough friction to keep the cylinder rolling without slipping .
Since there is no slipping , the magnitude of the friction force is less than or equal to .
For this , we write down Newton ’ s second law for rotation , The torques are calculated about the axis through the center of mass of the cylinder .
The only nonzero torque is provided by the friction force .
We have Finally , the linear acceleration is related to the angular acceleration by These equations can be used to solve for in terms of the moment of inertia , where we have dropped the x -subscript .
We write in terms of the vertical component of gravity and the friction force , and make the following substitutions .
From this we obtain Note that this result is independent of the coefficient of static friction , .
Since we have a solid cylinder , from , we have and Therefore , we have Because slipping does not occur , .
The angular acceleration , however , is linearly proportional to and inversely proportional to the radius of the cylinder .
Thus , the larger the radius , the smaller the angular acceleration .
For no slipping to occur , the coefficient of static friction must be greater than or equal to .
Thus , the greater the angle of incline , the greater the coefficient of static friction must be to prevent the cylinder from slipping .
Check Your Understanding A hollow cylinder is on an incline at an angle of The coefficient of static friction on the surface is .
( a ) Does the cylinder roll without slipping ?
( b ) Will a solid cylinder roll without slipping ?
It is worthwhile to repeat the equation derived in this example for the acceleration of an object rolling without slipping : This is a very useful equation for solving problems involving rolling without slipping .
Note that the acceleration is less than that for an object sliding down a frictionless plane with no rotation .
The acceleration will also be different for two rotating cylinders with different rotational inertias .
In the case of rolling motion with slipping , we must use the coefficient of kinetic friction , which gives rise to the kinetic friction force since static friction is not present .
The situation is shown in .
In the case of slipping , , because point P on the wheel is not at rest on the surface , and .
A solid cylinder rolls down an inclined plane from rest and undergoes slipping .
It has mass m and radius r .
( a ) What is its linear acceleration ?
( b ) What is its angular acceleration about an axis through the center of mass ?
Draw a sketch and free-body diagram showing the forces involved .
The free-body diagram is similar to the noslipping case except for the friction force , which is kinetic instead of static .
Use Newton ’ s second law to solve for the acceleration in the x -direction .
Use Newton ’ s second law of rotation to solve for the angular acceleration .
The linear acceleration is the same as that found for an object sliding down an inclined plane with kinetic friction .
The angular acceleration about the axis of rotation is linearly proportional to the normal force , which depends on the cosine of the angle of inclination .
As , this force goes to zero , and , thus , the angular acceleration goes to zero .
In the preceding chapter , we introduced rotational kinetic energy .
Any rolling object carries rotational kinetic energy , as well as translational kinetic energy and potential energy if the system requires .
Examples where energy is not conserved are a rolling object that is slipping , production of heat as a result of kinetic friction , and a rolling object encountering air resistance .
You may ask why a rolling object that is not slipping conserves energy , since the static friction force is nonconservative .
The answer can be found by referring back to .
Point P in contact with the surface is at rest with respect to the surface .
Therefore , its infinitesimal displacement with respect to the surface is zero , and the incremental work done by the static friction force is zero .
We can apply energy conservation to our study of rolling motion to bring out some interesting results .
The Curiosity rover , shown in , was deployed on Mars on August 6 , 2012 .
The wheels of the rover have a radius of 25 cm .
Suppose astronauts arrive on Mars in the year 2050 and find the now-inoperative Curiosity on the side of a basin .
While they are dismantling the rover , an astronaut accidentally loses a grip on one of the wheels , which rolls without slipping down into the bottom of the basin 25 meters below .
If the wheel has a mass of 5 kg , what is its velocity at the bottom of the basin ?
We use mechanical energy conservation to analyze the problem .
At the top of the hill , the wheel is at rest and has only potential energy .
At the bottom of the basin , the wheel has rotational and translational kinetic energy , which must be equal to the initial potential energy by energy conservation .
Since the wheel is rolling without slipping , we use the relation to relate the translational variables to the rotational variables in the energy conservation equation .
We then solve for the velocity .
From , we see that a hollow cylinder is a good approximation for the wheel , so we can use this moment of inertia to simplify the calculation .
Energy at the top of the basin equals energy at the bottom : The known quantities are .
The result also assumes that the terrain is smooth , such that the wheel wouldn ’ t encounter rocks and bumps along the way .
Also , in this example , the kinetic energy , or energy of motion , is equally shared between linear and rotational motion .
If we look at the moments of inertia in , we see that the hollow cylinder has the largest moment of inertia for a given radius and mass .
If the wheels of the rover were solid and approximated by solid cylinders , for example , there would be more kinetic energy in linear motion than in rotational motion .
This would give the wheel a larger linear velocity than the hollow cylinder approximation .
Thus , the solid cylinder would reach the bottom of the basin faster than the hollow cylinder .
Why does Earth keep on spinning ?
What started it spinning to begin with ?
Why doesn ’ t Earth ’ s gravitational attraction not bring the Moon crashing in toward Earth ?
And how does an ice skater manage to spin faster and faster simply by pulling her arms in ?
Why does she not have to exert a torque to spin faster ?
Questions like these have answers based in angular momentum , the rotational analog to linear momentum .
In this chapter , we first define and then explore angular momentum from a variety of viewpoints .
First , however , we investigate the angular momentum of a single particle .
This allows us to develop angular momentum for a system of particles and for a rigid body .
with linear momentum with respect to the origin .
Even if shows a particle at a position the particle is not rotating about the origin , we can still define an angular momentum in terms of the position vector and the linear momentum .
The magnitude of the angular momentum is found from the definition of the cross-product , and is as discussed in and The units of angular momentum are .
In this respect , the magnitude of the angular momentum depends on the choice of origin .
If we take the time derivative of the angular momentum , we arrive at an expression for the torque on the particle : Here we have used the definition of and the fact that a vector crossed into itself is zero .
The following problem-solving Choose a coordinate system about which the angular momentum is to be calculated .
Write down the radius vector to the point particle in unit vector notation .
Write the linear momentum vector of the particle in unit vector notation .
Take the cross product momentum vector .
and use the right-hand rule to establish the direction of the angular See if there is a time dependence in the expression of the angular momentum vector .
If there is , then a torque to calculate the torque .
If there is no time dependence in the exists about the origin , and use expression for the angular momentum , then the net torque is zero .
A meteor enters Earth ’ s atmosphere and is observed by someone on the ground before it burns gives the position of the meteor with respect to the up in the atmosphere .
The vector observer .
At the instant the observer sees the meteor , it has linear momentum , and it is accelerating at a constant along its path , which for our purposes can be taken as a straight line .
( a ) What is the angular momentum of the meteor about the origin , which is at the location of the observer ?
( b ) What is the torque on the meteor about the origin ?
We resolve the acceleration into x and y -components and use the kinematic equations to express the velocity as a function of acceleration and time .
We insert these expressions into the linear momentum and then calculate the angular momentum using the cross-product .
Since the position and momentum vectors are in the xy -plane , we expect the angular momentum vector to be along the z -axis .
To find the torque , we take the time derivative of the angular momentum .
The meteor is entering Earth ’ s atmosphere at an angle of below the horizontal , so the components of the acceleration in the x and y -directions are We write the velocities using the kinematic equations .
The angular momentum is At , the angular momentum of the meteor about the origin is This is the instant that the observer sees the meteor .
To find the torque , we take the time derivative of the angular momentum .
Taking the time derivative of as a function of time , which is the second equation immediately above , we have Then , since , we have The units of torque are given as newton-meters , not to be confused with joules .
As a check , we note that in since it is perpendicular to the force the lever arm is the x -component of the vector acting on the meteor , which is along its path .
By Newton ’ s second law , this force is The lever arm is Thus , the torque is Since the meteor is accelerating downward toward Earth , its radius and velocity vector are changing .
Therefore , , the angular momentum is changing as a function of time .
The torque on the meteor since about the origin , however , is constant , because the lever arm and the force on the meteor are constants .
This example is important in that it illustrates that the angular momentum depends on the choice of origin about which it is calculated .
The methods used in this example are also important in developing angular momentum for a system of particles and for a rigid body .
Check Your Understanding A proton spiraling around a magnetic field executes circular motion in the plane of the paper , as shown below .
The circular path has a radius of 0.4 m and the proton has velocity .
What is the angular momentum of the proton about the origin ?
The angular momentum of a system of particles is important in many scientific disciplines , one being astronomy .
Consider a spiral galaxy , a rotating island of stars like our own Milky Way .
The individual stars can be treated as point particles , each of which has its own angular momentum .
The vector sum of the individual angular momenta give the total angular momentum of the galaxy .
In this section , we develop the tools with which we can calculate the total angular momentum of a system of particles .
In the preceding section , we introduced the angular momentum of a single particle about a designated origin .
The expression where the vector for this angular momentum is particle ’ s linear momentum .
If we have a system of N particles , each with position vector from the origin given by each having momentum sum of the individual angular momenta about the origin .
can be applied to any system that has net angular momentum , including rigid bodies , as discussed in the next section .
Referring to ( a ) , determine the total angular momentum due to the three particles about the origin .
( b ) What is the rate of change of the angular momentum ?
Write down the position and momentum vectors for the three particles .
Calculate the individual angular momenta and add them as vectors to find the total angular momentum .
Then do the same for the torques .
of the particles to calculate the angular momenta , Care must be taken when evaluating the radius vectors and the lever arms , to calculate the torques , as they are completely different quantities .
We have investigated the angular momentum of a single particle , which we generalized to a system of particles .
Now we can use the principles discussed in the previous section to develop the concept of the angular momentum of a rigid body .
Celestial objects such as planets have angular momentum due to their spin and orbits around stars .
In engineering , anything that rotates about an axis carries angular momentum , such as flywheels , propellers , and rotating parts in engines .
Knowledge of the angular momenta of these objects is crucial to the design of the system in which they are a part .
To develop the angular momentum of a rigid body , we model a rigid body as being made up of small mass segments , In , a rigid body is constrained to rotate about the z -axis with angular velocity .
All mass segments that make up the rigid body undergo circular motion about the z -axis with the same angular velocity .
Part ( a ) of the figure shows from the origin and radius to the z -axis .
The magnitude of its tangential mass segment with position vector are perpendicular to each other , the magnitude of the angular velocity is .
Because the vectors momentum of this mass segment is Using the right-hand rule , the angular momentum vector points in the direction shown in part ( b ) .
The sum of the angular momenta of all the mass segments contains components both along and perpendicular to the axis of rotation .
Every mass segment has a perpendicular component of the angular momentum that will be cancelled by the perpendicular component of an identical mass segment on the opposite side of the rigid body .
Thus , the component along the axis of rotation is the only component that gives a nonzero value when summed over all the mass segments .
From part ( b ) , the component of along the axis of rotation is The net angular momentum of the rigid body along the axis of rotation is is simply the moment of inertia I of the rigid body about the axis of rotation .
For a thin hoop The summation rotating about an axis perpendicular to the plane of the hoop , all of the ’ s are equal to R so the summation reduces to which is the moment of inertia for a thin hoop found in .
Thus , the magnitude of the angular momentum along the axis of rotation of a rigid body rotating with angular velocity about the axis is This equation is analogous to the magnitude of the linear momentum .
The direction of the angular momentum vector is directed along the axis of rotation given by the right-hand rule .
A robot arm on a Mars rover like Curiosity shown in is 1.0 m long and has forceps at the free end to pick up rocks .
The mass of the arm is 2.0 kg and the mass of the forceps is 1.0 kg .
The robot arm and forceps move from rest to in 0.1 s. It rotates down and picks up a Mars rock that has mass 1.5 kg .
The axis of rotation is the point where the robot arm connects to the rover .
( a ) What is the angular momentum of the robot arm by itself about the axis of rotation after 0.1 s when the arm has stopped accelerating ?
( b ) What is the angular momentum of the robot arm when it has the Mars rock in its forceps and is rotating upwards ?
( c ) When the arm does not have a rock in the forceps , what is the torque about the point where the arm connects to the rover when it is accelerating from rest to its final angular velocity ?
We use to find angular momentum in the various configurations .
When the arm is rotating downward , the right-hand rule gives the angular momentum vector directed out of the page , which we will call the positive z -direction .
When the arm is rotating upward , the right-hand rule gives the direction of the angular momentum vector into the page or in the negative zdirection .
The moment of inertia is the sum of the individual moments of inertia .
The arm can be approximated with a solid rod , and the forceps and Mars rock can be approximated as point masses located at a distance of 1 m from the origin .
For part ( c ) , we use Newton ’ s second law of motion for rotation to find the torque on the robot arm .
We must include the Mars rock in the calculation of the moment of inertia , so we have and Now the angular momentum vector is directed into the page in the direction , by the right-hand rule , since the robot arm is now rotating clockwise .
Check Your Understanding Which has greater angular momentum : a solid sphere of mass m rotating at a constant angular frequency about the z -axis , or a solid cylinder of same mass and rotation rate about the z -axis ?
the Visit to learn more about angular momentum .
So far , we have looked at the angular momentum of systems consisting of point particles and rigid bodies .
We have also analyzed the torques involved , using the expression that relates the external net torque to the change in angular momentum , .
Examples of systems that obey this equation include a freely spinning bicycle tire that slows over time due to torque arising from friction , or the slowing of Earth ’ s rotation over millions of years due to frictional forces exerted on tidal deformations .
However , suppose there is no net external torque on the system , In this case , becomes the law of conservation of angular momentum .
The angular momentum of a system of particles around a point in a fixed inertial reference frame is conserved if there is no net external torque around that point : or Note that the total angular momentum is conserved .
Any of the individual angular momenta can change as long as their sum remains constant .
This law is analogous to linear momentum being conserved when the external force on a system is zero .
As an example of conservation of angular momentum , shows an ice skater executing a spin .
The net torque on her is very close to zero because there is relatively little friction between her skates and the ice .
Also , the friction is exerted very close to the pivot point .
Both are small , so is negligible .
Consequently , she can spin for quite some time .
She can also increase her rate of spin by pulling her arms and legs in .
Why does pulling her arms and legs in increase her rate of spin ?
The answer is that her angular momentum is constant , so that or where the primed quantities refer to conditions after she has pulled in her arms and reduced her moment of inertia .
Because is smaller , the angular velocity must increase to keep the angular momentum constant .
It is interesting to see how the rotational kinetic energy of the skater changes when she pulls her arms in .
Her initial rotational energy is whereas her final rotational energy is Since we can substitute for and find Because her moment of inertia has decreased , her final rotational kinetic energy has increased .
The source of this additional rotational kinetic energy is the work required to pull her arms inward .
Note that the skater ’ s arms do not move in a perfect circle—they spiral inward .
This work causes an increase in the rotational kinetic energy , while her angular momentum remains constant .
Since she is in a frictionless environment , no energy escapes the system .
Thus , if she were to extend her arms to their original positions , she would rotate at her original angular velocity and her kinetic energy would return to its original value .
The solar system is another example of how conservation of angular momentum works in our universe .
Our solar system was born from a huge cloud of gas and dust that initially had rotational energy .
Gravitational forces caused the cloud to contract , and the rotation rate increased as a result of conservation of angular momentum .
We continue our discussion with an example that has applications to engineering .
A flywheel rotates without friction at an angular velocity on a frictionless , vertical shaft of negligible rotational inertia .
A second flywheel , which is at rest and has a moment of inertia three times that of the rotating flywheel , is dropped onto it .
Because friction exists between the surfaces , the flywheels very quickly reach the same rotational velocity , after which they spin together .
( a ) Use the law of conservation of angular momentum to determine the angular velocity of the combination .
( b ) What fraction of the initial kinetic energy is lost in the coupling of the flywheels ?
Part ( a ) is straightforward to solve for the angular velocity of the coupled system .
We use the result of ( a ) to compare the initial and final kinetic energies of the system in part ( b ) .
No external torques act on the system .
The force due to friction produces an internal torque , which does not affect the angular momentum of the system .
Therefore conservation of angular momentum gives b .
Before contact , only one flywheel is rotating .
The rotational kinetic energy of this flywheel is the initial rotational kinetic energy of the system , .
The final kinetic energy is Therefore , the ratio of the final kinetic energy to the initial kinetic energy is Thus , 3/4 of the initial kinetic energy is lost to the coupling of the two flywheels .
Since the rotational inertia of the system increased , the angular velocity decreased , as expected from the law of conservation of angular momentum .
In this example , we see that the final kinetic energy of the system has decreased , as energy is lost to the coupling of the flywheels .
Compare this to the example of the skater in doing work to bring her arms inward and adding rotational kinetic energy .
Check Your Understanding A merry-go-round at a playground is rotating at 4.0 rev/min .
Three children jump on and increase the moment of inertia of the merry-go-round/children rotating system by .
What is the new rotation rate ?
An 80.0-kg gymnast dismounts from a high bar .
He starts the dismount at full extension , then tucks to complete a number of revolutions before landing .
His moment of inertia when fully extended can be approximated as a rod of length 1.8 m and when in the tuck a rod of half that length .
If his rotation rate at full extension is 1.0 rev/s and he enters the tuck when his center of mass is at 3.0 m height moving horizontally to the floor , how many revolutions can he execute if he comes out of the tuck at 1.8 m height ?
Using conservation of angular momentum , we can find his rotation rate when in the tuck .
Using the equations of kinematics , we can find the time interval from a height of 3.0 m to 1.8 m. Since he is moving horizontally with respect to the ground , the equations of free fall simplify .
This will allow the number of revolutions that can be executed to be calculated .
Since we are using a ratio , we can keep the units as rev/s and don ’ t need to convert to radians/s .
The moment of inertia at full extension is The moment of inertia in the tuck is Conservation of angular momentum : .
Time interval in the tuck : .
In 0.5 s , he will be able to execute two revolutions at 4.0 rev/s .
Note that the number of revolutions he can complete will depend on how long he is in the air .
In the problem , he is exiting the high bar horizontally to the ground .
He could also exit at an angle with respect to the ground , giving him more or less time in the air depending on the angle , positive or negative , with respect to the ground .
Gymnasts must take this into account when they are executing their dismounts .
A bullet of mass is moving horizontally with a speed of The bullet strikes and becomes embedded in the edge of a solid disk of mass and radius The cylinder is free to rotate around its axis and is initially at rest .
What is the angular velocity of the disk immediately after the bullet is embedded ?
For the system of the bullet and the cylinder , no external torque acts along the vertical axis through the center of the disk .
Thus , the angular momentum along this axis is conserved .
The initial angular momentum of the bullet is , which is taken about the rotational axis of the disk the moment before the collision .
The initial angular momentum of the cylinder is zero .
Thus , the net angular momentum of the system is .
Since angular momentum is conserved , the initial angular momentum of the system is equal to the angular momentum of the bullet embedded in the disk immediately after impact .
Care must be taken when formulating the angular momentum before and after the collision .
Just before impact the angular momentum of the bullet is taken about the rotational axis of the disk .
shows a gyroscope , defined as a spinning disk in which the axis of rotation is free to assume any orientation .
When spinning , the orientation of the spin axis is unaffected by the orientation of the body that encloses it .
The body or vehicle enclosing the gyroscope can be moved from place to place and the orientation of the spin axis will remain the same .
This makes gyroscopes very useful in navigation , especially where magnetic compasses can ’ t be used , such as in manned and unmanned spacecraft , intercontinental ballistic missiles , unmanned aerial vehicles , and satellites like the Hubble Space Telescope .
We illustrate the precession of a gyroscope with an example of a top in the next two figures .
If the top is placed on a flat surface near the surface of Earth at an angle to the vertical and is not spinning , it will fall over , due to the force of gravity producing a torque acting on its center of mass .
This is shown in ( a ) .
However , if the top is spinning on its axis , rather than topple over due to this torque , it precesses about the vertical , shown in part ( b ) of the figure .
This is due to the torque on the center of mass , which provides the change in angular momentum .
shows the forces acting on a spinning top .
The torque produced is perpendicular to the angular momentum vector .
This changes the direction of the angular momentum vector according to but not its magnitude .
The top precesses around a vertical axis , since the torque is always horizontal and perpendicular to .
If the top is not spinning , it acquires angular momentum in the direction of the torque , and it rotates around a horizontal axis , falling over just as we would expect .
We can experience this phenomenon first hand by holding a spinning bicycle wheel and trying to rotate it about an axis perpendicular to the spin axis .
As shown in , the person applies forces perpendicular to the spin axis in an attempt to rotate the wheel , but instead , the wheel axis starts to change direction to her left due to the applied torque .
We all know how easy it is for a bicycle to tip over when sitting on it at rest .
But when riding the bicycle at a good pace , tipping it over involves changing the angular momentum vector of the spinning wheels .
View the video on for a complete demonstration of precession of the bicycle wheel .
Also , when a spinning disk is put in a box such as a Blu-Ray player , try to move it .
We can calculate the precession rate of the top in .
The precession angular velocity adds a small component to the angular momentum along the z -axis .
This is seen in a slight bob up and down as the gyroscope precesses , referred to as nutation .
Earth itself acts like a gigantic gyroscope .
Its angular momentum is along its axis and currently points at Polaris , the North Star .
But Earth is slowly precessing ( once in about 26,000 years ) due to the torque of the Sun and the Moon on its nonspherical shape .
A gyroscope spins with its tip on the ground and is spinning with negligible frictional resistance .
The disk of the gyroscope has mass 0.3 kg and is spinning at 20 rev/s .
Its center of mass is 5.0 cm from the pivot and the radius of the disk is 5.0 cm .
What is the precessional period of the gyroscope ?
We use to find the precessional angular velocity of the gyroscope .
This allows us to find the period of precession .
The moment of inertia of the disk is The angular velocity of the disk is We can now substitute in .
The precessional angular velocity is The precessional period of the gyroscope is The precessional angular frequency of the gyroscope , 3.12 rad/s , or about 0.5 rev/s , is much less than the angular velocity 20 rev/s of the gyroscope disk .
Therefore , we don ’ t expect a large component of the angular momentum to arise due to precession , and is a good approximation of the precessional angular velocity .
Check Your Understanding A top has a precession frequency of 5.0 rad/s on Earth .
What is its precession frequency on the Moon ?
In earlier chapters , you learned about forces and Newton ’ s laws for translational motion .
You then studied torques and the rotational motion of a body about a fixed axis of rotation .
You also learned that static equilibrium means no motion at all and that dynamic equilibrium means motion without acceleration .
In this chapter , we combine the conditions for static translational equilibrium and static rotational equilibrium to describe situations typical for any kind of construction .
What type of cable will support a suspension bridge ?
What type of foundation will support an office building ?
Will this prosthetic arm function correctly ?
These are examples of questions that contemporary engineers must be able to answer .
The elastic properties of materials are especially important in engineering applications , including bioengineering .
For example , materials that can stretch or compress and then return to their original form or position make good shock absorbers .
In this chapter , you will learn about some applications that combine equilibrium with elasticity to construct real structures that last .
We say that a rigid body is in equilibrium when both its linear and angular acceleration are zero relative to an inertial frame of reference .
This means that a body in equilibrium can be moving , but if so , its linear and angular velocities must be constant .
We say that a rigid body is in static equilibrium when it is at rest in our selected frame of reference .
Because the motion is relative , what is in static equilibrium to us is in dynamic equilibrium to the moving observer , and vice versa .
Since the laws of physics are identical for all inertial reference frames , in an inertial frame of reference , there is no distinction between static equilibrium and equilibrium .
In equilibrium , the linear acceleration is zero .
In equilibrium , the rotational acceleration is zero .
It is worth noting that this equation for equilibrium is generally valid for rotational equilibrium about any axis of rotation ( fixed or otherwise ) .
Again , this vector equation is equivalent to three scalar equations for the vector components of the net torque : The second equilibrium condition means that in equilibrium , there is no net external torque to cause rotation about any axis .
The first and second equilibrium conditions are stated in a particular reference frame .
The first condition involves only forces and is therefore independent of the origin of the reference frame .
However , the second condition involves torque , with respect to the axis of which is defined as a cross product , rotation of the point where the force is applied enters the equation .
Therefore , torque depends on the location of the axis in the reference frame .
However , when rotational and translational equilibrium conditions hold simultaneously in one frame of reference , then they also hold in any other inertial frame of reference , so that the net torque about any axis of rotation is still zero .
The explanation for this is fairly straightforward .
Suppose vector is the position of the origin of a new inertial frame of reference in the old inertial frame of reference of the S .
Hence , we see that the net torque in any inertial frame of reference is zero , provided that both conditions for equilibrium hold in an inertial frame of reference S .
The practical implication of this is that when applying equilibrium conditions for a rigid body , we are free to choose any point as the origin of the reference frame .
Our choice of reference frame is dictated by the physical specifics of the problem we are solving .
In one frame of reference , the mathematical form of the equilibrium conditions may be quite complicated , whereas in another frame , the same conditions may have a simpler mathematical form that is easy to solve .
The origin of a selected frame of reference is called the pivot point .
In the most general case , equilibrium conditions are expressed by the six scalar equations ( and ) .
For planar equilibrium problems with rotation about a fixed axis , which we consider in this chapter , we can reduce the number of equations to three .
The standard procedure is to adopt a frame of reference where the z -axis is the axis of rotation .
With this choice of axis , the net torque has only a z -component , all forces that have non-zero torques lie in the xy -plane , and therefore contributions to the net torque come from only the x and y -components of external forces .
Thus , for planar problems with the axis of rotation perpendicular to the xy -plane , we have the following three equilibrium conditions for forces and torques : where the summation is over all N external forces acting on the body and over their torques .
In , we simplified the notation by dropping the subscript z , but we understand here that the summation is over all contributions along the z -axis , which is the axis of rotation .
In , the z -component of torque from the force is where is the length of the lever arm of the force and is the magnitude of the force ( as you saw in ) .
The angle is the angle between vectors in the counterclockwise direction .
When using , we often compute the magnitude of torque and assign its sense as either positive or negative depending on the direction of rotation caused by this torque alone .
In , net torque is the sum of terms , with each term computed from , and each term must have the correct sense .
Similarly , in , we assign the sign to force components in the x -direction and the sign to components in the x -direction .
The same rule must be consistently followed in , when computing force components along the y -axis .
measuring from vector to vector and View this to see two forces act on a rigid square in two dimensions .
At all times , the static equilibrium conditions given by through are satisfied .
You can vary magnitudes of the forces and their lever arms and observe the effect these changes have on the square .
In many equilibrium situations , one of the forces acting on the body is its weight .
In free-body diagrams , the weight vector is attached to the center of gravity of the body .
For all practical purposes , the center of gravity is identical to the center of mass , as you learned in on linear momentum and collisions .
Only in situations where a body has a large spatial extension so that the gravitational field is nonuniform throughout its volume , are the center of gravity and the center of mass located at different points .
Therefore , throughout this chapter , we use the center of mass ( CM ) as the point where the weight vector is attached .
Recall that the CM has a special physical meaning : When an external force is applied to a body at exactly its CM , the body as a whole undergoes translational motion and such a force does not cause rotation .
When the CM is located off the axis of rotation , a net gravitational torque occurs on an object .
Gravitational torque is the torque caused by weight .
This gravitational torque may rotate the object if there is no support present to balance it .
The magnitude of the gravitational torque depends on how far away from the pivot the CM is located .
For example , in the case of a tipping truck , the pivot is located on the line where the tires make contact with the road ’ s surface .
If the CM is located high above the road ’ s surface , the gravitational torque may be large enough to turn the truck over .
Passenger cars with a low-lying CM , close to the pavement , are more resistant to tipping over than are trucks .
If you tilt a box so that one edge remains in contact with the table beneath it , then one edge of the base of support becomes a pivot .
As long as the center of gravity of the box remains over the base of support , gravitational torque rotates the box back toward its original position of stable equilibrium .
When the center of gravity moves outside of the base of support , gravitational torque rotates the box in the opposite direction , and the box rolls over .
View this to experiment with stable and unstable positions of a box .
A passenger car with a 2.5-m wheelbase has 52 % of its weight on the front wheels on level ground , as illustrated in .
Where is the CM of this car located with respect to the rear axle ?
We do not know the weight w of the car .
All we know is that when the car rests on a level surface , 0.52 w pushes down on the surface at contact points of the front wheels and 0.48 w pushes down on the surface at contact points of the rear wheels .
Also , the contact points are separated from each other by the distance At these contact points , the car experiences normal reaction forces with magnitudes and on the front and rear axles , respectively .
We also know that the car is an example of a rigid body in equilibrium whose entire weight w acts at its CM .
The CM is located somewhere between the points where the normal reaction forces act , somewhere at a distance x from the point where acts .
Our task is to find x .
Thus , we identify three forces acting on the body ( the car ) , and we can draw a free-body diagram for the extended rigid body , as shown in .
We are almost ready to write down equilibrium conditions through for the car , but first we must decide on the reference frame .
Suppose we choose the x -axis along the length of the car , the y -axis vertical , and the z -axis perpendicular to this xy -plane .
With this choice we only need to write and because all the y -components are identically zero .
Now we need to decide on the location of the pivot point .
We can choose any point as the location of the axis of rotation ( z -axis ) .
Suppose we place the axis of rotation at CM , as indicated in the free-body diagram for the car .
At this point , we are ready to write the equilibrium conditions for the car .
Each equilibrium condition contains only three terms because there are forces acting on the car .
The lines of action of both normal reaction forces are perpendicular to their lever arms , so in , we have for both forces .
From the free-body diagram , we read that torque causes clockwise rotation about the pivot at CM , so its sense is negative ; and torque causes counterclockwise rotation about the pivot at CM , so its sense is positive .
The answer is Choosing the pivot at the position of the front axle does not change the result .
The free-body diagram for this pivot location is presented in .
For different choices of the pivot point we have different sets of equilibrium conditions to solve .
However , all choices lead to the same solution to the problem .
Check Your Understanding Solve by choosing the pivot at the location of the rear axle .
A special case of static equilibrium occurs when all external forces on an object act at or along the axis of rotation or when the spatial extension of the object can be disregarded .
In such a case , the object can be effectively treated like a point mass .
In this special case , we need not worry about the second equilibrium condition , , because all torques are identically zero and the first equilibrium condition ( for forces ) is the only condition to be satisfied .
The free-body diagram and problem-solving strategy for this special case were outlined in and .
You will see a typical equilibrium situation involving only the first equilibrium condition in the next example .
View this to see three weights that are connected by strings over pulleys and tied together in a knot .
You can experiment with the weights to see how they affect the equilibrium position of the knot and , at the same time , see the vector-diagram representation of the first equilibrium condition at work .
A small pan of mass 42.0 g is supported by two strings , as shown in .
The maximum tension that the string can support is 2.80 N. Mass is added gradually to the pan until one of the strings snaps .
Which string is it ?
How much mass must be added for this to occur ?
This mechanical system consisting of strings , masses , and the pan is in static equilibrium .
Specifically , the knot that ties the strings to the pan is in static equilibrium .
The knot can be treated as a point ; therefore , we need only the first equilibrium condition .
The three forces pulling at the knot are the tension in the 5.0-cm string , the tension in the 10.0-cm string , and the weight of the pan holding the masses .
We adopt a rectangular coordinate system with the y -axis pointing opposite to the direction of gravity and draw the free-body diagram for the knot ( see ) .
To find the tension components , we must identify the direction angles and that the strings make with the horizontal direction that is the x -axis .
As you can see in , the strings make two sides of a right triangle .
The string with a greater tension will break first .
We then obtain two equilibrium equations for the tensions : The equilibrium equation for the x -direction tells us that the tension in the 5.0-cm string is twice the tension in the 10.0-cm string .
Therefore , the shorter string will snap .
As long as the elevator moves up at a constant speed , the result stays the same because the weight does not change .
If the elevator moves up with acceleration , the critical mass is smaller because the weight of becomes larger by an apparent weight due to the acceleration of the elevator .
Still , in all cases the shorter string breaks first .
All examples in this chapter are planar problems .
Accordingly , we use equilibrium conditions in the component form of to .
We introduced a problem-solving strategy in to illustrate the physical meaning of the equilibrium conditions .
Now we generalize this strategy in a list of steps to follow when solving static equilibrium problems for extended rigid bodies .
We proceed in five practical steps .
Identify the object to be analyzed .
For some systems in equilibrium , it may be necessary to consider more than one object .
Identify all forces acting on the object .
Identify the questions you need to answer .
Identify the information given in the problem .
In realistic problems , some key information may be implicit in the situation rather than provided explicitly .
Set up a free-body diagram for the object .
( a ) Choose the xy -reference frame for the problem .
Draw a freebody diagram for the object , including only the forces that act on it .
When suitable , represent the forces in terms of their components in the chosen reference frame .
As you do this for each force , cross out the original force so that you do not erroneously include the same force twice in equations .
Label all forces—you will need this for correct computations of net forces in the x and y -directions .
For an unknown force , the direction must be assigned arbitrarily ; think of it as a ‘ working direction ’ or ‘ suspected direction. ’ The correct direction is determined by the sign that you obtain in the final solution .
A plus sign means that the working direction is the actual direction .
A minus sign means that the actual direction is opposite to the assumed working direction .
( b ) Choose the location of the rotation axis ; in other words , choose the pivot point with respect to which you will compute torques of acting forces .
On the free-body diagram , indicate the location of the pivot and the lever arms of acting forces—you will need this for correct computations of torques .
In the selection of the pivot , keep in mind that the pivot can be placed anywhere you wish , but the guiding principle is that the best choice will simplify as much as possible the calculation of the net torque along the rotation axis .
Set up the equations of equilibrium for the object .
( a ) Use the free-body diagram to write a correct equilibrium condition for force components in the x -direction .
( b ) Use the free-body diagram to write a correct equilibrium condition for force components in the y -direction .
( c ) Use the free-body diagram to write a correct equilibrium condition for torques along the axis of rotation .
Use to evaluate torque magnitudes and senses .
Simplify and solve the system of equations for equilibrium to obtain unknown quantities .
At this point , your work involves algebra only .
Keep in mind that the number of equations must be the same as the number of unknowns .
If the number of unknowns is larger than the number of equations , the problem can not be solved .
Evaluate the expressions for the unknown quantities that you obtained in your solution .
Your final answers should have correct numerical values and correct physical units .
If they do not , then use the previous steps to track back a mistake to its origin and correct it .
Also , you may independently check for your numerical answers by shifting the pivot to a different location and solving the problem again , which is what we did in .
Note that setting up a free-body diagram for a rigid-body equilibrium problem is the most important component in the solution process .
Without the correct setup and a correct diagram , you will not be able to write down correct conditions for equilibrium .
Also note that a free-body diagram for an extended rigid body that may undergo rotational motion is different from a free-body diagram for a body that experiences only translational motion ( as you saw in the chapters on Newton ’ s laws of motion ) .
In translational dynamics , a body is represented as its CM , where all forces on the body are attached and no torques appear .
This does not hold true in rotational dynamics , where an extended rigid body can not be represented by one point alone .
The reason for this is that in analyzing rotation , we must identify torques acting on the body , and torque depends both on the acting force and on its lever arm .
Here , the free-body diagram for an extended rigid body helps us identify external torques .
Three masses are attached to a uniform meter stick , as shown in .
In other words , we choose the pivot at the point where the meter stick touches the support .
This is a natural choice for the pivot because this point does not move as the stick rotates .
Now we are ready to set up the free-body diagram for the meter stick .
We indicate the pivot and attach five vectors representing the five forces along the line representing the meter stick , locating the forces with respect to the pivot .
At this stage , we can identify the lever arms of the five forces given the information provided in the problem .
For the three hanging masses , the problem is explicit about their locations along the stick , but the information about the location of the weight w is given implicitly .
The key word here is “ uniform. ” We know from our previous studies that the CM of a uniform stick is located at its midpoint , so this is where we attach the weight w , at the 50-cm mark .
The torque balance may therefore be used to measure mass , since variations in g -values on Earth ’ s surface do not affect these measurements .
This is not the case for a spring balance because it measures the force .
Check Your Understanding Repeat using the left end of the meter stick to calculate the torques ; that is , by placing the pivot at the left end of the meter stick .
In the next example , we show how to use the first equilibrium condition ( equation for forces ) in the vector form given by and .
We present this solution to illustrate the importance of a suitable choice of reference frame .
Although all inertial reference frames are equivalent and numerical solutions obtained in one frame are the same as in any other , an unsuitable choice of reference frame can make the solution quite lengthy and convoluted , whereas a wise choice of reference frame makes the solution straightforward .
We show this in the equivalent solution to the same problem .
This particular example illustrates an application of static equilibrium to biomechanics .
A weightlifter is holding a 50.0-lb weight ( equivalent to 222.4 N ) with his forearm , as shown in .
His forearm is positioned at with respect to his upper arm .
The forearm is supported by a contraction of the biceps muscle , which causes a torque around the elbow .
Assuming that the tension in the biceps acts along the vertical direction given by gravity , what tension must the muscle exert to hold the forearm at the position shown ?
What is the force on the elbow joint ?
Assume that the forearm ’ s weight is negligible .
Give your final answers in SI units .
We identify three forces acting on the forearm : the unknown force at the elbow ; the unknown tension in the muscle ; and the weight with magnitude We adopt the frame of reference with the x -axis along the forearm and the pivot at the elbow .
The vertical direction is the direction of the weight , which is the same as the direction of the upper arm .
The x -axis makes an angle with the vertical .
The y -axis is perpendicular to the x -axis .
Now we set up the free-body diagram for the forearm .
First , we draw the axes , the pivot , and the three vectors representing the three identified forces .
Then we locate the angle and represent each force by its x and y -components , remembering to cross out the original force vector to avoid double counting .
Finally , we label the forces and their lever arms .
The free-body diagram for the forearm is shown in .
At this point , we are ready to set up equilibrium conditions for the forearm .
Each force has x and y -components ; therefore , we have two equations for the first equilibrium condition , one equation for each component of the net force acting on the forearm .
For the y -components we have in .
Also notice that the torque of the force at the elbow is zero because this force is attached at the pivot .
Next , we read from the free-body diagram that the net torque along the axis of rotation is is the second equilibrium condition ( for torques ) for the forearm .
The free-body diagram shows that the lever arms are and At this point , we do not need to convert inches into SI units , because as long as these units are consistent in , they cancel out .
In the final answer , we convert the forces into SI units of force .
The answer is Two important issues here are worth noting .
The first concerns conversion into SI units , which can be done at the very end of the solution as long as we keep consistency in units .
The second important issue concerns the hinge joints such as the elbow .
In the initial analysis of a problem , hinge joints should always be assumed to exert a force in an arbitrary direction , and then you must solve for all components of a hinge force independently .
In this example , the elbow force happens to be vertical because the problem assumes the tension by the biceps to be vertical as well .
Such a simplification , however , is not a general rule .
Suppose we adopt a reference frame with the direction of the y -axis along the 50-lb weight and the pivot placed at the elbow .
In this frame , all three forces have only y -components , so we have only one equation for the first equilibrium condition ( for forces ) .
We draw the free-body diagram for the forearm as shown in , indicating the pivot , the acting forces and their lever arms with respect to the pivot , and the angles and that the forces and ( respectively ) make with their lever arms .
In the definition of torque given by , the angle is the direction angle of the vector counted counterclockwise from the radial direction of the lever arm that always points away from the pivot .
Check Your Understanding Repeat assuming that the forearm is an object of uniform density that weighs 8.896 N. A uniform ladder is long and weighs 400.0 N. The ladder rests against a slippery vertical wall , as shown in .
The inclination angle between the ladder and the rough floor is Find the reaction forces from the floor and from the wall on the ladder and the coefficient of static friction at the interface of the ladder with the floor that prevents the ladder from slipping .
We can identify four forces acting on the ladder .
The first force is the normal reaction force N from the floor in the upward vertical direction .
The second force is the static friction force directed horizontally along the floor toward the wall—this force prevents the ladder from slipping .
These two forces act on the ladder at its contact point with the floor .
The third force is the weight w of the ladder , attached at its CM located midway between its ends .
The fourth force is the normal reaction force F from the wall in the horizontal direction away from the wall , attached at the contact point with the wall .
There are no other forces because the wall is slippery , which means there is no friction between the wall and the ladder .
Based on this analysis , we adopt the frame of reference with the y -axis in the vertical direction ( parallel to the wall ) and the x -axis in the horizontal direction ( parallel to the floor ) .
In this frame , each force has either a horizontal component or a vertical component but not both , which simplifies the solution .
We select the pivot at the contact point with the floor .
In the free-body diagram for the ladder , we indicate the pivot , all four forces and their lever arms , and the angles between lever arms and the forces , as shown in .
With our choice of the pivot location , there is no torque either from the normal reaction force N or from the static friction f because they both act at the pivot .
First , notice that when we choose a pivot point , there is no expectation that the system will actually pivot around the chosen point .
The ladder in this example is not rotating at all but firmly stands on the floor ; nonetheless , its contact point with the floor is a good choice for the pivot .
As long as the angle in is correctly identified—with the help of a free-body diagram—as the angle measured counterclockwise from the direction of the lever arm to the direction of the force vector , gives both the magnitude and the sense of the torque .
This is because torque is the vector product of the lever-arm vector crossed with the force vector , and expresses the rectangular component of this vector product along the axis of rotation .
This result is independent of the length of the ladder because L is cancelled in the second equilibrium condition , .
No matter how long or short the ladder is , as long as its weight is 400 N and the angle with the floor is our results hold .
But the ladder will slip if the net torque becomes negative in .
This happens for some angles when the coefficient of static friction is not great enough to prevent the ladder from slipping .
Check Your Understanding For the situation described in , determine the values of the coefficient of static friction for which the ladder starts slipping , given that is the angle that the ladder makes with the floor .
A swinging door that weighs is supported by hinges A and B so that the door can swing about a vertical axis passing through the hinges .
The door has a width of and the door slab has a uniform mass density .
The hinges are placed symmetrically at the door ’ s edge in such a way that the door ’ s weight is evenly distributed between them .
The hinges are separated by distance Find the forces on the hinges when the door rests half-open .
The forces that the door exerts on its hinges can be found by simply reversing the directions of the forces that the hinges exert on the door .
Hence , our task is to find the forces from the hinges on the door .
Three forces act on the door slab : an unknown force from hinge an unknown force from hinge and the known weight attached at the center of mass of the door slab .
The CM is located at the geometrical center of the door because the slab has a uniform mass density .
We adopt a rectangular frame of reference with the y -axis along the direction of gravity and the x -axis in the plane of the slab , as shown in panel ( a ) of , and resolve all forces into their rectangular components .
In this way , we have four unknown component forces : two components of force and two components of force and In the freebody diagram , we represent the two forces at the hinges by their vector components , whose assumed orientations are arbitrary .
Because there are four unknowns we must set up four independent and equations .
One equation is the equilibrium condition for forces in the x -direction .
The second equation is the equilibrium condition for forces in the y -direction .
The third equation is the equilibrium condition for torques in rotation about a hinge .
Because the weight is evenly distributed between the hinges , we have the fourth equation , To set up the equilibrium conditions , we draw a free-body diagram and choose the pivot point at the upper hinge , as shown in panel ( b ) of .
Finally , we solve the equations for the unknown force components and find the forces .
Check Your Understanding Solve the problem in by taking the pivot position at the center of mass .
Check Your Understanding A 50-kg person stands 1.5 m away from one end of a uniform 6.0-m-long scaffold of mass 70.0 kg .
Find the tensions in the two vertical ropes supporting the scaffold .
Check Your Understanding A 400.0-N sign hangs from the end of a uniform strut .
The strut is 4.0 m long and weighs 600.0 N. The strut is supported by a hinge at the wall and by a cable whose other end is tied to the wall at a point 3.0 m above the left end of the strut .
Find the tension in the supporting cable and the force of the hinge on the strut .
A model of a rigid body is an idealized example of an object that does not deform under the actions of external forces .
It is very useful when analyzing mechanical systems—and many physical objects are indeed rigid to a great extent .
The extent to which an object can be perceived as rigid depends on the physical properties of the material from which it is made .
For example , a ping-pong ball made of plastic is brittle , and a tennis ball made of rubber is elastic when acted upon by squashing forces .
However , under other circumstances , both a ping-pong ball and a tennis ball may bounce well as rigid bodies .
Similarly , someone who designs prosthetic limbs may be able to approximate the mechanics of human limbs by modeling them as rigid bodies ; however , the actual combination of bones and tissues is an elastic medium .
For the remainder of this chapter , we move from consideration of forces that affect the motion of an object to those that affect an object ’ s shape .
A change in shape due to the application of a force is known as a deformation .
Even very small forces are known to cause some deformation .
Deformation is experienced by objects or physical media under the action of external forces—for example , this may be squashing , squeezing , ripping , twisting , shearing , or pulling the objects apart .
In the language of physics , two terms describe the forces on objects undergoing deformation : stress and strain .
Stress is a quantity that describes the magnitude of forces that cause deformation .
Stress is generally defined as force per unit area .
When forces pull on an object and cause its elongation , like the stretching of an elastic band , we call such stress a tensile stress .
When forces cause a compression of an object , we call it a compressive stress .
When an object is being squeezed from all sides , like a submarine in the depths of an ocean , we call this kind of stress a bulk stress ( or volume stress ) .
In other situations , the acting forces may be neither tensile nor compressive , and still produce a noticeable deformation .
For example , suppose you hold a book tightly between the palms of your hands , then with one hand you pressand-pull on the front cover away from you , while with the other hand you press-and-pull on the back cover toward you .
In such a case , when deforming forces act tangentially to the object ’ s surface , we call them ‘ shear ’ forces and the stress they cause is called shear stress .
The SI unit of stress is the pascal ( Pa ) .
Conversion factors are Another unit that An object or medium under stress becomes deformed .
The quantity that describes this deformation is called strain .
Strain is given as a fractional change in either length ( under tensile stress ) or volume ( under bulk stress ) or geometry ( under shear stress ) .
Therefore , strain is a dimensionless number .
Strain under a tensile stress is called tensile strain , strain under bulk stress is called bulk strain ( or volume strain ) , and that caused by shear stress is called shear strain .
The greater the stress , the greater the strain ; however , the relation between strain and stress does not need to be linear .
Only when stress is sufficiently low is the deformation it causes in direct proportion to the stress value .
The proportionality constant in this relation is called the elastic modulus .
In the linear limit of low stress values , the general relation between stress and strain is As we can see from dimensional analysis of this relation , the elastic modulus has the same physical unit as stress because strain is dimensionless .
We can also see from that when an object is characterized by a large value of elastic modulus , the effect of stress is small .
On the other hand , a small elastic modulus means that stress produces large strain and noticeable deformation .
For example , a stress on a rubber band produces larger strain ( deformation ) than the same stress on a steel band of the same dimensions because the elastic modulus for rubber is two orders of magnitude smaller than the elastic modulus for steel .
The elastic modulus for tensile stress is called Young ’ s modulus ; that for the bulk stress is called the bulk modulus ; and that for shear stress is called the shear modulus .
Note that the relation between stress and strain is an observed relation , measured in the laboratory .
Elastic moduli for various materials are measured under various physical conditions , such as varying temperature , and collected in engineering data tables for reference .
These tables are valuable references for industry and for anyone involved in engineering or construction .
In the next section , we discuss strain-stress relations beyond the linear limit represented by , in the full range of stress values up to a fracture point .
In the remainder of this section , we study the linear limit expressed by .
Tension or compression occurs when two antiparallel forces of equal magnitude act on an object along only one of its dimensions , in such a way that the object does not move .
One way to envision such a situation is illustrated in .
A rod segment is either stretched or squeezed by a pair of forces acting along its length and perpendicular to its cross-section .
The net effect of such forces is that the rod changes its length from the original length that it had before the forces appeared , to a new length L that it has under the action of the forces .
Compressive stress and strain occur when the forces are contracting an object , causing its shortening , and the length change is negative .
In either of these situations , we define stress as the ratio of the deforming force to the cross-sectional area A of the object being deformed .
The symbol that we reserve for the deforming force means that this force acts perpendicularly to the cross-section of the object .
Forces that act parallel to the cross-section do not change the length of an object .
The only difference from the tensile situation is that for compressive stress and strain , we take absolute values of the right-hand sides in and .
Young ’ s modulus Y is the elastic modulus when deformation is caused by either tensile or compressive stress , and is defined by .
Dividing this equation by tensile strain , we obtain the expression for Young ’ s modulus : A sculpture weighing 10,000 N rests on a horizontal surface at the top of a 6.0-m-tall vertical pillar .
First we find the weight of the 3.0-m-long top section of the pillar .
The normal force that acts on the cross-section located 3.0 m down from the top is the sum of the pillar ’ s weight and the sculpture ’ s weight .
Once we have the normal force , we use to find the stress .
To find the compressive strain , we find the value of Young ’ s modulus for granite in and invert .
Thus , if the pillar has a uniform cross-sectional area along its length , the stress is largest at its base .
Check Your Understanding Find the compressive stress and strain at the base of Nelson ’ s column .
A 2.0-m-long steel rod has a cross-sectional area of The rod is a part of a vertical support that holds a heavy 550-kg platform that hangs attached to the rod ’ s lower end .
Ignoring the weight of the rod , what is the tensile stress in the rod and the elongation of the rod under the stress ?
First we compute the tensile stress in the rod under the weight of the platform in accordance with .
Unlike in the previous example , however , if the weight of the rod is taken into consideration , the stress in the rod is largest at the top and smallest at the bottom of the rod where the equipment is attached .
Check Your Understanding A 2.0-m-long wire stretches 1.0 mm when subjected to a load .
What is the tensile strain in the wire ?
Objects can often experience both compressive stress and tensile stress simultaneously .
One example is a long shelf loaded with heavy books that sags between the end supports under the weight of the books .
The top surface of the shelf is in compressive stress and the bottom surface of the shelf is in tensile stress .
Similarly , long and heavy beams sag under their own weight .
In modern building construction , such bending strains can be almost eliminated with the use of I-beams .
View this A heavy to move the box to see how the compression ( or tension ) in the columns is affected when the box changes its position .
supported three table rests on by a When you dive into water , you feel a force pressing on every part of your body from all directions .
What you are experiencing then is bulk stress , or in other words , pressure .
Bulk stress always tends to decrease the volume enclosed by the surface of a submerged object .
The forces of this “ squeezing ” are always perpendicular to the submerged surface .
The effect of these forces is to decrease the volume of the submerged object by an amount compared with the volume of the object in the absence of bulk stress .
This kind of physical quantity , or pressure p , is defined as We will study pressure in fluids in greater detail in .
An important characteristic of pressure is that it is a scalar quantity and does not have any particular direction ; that is , pressure acts equally in all possible directions .
When you submerge your hand in water , you sense the same amount of pressure acting on the top surface of your hand as on the bottom surface , or on the side surface , or on the surface of the skin between your fingers .
What you are perceiving in this case is an increase in pressure over what you are used to feeling when your hand is not submerged in water .
What you feel when your hand is not submerged in the water is the normal pressure of one atmosphere , which serves as a reference point .
The bulk stress is this increase in pressure , or over the normal level , When the bulk stress increases , the bulk strain increases in response , in accordance with .
The proportionality constant in this relation is called the bulk modulus , B , or The minus sign that appears in is for consistency , to ensure that B is a positive quantity .
Note that the minus sign is necessary because an increase in pressure ( a positive quantity ) always causes a decrease in volume , and decrease in volume is a negative quantity .
The reciprocal of the bulk modulus is called compressibility or The term ‘ compressibility ’ is used in relation to fluids ( gases and liquids ) .
Compressibility describes the change in the volume of a fluid per unit increase in pressure .
Fluids characterized by a large compressibility are relatively easy to compress .
For example , the compressibility of water is and the compressibility of acetone is This means that under a 1.0-atm increase in pressure , the relative decrease in volume is approximately three times as large for acetone as it is for water .
In a hydraulic press , a 250-liter volume of oil is subjected to a 2300-psi pressure increase .
If the compressibility of oil is find the bulk strain and the absolute decrease in the volume of oil when the press is operating .
We must invert to find the bulk strain .
is changed by Check Your Understanding If the normal force acting on each face of a cubical piece of steel find the resulting change in the volume of the piece of steel .
The concepts of shear stress and strain concern only solid objects or materials .
Buildings and tectonic plates are examples of objects that may be subjected to shear stresses .
In general , these concepts do not apply to fluids .
Shear deformation occurs when two antiparallel forces of equal magnitude are applied tangentially to opposite surfaces of a solid object , causing no deformation in the transverse direction to the line of force , as in the typical example of shear stress illustrated in .
Shear deformation is characterized by a gradual shift of layers in the direction tangent to the acting forces .
This gradation in occurs in the transverse direction along some distance Shear strain is defined by the ratio of the largest displacement to the transverse distance Shear strain is caused by shear stress .
Shear stress is due to forces that act parallel to the surface .
We use the symbol for such forces .
The magnitude per surface area A where shearing force is applied is the measure of shear stress The shear modulus is the proportionality constant in and is defined by the ratio of stress to strain .
Shear modulus is commonly denoted by S : A cleaning person tries to move a heavy , old bookcase on a carpeted floor by pushing tangentially on the surface of the very top shelf .
However , the only noticeable effect of this effort is similar to that seen in , and it disappears when the person stops pushing .
The bookcase is 180.0 cm tall and 90.0 cm wide with four 30.0-cmdeep shelves , all partially loaded with books .
The total weight of the bookcase and books is 600.0 N. If the person gives the top shelf a 50.0-N push that displaces the top shelf horizontally by 15.0 cm relative to the motionless bottom shelf , find the shear modulus of the bookcase .
The only pieces of relevant information are the physical dimensions of the bookcase , the value of the tangential force , and the displacement this force causes .
We identify and and we use to compute the shear modulus .
Much the same shear mechanism is responsible for failures of earth-filled dams and levees ; and , in general , for landslides .
Check Your Understanding Explain why the concepts of Young ’ s modulus and shear modulus do not apply to fluids .
We referred to the proportionality constant between stress and strain as the elastic modulus .
But why do we call it that ?
What does it mean for an object to be elastic and how do we describe its behavior ?
Elasticity is the tendency of solid objects and materials to return to their original shape after the external forces ( load ) causing a deformation are removed .
An object is elastic when it comes back to its original size and shape when the load is no longer present .
Physical reasons for elastic behavior vary among materials and depend on the microscopic structure of the material .
For example , the elasticity of polymers and rubbers is caused by stretching polymer chains under an applied force .
In contrast , the elasticity of metals is caused by resizing and reshaping the crystalline cells of the lattices ( which are the material structures of metals ) under the action of externally applied forces .
The two parameters that determine the elasticity of a material are its elastic modulus and its elastic limit .
A high elastic modulus is typical for materials that are hard to deform ; in other words , materials that require a high load to achieve a significant strain .
An example is a steel band .
A low elastic modulus is typical for materials that are easily deformed under a load ; for example , a rubber band .
If the stress under a load becomes too high , then when the load is removed , the material no longer comes back to its original shape and size , but relaxes to a different shape and size : The material becomes permanently deformed .
The elastic limit is the stress value beyond which the material no longer behaves elastically but becomes permanently deformed .
Our perception of an elastic material depends on both its elastic limit and its elastic modulus .
For example , all rubbers are characterized by a low elastic modulus and a high elastic limit ; hence , it is easy to stretch them and the stretch is noticeably large .
Among materials with identical elastic limits , the most elastic is the one with the lowest elastic modulus .
When the load increases from zero , the resulting stress is in direct proportion to strain in the way given by , but only when stress does not exceed some limiting value .
For stress values within this linear limit , we can describe elastic behavior in analogy with Hooke ’ s law for a spring .
According to Hooke ’ s law , the stretch value of a spring under an applied force is directly proportional to the magnitude of the force .
Conversely , the response force from the spring to an applied stretch is directly proportional to the stretch .
In the same way , the deformation of a material under a load is directly proportional to the load , and , conversely , the resulting stress is directly proportional to strain .
The linearity limit ( or the proportionality limit ) is the largest stress value beyond which stress is no longer proportional to strain .
Beyond the linearity limit , the relation between stress and strain is no longer linear .
When stress becomes larger than the linearity limit but still within the elasticity limit , behavior is still elastic , but the relation between stress and strain becomes nonlinear .
For stresses beyond the elastic limit , a material exhibits plastic behavior .
This means the material deforms irreversibly and does not return to its original shape and size , even when the load is removed .
When stress is gradually increased beyond the elastic limit , the material undergoes plastic deformation .
Rubber-like materials show an increase in stress with the increasing strain , which means they become more difficult to stretch and , eventually , they reach a fracture point where they break .
Ductile materials such as metals show a gradual decrease in stress with the increasing strain , which means they become easier to deform as stress-strain values approach the breaking point .
Microscopic mechanisms responsible for plasticity of materials are different for different materials .
We can graph the relationship between stress and strain on a stress-strain diagram .
Each material has its own characteristic strain-stress curve .
A typical stress-strain diagram for a ductile metal under a load is shown in .
In this figure , strain is a fractional elongation ( not drawn to scale ) .
When the load is gradually increased , the linear behavior ( red line ) that starts at the no-load point ( the origin ) ends at the linearity limit at point H .
For further load increases beyond point H , the stress-strain relation is nonlinear but still elastic .
In the figure , this nonlinear region is seen between points H and E .
Ever larger loads take the stress to the elasticity limit E , where elastic behavior ends and plastic deformation begins .
Beyond the elasticity limit , when the load is removed , for example at P , the material relaxes to a new shape and size along the green line .
This is to say that the material becomes permanently deformed and does not come back to its initial shape and size when stress becomes zero .
The material undergoes plastic deformation for loads large enough to cause stress to go beyond the elasticity limit at E .
The material continues to be plastically deformed until the stress reaches the fracture point ( breaking point ) .
Beyond the fracture point , we no longer have one sample of material , so the diagram ends at the fracture point .
For the completeness of this qualitative description , it should be said that the linear , elastic , and plasticity limits denote a range of values rather than one sharp point .
The value of stress at the fracture point is called breaking stress ( or ultimate stress ) .
Materials with similar elastic properties , such as two metals , may have very different breaking stresses .
For example , ultimate stress for aluminum is and for steel it may be as high as depending on the kind of steel .
We can make a quick estimate , based on , that for rods with a cross-sectional area , the breaking load for an aluminum rod is and the breaking load for a steel rod is about nine times larger .
We show how the gravitational force affects objects on Earth and the motion of the Universe itself .
Gravity is the first force to be postulated as an action-at-a-distance force , that is , objects exert a gravitational force on one another without physical contact and that force falls to zero only at an infinite distance .
Earth exerts a gravitational force on you , but so do our Sun , the Milky Way galaxy , and the billions of galaxies , like those shown above , which are so distant that we can not see them with the naked eye .
We first review the history of the study of gravitation , with emphasis on those phenomena that for thousands of years have inspired philosophers and scientists to search for an explanation .
Then we examine the simplest form of Newton ’ s law of universal gravitation and how to apply it .
The earliest philosophers wondered why objects naturally tend to fall toward the ground .
Aristotle ( 384–322 BCE ) believed that it was the nature of rocks to seek Earth and the nature of fire to seek the Heavens .
Brahmagupta ( 598~665 CE ) postulated that Earth was a sphere and that objects possessed a natural affinity for it , falling toward the center from wherever they were located .
The motions of the Sun , our Moon , and the planets have been studied for thousands of years as well .
These motions were described with amazing accuracy by Ptolemy ( 90–168 CE ) , whose method of epicycles described the paths of the planets as circles within circles .
However , there is little evidence that anyone connected the motion of astronomical bodies with the motion of objects falling to Earth—until the seventeenth century .
Nicolaus Copernicus ( 1473–1543 ) is generally credited as being the first to challenge Ptolemy ’ s geocentric ( Earth-centered ) system and suggest a heliocentric system , in which the Sun is at the center of the solar system .
This idea was supported by the incredibly precise naked-eye measurements of planetary motions by Tycho Brahe and their analysis by Johannes Kepler and Galileo Galilei .
However , it was Isaac Newton who connected the acceleration of objects near Earth ’ s surface with the centripetal acceleration of the Moon in its orbit about Earth .
Finally , in , we look at the theory of general relativity proposed by Albert Einstein in 1916 .
His theory comes from a vastly different perspective , in which gravity is a manifestation of mass warping space and time .
The consequences of his theory gave rise to many remarkable predictions , essentially all of which have been confirmed over the many decades following the publication of the theory ( including the 2015 measurement of gravitational waves from the merger of two black holes ) .
Newton noted that objects at Earth ’ s surface ( hence at a distance of from the center of Earth ) have an acceleration of g , but the Moon , at a distance of about , has a centripetal acceleration about times smaller than g .
He could explain this by postulating that a force exists between any two objects , whose magnitude is given by the product of the two masses divided by the square of the distance between them .
We now know that this inverse square law is ubiquitous in nature , a function of geometry for point sources .
The strength of any source at a distance r is spread over the surface of a sphere centered about the mass .
The surface area of that sphere is proportional to .
In later chapters , we see this same form in the electromagnetic force .
Newton ’ s law of gravitation can be expressed as where object 2. is the force on object 1 exerted by object 2 and is a unit vector that points from object 1 toward As shown in , the between the objects .
The equal but opposite force vector points from object 1 toward object 2 , and hence represents an attractive force is the force on object 2 exerted by object 1 .
These equal but opposite forces reflect Newton ’ s third law , which we discussed earlier .
Note that strictly speaking , applies to point masses—all the mass is located at one point .
But it applies equally to any spherically symmetric objects , where r is the distance between the centers of mass of those objects .
In many cases , it works reasonably well for nonsymmetrical objects , if their separation is large compared to their size , and we take r to be the distance between the center of mass of each body .
A century after Newton published his law of universal gravitation , Henry Cavendish determined the proportionality constant G by performing a painstaking experiment .
He constructed a device similar to that shown in , in which small masses are suspended from a wire .
Once in equilibrium , two fixed , larger masses are placed symmetrically near the smaller ones .
The gravitational attraction creates a torsion ( twisting ) in the supporting wire that can be measured .
The to be .
The word ‘ universal ’ indicates that scientists think that this constant applies to masses of any composition and that it is the same throughout the Universe .
The value of G is an incredibly small number , showing that the force of gravity is very weak .
The attraction between masses as small as our bodies , or even objects the size of skyscrapers , is incredibly small .
For example , two 1.0-kg masses located 1.0 meter apart exert a force of on each other .
This is the weight of a typical grain of pollen .
Gravity is the force that forms the Universe .
To determine the motion caused by the gravitational force , follow these steps : Identify the two masses , one or both , for which you wish to find the gravitational force .
Draw a free-body diagram , sketching the force acting on each mass and indicating the distance between their centers of mass .
Apply Newton ’ s second law of motion to each mass to determine how it will move .
Consider two nearly spherical Soyuz payload vehicles , in orbit about Earth , each with mass 9000 kg and diameter 4.0 m. They are initially at rest relative to each other , 10.0 m from center to center .
( As we will see in , both orbit Earth at the same speed and interact nearly the same as if they were isolated in deep space . )
Determine the gravitational force between them and their initial acceleration .
Estimate how long it takes for them to drift together , and how fast they are moving upon impact .
We use Newton ’ s law of gravitation to determine the force between them and then use Newton ’ s second law to find the acceleration of each .
For the estimate , we assume this acceleration is constant , and we use the constantacceleration equations from to find the time and speed of the collision .
The magnitude of the force is The initial acceleration of each payload is The vehicles are 4.0 m in diameter , so the vehicles move from 10.0 m to 4.0 m apart , or a distance of 3.0 m each .
A similar calculation to that above , for when the vehicles are 4.0 m apart , yields an acceleration of , and the average of these two values is .
If we assume a constant acceleration of this value and they start from rest , then the vehicles collide with speed given by so We use to find or about 4.6 hours .
These calculations—including the initial force—are only estimates , as the vehicles are probably not spherically symmetrical .
But you can see that the force is incredibly small .
Astronauts must tether themselves when doing work outside even the massive International Space Station ( ISS ) , as in , because the gravitational attraction can not save them from even the smallest push away from the station .
Check Your Understanding What happens to force and acceleration as the vehicles fall together ?
What will our estimate of the velocity at a collision higher or lower than the speed actually be ?
And finally , what would happen if the masses were not identical ?
Would the force on each be the same or different ?
How about their accelerations ?
The effect of gravity between two objects with masses on the order of these space vehicles is indeed small .
Yet , the effect of gravity on you from Earth is significant enough that a fall into Earth of only a few feet can be dangerous .
We examine the force of gravity near Earth ’ s surface in the next section .
Find the acceleration of our galaxy , the Milky Way , due to the nearest comparably sized galaxy , the Andromeda galaxy .
The approximate mass of each galaxy is 800 billion solar masses ( a solar mass is the mass of our Sun ) , and they are separated by 2.5 million light-years .
( Note that the mass of Andromeda is not so well known but is believed to be slightly larger than our galaxy . )
Each galaxy has a diameter of roughly 100,000 lightyears .
As in the preceding example , we use Newton ’ s law of gravitation to determine the force between them and then use Newton ’ s second law to find the acceleration of the Milky Way .
We can consider the galaxies to be point masses , since their sizes are about 25 times smaller than their separation .
The mass of the Sun ( see ) is and a light-year is the distance light travels in one year , .
The magnitude of the force is The acceleration of the Milky Way is Does this value of acceleration seem astoundingly small ?
If they start from rest , then they would accelerate directly toward each other , “ colliding ” at their center of mass .
Let ’ s estimate the time for this to happen .
The initial acceleration is , so using , we see that it would take for each galaxy to reach a speed of 1.0 m/s , and they would be only closer .
That is nine orders of magnitude smaller than the initial distance between them .
In reality , such motions are rarely simple .
These two galaxies , along with about 50 other smaller galaxies , are all gravitationally bound into our local cluster .
Our local cluster is gravitationally bound to other clusters in what is called a supercluster .
All of this is part of the great cosmic dance that results from gravitation , as shown in .
In this section , we observe how Newton ’ s law of gravitation applies at the surface of a planet and how it connects with what we learned earlier about free fall .
We also examine the gravitational effects within spherical bodies .
Recall that the acceleration of a free-falling object near Earth ’ s surface is approximately .
The force causing this acceleration is called the weight of the object , and from Newton ’ s second law , it has the value mg .
This weight is present regardless of whether the object is in free fall .
We now know that this force is the gravitational force between the object and Earth .
If we substitute mg for the magnitude of in Newton ’ s law of universal gravitation , m for , and for , we obtain the scalar equation where r is the distance between the centers of mass of the object and Earth .
The average radius of Earth is about 6370 km .
Hence , for objects within a few kilometers of Earth ’ s surface , we can take .
The mass m of the object cancels , leaving This explains why all masses free fall with the same acceleration .
We have ignored the fact that Earth also accelerates toward the falling object , but that is acceptable as long as the mass of Earth is much larger than that of the object .
Have you ever wondered how we know the mass of Earth ?
We certainly can ’ t place it on a scale .
The values of g and the radius of Earth were measured with reasonable accuracy centuries ago .
Use the standard values of g , , and to find the mass of Earth .
Estimate the value of g on the Moon .
Use the fact that the Moon has a radius of about 1700 km ( a value of this accuracy was determined many centuries ago ) and assume it has the same average density as Earth , .
With the known values of g and , we can use to find .
For the Moon , we use the assumption of equal average density to determine the mass from a ratio of the volumes of Earth and the Moon .
Rearranging , we have The volume of a sphere is proportional to the radius cubed , so a simple ratio gives us We now use .
As soon as Cavendish determined the value of G in 1798 , the mass of Earth could be calculated .
( In fact , that was the ultimate purpose of Cavendish ’ s experiment in the first place . )
The value we calculated for g of the Moon is incorrect .
The average density of the Moon is actually only and at the surface .
Newton attempted to measure the mass of the Moon by comparing the effect of the Sun on Earth ’ s ocean tides compared to that of the Moon .
His value was a factor of two too small .
The most accurate values for g and the mass of the Moon come from tracking the motion of spacecraft that have orbited the Moon .
But the mass of the Moon can actually be determined accurately without going to the Moon .
Earth and the Moon orbit about a common center of mass , and careful astronomical measurements can determine that location .
The ratio of the Moon ’ s mass to Earth ’ s is the ratio of [ the distance from the common center of mass to the Moon ’ s center ] to [ the distance from the common center of mass to Earth ’ s center ] .
Later in this chapter , we will see that the mass of other astronomical bodies also can be determined by the period of small satellites orbiting them .
But until Cavendish determined the value of G , the masses of all these bodies were unknown .
What is the value of g 400 km above Earth ’ s surface , where the International Space Station is in orbit ?
Using the value of and noting the radius is , we use to find g .
From we have We often see video of astronauts in space stations , apparently weightless .
But clearly , the force of gravity is acting on them .
Comparing the value of g we just calculated to that on Earth , we see that the astronauts in the International Space Station still have 88 % of their weight .
They only appear to be weightless because they are in free fall .
We will come back to this in .
Check Your Understanding How does your weight at the top of a tall building compare with that on the first floor ?
Do you think engineers need to take into account the change in the value of g when designing structural support for a very tall building ?
is a scalar equation , giving the magnitude of the gravitational acceleration as a function of the distance from the center of the mass that causes the acceleration .
But we could have retained the vector form for the force of gravity in , and written the acceleration in vector form as We identify the vector field represented by as the gravitational field caused by mass .
We can picture the field as shown .
The lines are directed radially inward and are symmetrically distributed about the mass .
As is true for any vector field , the direction of is parallel to the field lines at any point .
The strength of at any point is inversely proportional to the line spacing .
Another way to state this is that the magnitude of the field in any region is proportional to the number of lines that pass through a unit surface area , effectively a density of lines .
Since the lines are equally spaced in all directions , the number of lines per unit surface area at a distance r from the mass is the total number of lines divided by the surface area of a sphere of radius r , which is proportional to .
Hence , this picture perfectly represents the inverse square law , in addition to indicating the direction of the field .
In the field picture , we say that a mass m interacts with the gravitational field of mass M .
We will use the concept of fields to great advantage in the later chapters on electromagnetism .
As we saw in , objects moving at constant speed in a circle have a centripetal acceleration directed toward the center of the circle , which means that there must be a net force directed toward the center of that circle .
Since all objects on the surface of Earth move through a circle every 24 hours , there must be a net centripetal force on each object directed toward the center of that circle .
Let ’ s first consider an object of mass m located at the equator , suspended from a scale .
The scale exerts an upward force away from Earth ’ s center .
This is the reading on the scale , and hence it is the apparent weight of the object .
The weight ( mg ) points toward Earth ’ s center .
If Earth were not rotating , the acceleration would be zero and , consequently , the net force would be zero , resulting in .
This would be the true reading of the weight .
With rotation , the sum of these forces must provide the centripetal acceleration , .
Using Newton ’ s second law , we have Note that points in the same direction as the weight ; hence , it is negative .
The tangential speed v is the speed at the equator and r is .
We can calculate the speed simply by noting that objects on the equator travel the circumference of Earth in 24 hours .
Instead , let ’ s use the alternative expression for from .
Recall that the tangential speed is related to the angular speed by .
Hence , we have .
By rearranging and substituting , the apparent weight at the equator is The angular speed of Earth everywhere is Substituting for the values or and , we have .
This is only 0.34 % of the value of gravity , so it is clearly a small correction .
How fast would Earth need to spin for those at the equator to have zero apparent weight ?
How long would the length of the day be ?
Using , we can set the apparent weight to zero and determine the centripetal acceleration required .
From that , we can find the speed at the equator .
The length of day is the time required for one complete rotation .
From , we have , so setting , we get .
Using the expression for , substituting for Earth ’ s radius and the standard value of gravity , we get The period T is the time for one complete rotation .
Therefore , the tangential speed is the circumference divided by T , so we have This is about 84 minutes .
We will see later in this chapter that this speed and length of day would also be the orbital speed and period of a satellite in orbit at Earth ’ s surface .
While such an orbit would not be possible near Earth ’ s surface due to air resistance , it certainly is possible only a few hundred miles above Earth .
must point toward point P , hence At the poles , and , just as is the case without rotation .
At any other latitude , the situation is more complicated .
The centripetal acceleration is directed toward point P in the figure , and the radius becomes .
The vector sum of the weight and no longer points away from the center of Earth .
( The difference is small and exaggerated in the figure . )
A plumb bob will always point along this deviated direction .
All buildings are built aligned along this deviated direction , not along a radius through the center of Earth .
For the tallest buildings , this represents a deviation of a few feet at the top .
It is also worth noting that Earth is not a perfect sphere .
The interior is partially liquid , and this enhances Earth bulging at the equator due to its rotation .
The radius of Earth is about 30 km greater at the equator compared to the poles .
It is left as an exercise to compare the strength of gravity at the poles to that at the equator using .
The difference is comparable to the difference due to rotation and is in the same direction .
Apparently , you really can lose “ weight ” by moving to the tropics .
Earlier we stated without proof that the law of gravitation applies to spherically symmetrical objects , where the mass of each body acts as if it were at the center of the body .
Since is derived from , it is also valid for symmetrical mass distributions , but both equations are valid only for values of .
As we saw in , at 400 km above Earth ’ s surface , where the International Space Station orbits , the value of g is .
( We will see later that this is also the centripetal acceleration of the ISS . )
For , and are not valid .
However , we can determine g for these cases using a principle that comes from Gauss ’ s law , which is a powerful mathematical tool that we study in more detail later in the course .
A consequence of Gauss ’ s law , applied to gravitation , is that only the mass within r contributes to the gravitational force .
Also , that mass , just as before , can be considered to be located at the center .
The gravitational effect of the mass outside r has zero net effect .
Two very interesting special cases occur .
For a spherical planet with constant density , the mass within r is the density times the volume within r .
This mass can be considered located at the center .
Replacing with only the mass within r , , and with r , becomes The value of g , and hence your weight , decreases linearly as you descend down a hole to the center of the spherical planet .
At the center , you are weightless , as the mass of the planet pulls equally in all directions .
Actually , Earth ’ s density is not constant , nor is Earth solid throughout .
shows the profile of g if Earth had constant density and the more likely profile based upon estimates of density derived from seismic data .
The second interesting case concerns living on a spherical shell planet .
This scenario has been proposed in many science fiction stories .
Ignoring significant engineering issues , the shell could be constructed with a desired radius and total mass , such that g at the surface is the same as Earth ’ s .
Can you guess what happens once you descend in an elevator to the inside of the shell , where there is no mass between you and the center ?
What benefits would this provide for traveling great distances from one point on the sphere to another ?
And finally , what effect would there be if the planet was spinning ?
We studied gravitational potential energy in , where the value of g remained constant .
We now develop an expression that works over distances such that g is not constant .
This is necessary to correctly calculate the energy needed to place satellites in orbit or to send them on missions in space .
We defined work and potential energy in and .
The usefulness of those definitions is the ease with which we can solve many problems using conservation of energy .
Potential energy is particularly useful for forces that change with position , as the gravitational force does over large distances .
In , we showed that the change in gravitational potential energy near Earth ’ s surface is .
This works very well if g does not change significantly between and .
We return to the definition of work and potential energy to derive an expression that is correct over larger distances .
Recall that work ( W ) is the integral of the dot product between force and distance .
Essentially , it is the product of the component of a force along a displacement times that displacement .
We define as the negative of the work done by the force we associate with the potential energy .
For clarity , we derive an expression for moving a mass m from distance from the center of Earth to distance .
However , the result can easily be generalized to any two objects changing their separation from one value to another .
Consider , in which we take m from a distance from Earth ’ s center to a distance that is from the center .
Gravity is a conservative force ( its magnitude and direction are functions of location only ) , so we can take any path we wish , and the result for the calculation of work is the same .
We take the path shown , as it greatly simplifies the integration .
We first move radially outward from distance to distance , and then move along the arc of a circle until we reach the final position .
During the radial portion , is opposite to the direction we travel along , so Along the arc , is perpendicular to , so .
No work is done as we move along the arc .
Using the expression for the gravitational force and noting the values for along the two segments of our path , we have Since , we can adopt a simple expression for : Note two important items with this definition .
The potential energy is zero when the two masses are infinitely far apart .
Only the difference in U is important , so the choice of is merely one of convenience .
( Recall that in earlier gravity problems , you were free to take at the top or bottom of a building , or anywhere . )
Second , note that U becomes increasingly more negative as the masses get closer .
That is consistent with what you learned about potential energy in .
As the two masses are separated , positive work must be done against the force of gravity , and hence , U increases ( becomes less negative ) .
All masses naturally fall together under the influence of gravity , falling from a higher to a lower potential energy .
How much energy is required to lift the 9000-kg Soyuz vehicle from Earth ’ s surface to the height of the ISS , 400 km above the surface ?
Use to find the change in potential energy of the payload .
That amount of work or energy must be supplied to lift the payload .
Paying attention to the fact that we start at Earth ’ s surface and end at 400 km above the surface , the change in U is We insert the values and convert 400 km into .
It is positive , indicating an increase in potential energy , as we would expect .
For perspective , consider that the average US household energy use in 2013 was 909 kWh per month .
That is energy of So our result is an energy expenditure equivalent to 10 months .
But this is just the energy needed to raise the payload 400 km .
If we want the Soyuz to be in orbit so it can rendezvous with the ISS and not just fall back to Earth , it needs a lot of kinetic energy .
As we see in the next section , that kinetic energy is about five times that of .
In addition , far more energy is expended lifting the propulsion system itself .
Space travel is not cheap .
Check Your Understanding Why not use the simpler expression ?
How significant would the error be ?
( Recall the previous result , in , that the value g at 400 km above the Earth is . )
In , we described how to apply conservation of energy for systems with conservative forces .
We were able to solve many problems , particularly those involving gravity , more simply using conservation of energy .
Those principles and problem-solving strategies apply equally well here .
The only change is to place the new expression for potential energy into the conservation of energy equation , .
Note that we use M , rather than , as a reminder that we are not restricted to problems involving Earth .
However , we still assume that .
( For problems in which this is not true , we need to include the kinetic energy of both masses and use conservation of momentum to relate the velocities to each other .
But the principle remains the same . )
Escape velocity is often defined to be the minimum initial velocity of an object that is required to escape the surface of a planet ( or any large body like a moon ) and never return .
As usual , we assume no energy lost to an atmosphere , should there be any .
Consider the case where an object is launched from the surface of a planet with an initial velocity directed away from the planet .
With the minimum velocity needed to escape , the object would just come to rest infinitely far away , that is , the object gives up the last of its kinetic energy just as it reaches infinity , where the force of gravity becomes zero .
Since , this means the total energy is zero .
Thus , we find the escape velocity from the surface of an astronomical body of mass M and radius R by setting the total energy equal to zero .
At the surface of the body , the object is located at and it has escape velocity .
It reaches with velocity .
Substituting into , we have Solving for the escape velocity , Notice that m has canceled out of the equation .
The escape velocity is the same for all objects , regardless of mass .
Also , we are not restricted to the surface of the planet ; R can be any starting point beyond the surface of the planet .
What is the escape speed from the surface of Earth ?
Assume there is no energy loss from air resistance .
Compare this to the escape speed from the Sun , starting from Earth ’ s orbit .
We use , clearly defining the values of R and M .
To escape Earth , we need the mass and radius of Earth .
For escaping the Sun , we need the mass of the Sun , and the orbital distance between Earth and the Sun .
Substituting the values for Earth ’ s mass and radius directly into , we obtain That is about 11 km/s or 25,000 mph .
To escape the Sun , starting from Earth ’ s orbit , we use and .
The result is or about 42 km/s .
The speed needed to escape the Sun ( leave the solar system ) is nearly four times the escape speed from Earth ’ s surface .
But there is help in both cases .
Earth is rotating , at a speed of nearly 1.7 km/s at the equator , and we can use that velocity to help escape , or to achieve orbit .
For this reason , many commercial space companies maintain launch facilities near the equator .
To escape the Sun , there is even more help .
Earth revolves about the Sun at a speed of approximately 30 km/s .
By launching in the direction that Earth is moving , we need only an additional 12 km/s .
The use of gravitational assist from other planets , essentially a gravity slingshot technique , allows space probes to reach even greater speeds .
In this slingshot technique , the vehicle approaches the planet and is accelerated by the planet ’ s gravitational attraction .
It has its greatest speed at the closest point of approach , although it decelerates in equal measure as it moves away .
But relative to the planet , the vehicle ’ s speed far before the approach , and long after , are the same .
If the directions are chosen correctly , that can result in a significant increase ( or decrease if needed ) in the vehicle ’ s speed relative to the rest of the solar system .
Visit this to learn more about escape velocity .
Check Your Understanding If we send a probe out of the solar system starting from Earth ’ s surface , do we only have to escape the Sun ?
As stated previously , escape velocity can be defined as the initial velocity of an object that can escape the surface of a moon or planet .
More generally , it is the speed at any position such that the total energy is zero .
If the total energy is zero or greater , the object escapes .
If the total energy is negative , the object can not escape .
Let ’ s see why that is the case .
As noted earlier , we see that .
If the total energy is zero , then as m reaches a value of r that approaches infinity , U becomes zero and so must the kinetic energy .
Hence , m comes to rest infinitely far away from M .
It has “ just escaped ” M .
If the total energy is positive , then kinetic energy remains at and certainly m does not return .
When the total energy is zero or greater , then we say that m is not gravitationally bound to M .
On the other hand , if the total energy is negative , then the kinetic energy must reach zero at some finite value of r , where U is negative and equal to the total energy .
The object can never exceed this finite distance from M , since to do so would require the kinetic energy to become negative , which is not possible .
We say m is gravitationally bound to M .
We have simplified this discussion by assuming that the object was headed directly away from the planet .
What is remarkable is that the result applies for any velocity .
Energy is a scalar quantity and hence is a scalar equation—the direction of the velocity plays no role in conservation of energy .
It is possible to have a gravitationally bound system where the masses do not “ fall together , ” but maintain an orbital motion about each other .
We have one important final observation .
Earlier we stated that if the total energy is zero or greater , the object escapes .
Strictly speaking , and apply for point objects .
They apply to finite-sized , spherically symmetric objects as well , provided that the value for r in is always greater than the sum of the radii of the two objects .
If r becomes less than this sum , then the objects collide .
( Even for greater values of r , but near the sum of the radii , gravitational tidal forces could create significant effects if both objects are planet sized .
We examine tidal effects in . )
Neither positive nor negative total energy precludes finite-sized masses from colliding .
For real objects , direction is important .
Let ’ s consider the preceding example again , where we calculated the escape speed from Earth and the Sun , starting from Earth ’ s orbit .
We noted that Earth already has an orbital speed of 30 km/s .
As we see in the next section , that is the tangential speed needed to stay in circular orbit .
If an object had this speed at the distance of Earth ’ s orbit , but was headed directly away from the Sun , how far would it travel before coming to rest ?
Ignore the gravitational effects of any other bodies .
The object has initial kinetic and potential energies that we can calculate .
When its speed reaches zero , it is at its maximum distance from the Sun .
We use , conservation of energy , to find the distance at which kinetic energy is zero .
The initial position of the object is Earth ’ s radius of orbit and the intial speed is given as 30 km/s .
The final velocity is zero , so we can solve for the distance at that point from the conservation of energy equation .
Using and , we have where the mass m cancels .
Solving for we get .
Note that this is twice the initial distance from the Sun and takes us past Mars ’ s orbit , but not quite to the asteroid belt .
The object in this case reached a distance exactly twice the initial orbital distance .
We will see the reason for this in the next section when we calculate the speed for circular orbits .
Check Your Understanding Assume you are in a spacecraft in orbit about the Sun at Earth ’ s orbit , but far away from Earth ( so that it can be ignored ) .
How could you redirect your tangential velocity to the radial direction such that you could then pass by Mars ’ s orbit ?
What would be required to change just the direction of the velocity ?
The Moon orbits Earth .
In turn , Earth and the other planets orbit the Sun .
The space directly above our atmosphere is filled with artificial satellites in orbit .
We examine the simplest of these orbits , the circular orbit , to understand the relationship between the speed and period of planets and satellites in relation to their positions and the bodies that they orbit .
As noted at the beginning of this chapter , Nicolaus Copernicus first suggested that Earth and all other planets orbit the Sun in circles .
He further noted that orbital periods increased with distance from the Sun .
Later analysis by Kepler showed that these orbits are actually ellipses , but the orbits of most planets in the solar system are nearly circular .
Earth ’ s orbital distance from the Sun varies a mere 2 % .
The exception is the eccentric orbit of Mercury , whose orbital distance varies nearly 40 % .
Determining the orbital speed and orbital period of a satellite is much easier for circular orbits , so we make that assumption in the derivation that follows .
As we described in the previous section , an object with negative total energy is gravitationally bound and therefore is in orbit .
Our computation for the special case of circular orbits will confirm this .
We focus on objects orbiting Earth , but our results can be generalized for other cases .
Consider a satellite of mass m in a circular orbit about Earth at distance r from the center of Earth .
It has centripetal acceleration directed toward the center of Earth .
The value of g , the escape velocity , and orbital velocity depend only upon the distance from the center of the planet , and not upon the mass of the object being acted upon .
Notice the similarity in the equations for and .
The escape velocity is exactly times greater , about 40 % , than the orbital velocity .
This comparison was noted in , and it is true for a satellite at any radius .
To find the period of a circular orbit , we note that the satellite travels the circumference of the orbit in one period T .
Using the definition of speed , we have .
We substitute this into and rearrange to get We see in the next section that this represents Kepler ’ s third law for the case of circular orbits .
It also confirms Copernicus ’ s observation that the period of a planet increases with increasing distance from the Sun .
We need only replace with in .
We conclude this section by returning to our earlier discussion about astronauts in orbit appearing to be weightless , as if they were free-falling towards Earth .
In fact , they are in free fall .
Consider the trajectories shown in .
( This figure is based on a drawing by Newton in his Principia and also appeared earlier in . )
All the trajectories shown that hit the surface of Earth have less than orbital velocity .
The astronauts would accelerate toward Earth along the noncircular paths shown and feel weightless .
( Astronauts actually train for life in orbit by riding in airplanes that free fall for 30 seconds at a time . )
But with the correct orbital velocity , Earth ’ s surface curves away from them at exactly the same rate as they fall toward Earth .
Of course , staying the same distance from the surface is the point of a circular orbit .
We can summarize our discussion of orbiting satellites in the following Problem-Solving Strategy .
Determine whether the equations for speed , energy , or period are valid for the problem at hand .
If not , start with the first principles we used to derive those equations .
To start from first principles , draw a free-body diagram and apply Newton ’ s law of gravitation and Newton ’ s second law .
Along with the definitions for speed and energy , apply Newton ’ s second law of motion to the bodies of interest .
Determine the orbital speed and period for the International Space Station ( ISS ) .
Since the ISS orbits above Earth ’ s surface , the radius at which it orbits is .
We use and to find the orbital speed and period , respectively .
Using , the orbital velocity is which is about 17,000 mph .
Using , the period is which is just over 90 minutes .
The ISS is considered to be in low Earth orbit ( LEO ) .
Nearly all satellites are in LEO , including most weather satellites .
GPS satellites , at about 20,000 km , are considered medium Earth orbit .
The higher the orbit , the more energy is required to put it there and the more energy is needed to reach it for repairs .
Of particular interest are the satellites in geosynchronous orbit .
All fixed satellite dishes on the ground pointing toward the sky , such as TV reception dishes , are pointed toward geosynchronous satellites .
These satellites are placed at the exact distance , and just above the equator , such that their period of orbit is 1 day .
They remain in a fixed position relative to Earth ’ s surface .
Check Your Understanding By what factor must the radius change to reduce the orbital velocity of a satellite by one-half ?
By what factor would this change the period ?
Determine the mass of Earth from the orbit of the Moon .
We use , solve for , and substitute for the period and radius of the orbit .
The radius and period of the Moon ’ s orbit was measured with reasonable accuracy thousands of years ago .
From the astronomical data in , the period of the Moon is 27.3 days , and the average distance between the centers of Earth and the Moon is 384,000 km .
Solving for , Compare this to the value of that we obtained in , using the value of g at the surface of Earth .
Although these values are very close ( ~0.8 % ) , both calculations use average values .
The value of g varies from the equator to the poles by approximately 0.5 % .
But the Moon has an elliptical orbit in which the value of r varies just over 10 % .
( The apparent size of the full Moon actually varies by about this amount , but it is difficult to notice through casual observation as the time from one extreme to the other is many months . )
Check Your Understanding There is another consideration to this last calculation of .
We derived assuming that the satellite orbits around the center of the astronomical body at the same radius used in the expression for the gravitational force between them .
What assumption is made to justify this ?
Earth is about 81 times more massive than the Moon .
Does the Moon orbit about the exact center of Earth ?
Let ’ s revisit .
Assume that the Milky Way and Andromeda galaxies are in a circular orbit about each other .
What would be the velocity of each and how long would their orbital period be ?
Assume the mass of each is 800 billion solar masses and their centers are separated by 2.5 million light years .
We can not use and directly because they were derived assuming that the object of mass m orbited about the center of a much larger planet of mass M .
We determined the gravitational force in using Newton ’ s law of universal gravitation .
We can use Newton ’ s second law , applied to the centripetal acceleration of either galaxy , to determine their tangential speed .
From that result we can determine the period of the orbit .
In , we found the force between the galaxies to be and that the acceleration of each galaxy is Since the galaxies are in a circular orbit , they have centripetal acceleration .
If we ignore the effect of other galaxies , then , as we learned in and , the centers of mass of the two galaxies remain fixed .
Hence , the galaxies must orbit about this common center of mass .
For equal masses , the center of mass is exactly half way between them .
So the radius of the orbit , , is not the same as the distance between the galaxies , but one-half that value , or 1.25 million light-years .
These two different values are shown in .
Using the expression for centripetal acceleration , we have Solving for the orbit velocity , we have .
Finally , we can determine the period of the orbit directly from , to find that the period is , about 50 billion years .
The orbital speed of 47 km/s might seem high at first .
But this speed is comparable to the escape speed from the Sun , which we calculated in an earlier example .
To give even more perspective , this period is nearly four times longer than the time that the Universe has been in existence .
In fact , the present relative motion of these two galaxies is such that they are expected to collide in about 4 billion years .
Although the density of stars in each galaxy makes a direct collision of any two stars unlikely , such a collision will have a dramatic effect on the shape of the galaxies .
Examples of such collisions are well known in astronomy .
Check Your Understanding Galaxies are not single objects .
How does the gravitational force of one galaxy exerted on the “ closer ” stars of the other galaxy compare to those farther away ?
What effect would this have on the shape of the galaxies themselves ?
See the for more information on colliding galaxies .
In , we argued that objects are gravitationally bound if their total energy is negative .
The argument was based on the simple case where the velocity was directly away or toward the planet .
We now examine the total energy for a circular orbit and show that indeed , the total energy is negative .
As we did earlier , we start with Newton ’ s second law applied to a circular orbit , In the last step , we multiplied by r on each side .
For circular orbits , the magnitude of the kinetic energy is exactly one-half the magnitude of the potential energy .
Remarkably , this result applies to any two masses in circular orbits about their common center of mass , at a distance r from each other .
The proof of this is left as an exercise .
We will see in the next section that a very similar expression applies in the case of elliptical orbits .
In , we calculated the energy required to simply lift the 9000-kg Soyuz vehicle from Earth ’ s surface to the height of the ISS , 400 km above the surface .
In other words , we found its change in potential energy .
We now ask , what total energy change in the Soyuz vehicle is required to take it from Earth ’ s surface and put it in orbit with the ISS for a rendezvous ?
How much of that total energy is kinetic energy ?
The energy required is the difference in the Soyuz ’ s total energy in orbit and that at Earth ’ s surface .
We can use to find the total energy of the Soyuz at the ISS orbit .
But the total energy at the surface is simply the potential energy , since it starts from rest .
[ Note that we do not use at the surface , since we are not in orbit at the surface . ]
The kinetic energy can then be found from the difference in the total energy change and the change in potential energy found in .
Alternatively , we can use to find and calculate the kinetic energy directly from that .
The total energy required is then the kinetic energy plus the change in potential energy found in .
From , the total energy of the Soyuz in the same orbit as the ISS is The total energy at Earth ’ s surface is in energy potential from The change in energy is .
To get the kinetic energy , we subtract the change us .
As stated earlier , the kinetic energy of a circular orbit is always one-half the magnitude of the potential energy , and the same as the magnitude of the total energy .
Our result confirms this .
The second approach is to use to find the orbital speed of the Soyuz , which we did for the ISS in .
gives That So the kinetic energy of the Soyuz in orbit is the same as in the previous method .
The total energy is just The kinetic energy of the Soyuz is nearly eight times the change in its potential energy , or 90 % of the total energy needed for the rendezvous with the ISS .
And it is important to remember that this energy represents only the energy that must be given to the Soyuz .
With our present rocket technology , the mass of the propulsion system ( the rocket fuel , its container and combustion system ) far exceeds that of the payload , and a tremendous amount of kinetic energy must be given to that mass .
So the actual cost in energy is many times that of the change in energy of the payload itself .
Using the precise data collected by Tycho Brahe , Johannes Kepler carefully analyzed the positions in the sky of all the known planets and the Moon , plotting their positions at regular intervals of time .
From this analysis , he formulated three laws , which we address in this section .
The prevailing view during the time of Kepler was that all planetary orbits were circular .
The data for Mars presented the greatest challenge to this view and that eventually encouraged Kepler to give up the popular idea .
Kepler ’ s first law states that every planet moves along an ellipse , with the Sun located at a focus of the ellipse .
An ellipse is defined as the set of all points such that the sum of the distance from each point to two foci is a constant .
shows an ellipse and describes a simple way to create it .
For elliptical orbits , the point of closest approach of a planet to the Sun is called the perihelion .
It is labeled point A in .
The farthest point is the aphelion and is labeled point B in the figure .
For the Moon ’ s orbit about Earth , those points are called the perigee and apogee , respectively .
An ellipse has several mathematical forms , but all are a specific case of the more general equation for conic sections .
There are four different conic sections , all given by the equation The variables r and are shown in in the case of an ellipse .
The constants and e are determined by the total energy and angular momentum of the satellite at a given point .
The constant e is called the eccentricity .
The values of and e determine which of the four conic sections represents the path of the satellite .
Every path taken by m is one of the four conic sections : a circle or an ellipse for bound or closed orbits , or a parabola or hyperbola for unbounded or open orbits .
These conic sections are shown in .
If the total energy is negative , then , and represents a bound or closed orbit of either an ellipse or a circle , where .
[ You can see from that for , , and hence the radius is constant . ]
For ellipses , the eccentricity is related to how oblong the ellipse appears .
A circle has zero eccentricity , whereas a very long , drawn-out ellipse has an eccentricity near one .
If the total energy is exactly zero , then and the path is a parabola .
Recall that a satellite with zero total energy has exactly the escape velocity .
( The parabola is formed only by slicing the cone parallel to the tangent line along the surface . )
Finally , if the total energy is positive , then and the path is a hyperbola .
These last two paths represent unbounded orbits , where m passes by M once and only once .
This situation has been observed for several comets that approach the Sun and then travel away , never to return .
We have confined ourselves to the case in which the smaller mass ( planet ) orbits a much larger , and hence stationary , mass ( Sun ) , but also applies to any two gravitationally interacting masses .
Each mass traces out the exact sameshaped conic section as the other .
That shape is determined by the total energy and angular momentum of the system , with the center of mass of the system located at the focus .
The ratio of the dimensions of the two paths is the inverse of the ratio of their masses .
the My Solar System page at You can see an animation of .
Choose the Sun and Planet preset option .
You can also view the more complicated multiple body problems as well .
You may find the actual path of the Moon quite surprising , yet is obeying Newton ’ s simple laws of motion .
two interacting objects at People have imagined traveling to the other planets of our solar system since they were discovered .
But how can we best do this ?
The most efficient method was discovered in 1925 by Walter Hohmann , inspired by a popular science fiction novel of that time .
The method is now called a Hohmann transfer .
For the case of traveling between two circular orbits , the transfer is along a “ transfer ” ellipse that perfectly intercepts those orbits at the aphelion and perihelion of the ellipse .
shows the case for a trip from Earth ’ s orbit to that of Mars .
As before , the Sun is at the focus of the ellipse .
For any ellipse , the semi-major axis is defined as one-half the sum of the perihelion and the aphelion .
In , the semi-major axis is the distance from the origin to either side of the ellipse along the x -axis , or just one-half the longest axis ( called the major axis ) .
Hence , to travel from one circular orbit of radius to another circular orbit of radius , the aphelion of the transfer ellipse will be equal to the value of the larger orbit , while the perihelion will be the smaller orbit .
The semi-major axis , denoted a , is therefore given by .
Let ’ s take the case of traveling from Earth to Mars .
For the moment , we ignore the planets and assume we are alone in Earth ’ s orbit and wish to move to Mars ’ orbit .
From , the expression for total energy , we can see that the total energy for a spacecraft in the larger orbit ( Mars ) is greater ( less negative ) than that for the smaller orbit ( Earth ) .
To move onto the transfer ellipse from Earth ’ s orbit , we will need to increase our kinetic energy , that is , we need a velocity boost .
The most efficient method is a very quick acceleration along the circular orbital path , which is also along the path of the ellipse at that point .
( In fact , the acceleration should be instantaneous , such that the circular and elliptical orbits are congruent during the acceleration .
In practice , the finite acceleration is short enough that the difference is not a significant consideration . )
Once you have arrived at Mars orbit , you will need another velocity boost to move into that orbit , or you will stay on the elliptical orbit and simply fall back to perihelion where you started .
For the return trip , you simply reverse the process with a retro-boost at each transfer point .
To make the move onto the transfer ellipse and then off again , we need to know each circular orbit velocity and the transfer orbit velocities at perihelion and aphelion .
The velocity boost required is simply the difference between the circular orbit velocity and the elliptical orbit velocity at each point .
We can find the circular orbital velocities from .
To determine the velocities for the ellipse , we state without proof ( as it is beyond the scope of this course ) that total energy for an elliptical orbit is where is the mass of the Sun and a is the semi-major axis .
Remarkably , this is the same as for circular orbits , but with the value of the semi-major axis replacing the orbital radius .
Since we know the potential energy from , we can find the kinetic energy and hence the velocity needed for each point on the ellipse .
We leave it as a challenge problem to find those transfer velocities for an Earth-to-Mars trip .
We end this discussion by pointing out a few important details .
First , we have not accounted for the gravitational potential energy due to Earth and Mars , or the mechanics of landing on Mars .
In practice , that must be part of the calculations .
Second , timing is everything .
You do not want to arrive at the orbit of Mars to find out it isn ’ t there .
We must leave Earth at precisely the correct time such that Mars will be at the aphelion of our transfer ellipse just as we arrive .
That opportunity comes about every 2 years .
And returning requires correct timing as well .
The total trip would take just under 3 years !
There are other options that provide for a faster transit , including a gravity assist flyby of Venus .
But these other options come with an additional cost in energy and danger to the astronauts .
Visit this for more details about planning a trip to Mars .
Kepler ’ s second law states that a planet sweeps out equal areas in equal times , that is , the area divided by time , called the areal velocity , is constant .
The time it takes a planet to move from position A to B , sweeping out area , is exactly the time taken to move from position C to D , sweeping area , and to move from E to F , sweeping out area .
These areas are the same : .
This behavior is completely consistent with our conservation equation , .
But we will show that Kepler ’ s second law is actually a consequence of the conservation of angular momentum , which holds for any system with only radial forces .
Recall the definition of angular momentum from , .
For the case of orbiting along the line to the Sun , and a .
The cross product for angular momentum can then be written as motion , is the angular momentum of the planet about the Sun , is the position vector of the planet measured from the Sun , and is the instantaneous linear momentum at any point in the orbit .
Since the planet moves along the ellipse , is always tangent to the ellipse .
We can resolve the linear momentum into two components : a radial component component perpendicular to , and in the second term is perpendicular to The first term on the right is zero because , so the magnitude of the cross product reduces to .
Note that the angular momentum does not depend upon .
Since the gravitational force is only in the radial direction , it can change only and not ; hence , the angular momentum must remain constant .
A small triangular area is swept out in time .
The velocity is along the path and it makes an angle with the radial direction .
Hence , the perpendicular velocity is given by .
The planet moves a distance projected along the direction perpendicular to r .
Since the area of a triangle is one-half the base ( r ) times the height , for a small displacement , the area is given by .
Substituting for , multiplying by m in the numerator and denominator , and rearranging , we obtain is parallel to .
The areal velocity is simply the rate of change of area with time , so we have Since the angular momentum is constant , the areal velocity must also be constant .
This is exactly Kepler ’ s second law .
As with Kepler ’ s first law , Newton showed it was a natural consequence of his law of gravitation .
You can view an of , and many other interesting animations as well , at the School of Physics ( University of New South Wales ) site .
Kepler ’ s third law states that the square of the period is proportional to the cube of the semi-major axis of the orbit .
In , we derived Kepler ’ s third law for the special case of a circular orbit .
gives us the period of a circular orbit of radius r about Earth : For an ellipse , recall that the semi-major axis is one-half the sum of the perihelion and the aphelion .
For a circular orbit , the semi-major axis ( a ) is the same as the radius for the orbit .
In fact , gives us Kepler ’ s third law if we simply replace r with a and square both sides .
We have changed the mass of Earth to the more general M , since this equation applies to satellites orbiting any large mass .
Determine the semi-major axis of the orbit of Halley ’ s comet , given that it arrives at perihelion every 75.3 years .
If the perihelion is 0.586 AU , what is the aphelion ?
We are given the period , so we can rearrange , solving for the semi-major axis .
Since we know the value for the perihelion , we can use the definition of the semi-major axis , given earlier in this section , to find the aphelion .
We note that 1 Astronomical Unit ( AU ) is the average radius of Earth ’ s orbit and is defined to be .
Rearranging and inserting the values of the period of Halley ’ s comet and the mass of the Sun , we have This yields a value of or 17.8 AU for the semi-major axis .
The semi-major axis is one-half the sum of the aphelion and perihelion , so we have Substituting for the values , we found for the semi-major axis and the value given for the perihelion , we find the value of the aphelion to be 35.0 AU .
Edmond Halley , a contemporary of Newton , first suspected that three comets , reported in 1531 , 1607 , and 1682 , were actually the same comet .
Before Tycho Brahe made measurements of comets , it was believed that they were one-time events , perhaps disturbances in the atmosphere , and that they were not affected by the Sun .
Halley used Newton ’ s new mechanics to predict his namesake comet ’ s return in 1758 .
Check Your Understanding The nearly circular orbit of Saturn has an average radius of about 9.5 AU and has a period of 30 years , whereas Uranus averages about 19 AU and has a period of 84 years .
Is this consistent with our results for Halley ’ s comet ?
The origin of Earth ’ s ocean tides has been a subject of continuous investigation for over 2000 years .
But the work of Newton is considered to be the beginning of the true understanding of the phenomenon .
Ocean tides are the result of gravitational tidal forces .
These same tidal forces are present in any astronomical body .
They are responsible for the internal heat that creates the volcanic activity on Io , one of Jupiter ’ s moons , and the breakup of stars that get too close to black holes .
If you live on an ocean shore almost anywhere in the world , you can observe the rising and falling of the sea level about twice per day .
This is caused by a combination of Earth ’ s rotation about its axis and the gravitational attraction of both the Moon and the Sun .
Let ’ s consider the effect of the Moon first .
In , we are looking “ down ” onto Earth ’ s North Pole .
One side of Earth is closer to the Moon than the other side , by a distance equal to Earth ’ s diameter .
Hence , the gravitational force is greater on the near side than on the far side .
The magnitude at the center of Earth is between these values .
This is why a tidal bulge appears on both sides of Earth .
The net force on Earth causes it to orbit about the Earth-Moon center of mass , located about 1600 km below Earth ’ s surface along the line between Earth and the Moon .
The tidal force can be viewed as the difference between the force at the center of Earth and that at any other location .
In , this difference is shown at sea level , where we observe the ocean tides .
( Note that the change in sea level caused by these tidal forces is measured from the baseline sea level .
We saw earlier that Earth bulges many kilometers at the equator due to its rotation .
This defines the baseline sea level and here we consider only the much smaller tidal bulge measured from that baseline sea level . )
Why does the rise and fall of the tides occur twice per day ?
Look again at .
If Earth were not rotating and the Moon was fixed , then the bulges would remain in the same location on Earth .
Relative to the Moon , the bulges stay fixed—along the line connecting Earth and the Moon .
But Earth rotates ( in the direction shown by the blue arrow ) approximately every 24 hours .
In 6 hours , the near and far locations of Earth move to where the low tides are occurring , and 6 hours later , those locations are back to the high-tide position .
Since the Moon also orbits Earth approximately every 28 days , and in the same direction as Earth rotates , the time between high ( and low ) tides is actually about 12.5 hours .
The actual timing of the tides is complicated by numerous factors , the most important of which is another astronomical body—the Sun .
In addition to the Moon ’ s tidal forces on Earth ’ s oceans , the Sun exerts a tidal force as well .
The gravitational attraction of the Sun on any object on Earth is nearly 200 times that of the Moon .
However , as we show later in an example , the tidal effect of the Sun is less than that of the Moon , but a significant effect nevertheless .
Depending upon the positions of the Moon and Sun relative to Earth , the net tidal effect can be amplified or attenuated .
illustrates the relative positions of the Sun and the Moon that create the largest tides , called spring tides ( or leap tides ) .
During spring tides , Earth , the Moon , and the Sun are aligned and the tidal effects add .
( Recall that the tidal forces cause bulges on both sides . )
( c ) shows the relative positions for the smallest tides , called neap tides .
The extremes of both high and low tides are affected .
Spring tides occur during the new or full moon , and neap tides occur at half-moon .
You can see or animations of the tides in motion .
With accurate data for the positions of the Moon and the Sun , the time of maximum and minimum tides at most locations on our planet can be predicted accurately .
Visit to generate tide predictions for up to 2 years in the past or future , at more than 3000 locations around the United States .
The magnitude of the tides , however , is far more complicated .
The relative angles of Earth and the Moon determine spring and neap tides , but the magnitudes of these tides are affected by the distances from Earth as well .
Tidal forces are greater when the distances are smaller .
Both the Moon ’ s orbit about Earth and Earth ’ s orbit about the Sun are elliptical , so a spring tide is exceptionally large if it occurs when the Moon is at perigee and Earth is at perihelion .
Conversely , it is relatively small if it occurs when the Moon is at apogee and Earth is at aphelion .
The greatest causes of tide variation are the topography of the local shoreline and the bathymetry ( the profile of the depth ) of the ocean floor .
The range of tides due to these effects is astounding .
Although ocean tides are much smaller than a meter in many places around the globe , the tides at the Bay of Fundy , on the east coast of Canada , can be as much as 16.3 meters .
Compare the Moon ’ s gravitational force on a 1.0-kg mass located on the near side and another on the far side of Earth .
Repeat for the Sun and then compare the results to confirm that the Moon ’ s tidal forces are about twice that of the Sun .
We use Newton ’ s law of gravitation given by .
We need the masses of the Moon and the Sun and their distances from Earth , as well as the radius of Earth .
We use the astronomical data from .
Substituting the mass of the Moon and mean distance from Earth to the Moon , we have In the denominator , we use the minus sign for the near side and the plus sign for the far side .
The results are The Moon ’ s gravitational force is nearly 7 % higher at the near side of Earth than at the far side , but both forces are much less than that of Earth itself on the 1.0-kg mass .
Nevertheless , this small difference creates the tides .
We now repeat the problem , but substitute the mass of the Sun and the mean distance between the Earth and Sun .
The results are We have to keep six significant digits since we wish to compare the difference between them to the difference for the Moon .
( Although we can ’ t justify the absolute value to this accuracy , since all values in the calculation are the same except the distances , the accuracy in the difference is still valid to three digits . )
With just a bit of algebra we can show that where and are the same to three significant digits , but their difference , equal to the diameter of Earth , is also known to three significant digits .
The results of the calculation are the same .
This approach would be necessary if the number of significant digits needed exceeds that available on your calculator or computer .
Note that the forces exerted by the Sun are nearly 200 times greater than the forces exerted by the Moon .
But the difference in those forces for the Sun is half that for the Moon .
This is the nature of tidal forces .
The Moon has a greater tidal effect because the fractional change in distance from the near side to the far side is so much greater for the Moon than it is for the Sun .
Check Your Understanding Earth exerts a tidal force on the Moon .
Is it greater than , the same as , or less than that of the Moon on Earth ?
Be careful in your response , as tidal forces arise from the difference in gravitational forces between one side and the other .
Look at the calculations we performed for the tidal force on Earth and consider the values that would change significantly for the Moon .
The diameter of the Moon is onefourth that of Earth .
Tidal forces on the Moon are not easy to detect , since there is no liquid on the surface .
Tidal forces exist between any two bodies .
The effect stretches the bodies along the line between their centers .
Although the tidal effect on Earth ’ s seas is observable on a daily basis , long-term consequences can not be observed so easily .
One consequence is the dissipation of rotational energy due to friction during flexure of the bodies themselves .
Earth ’ s rotation rate is slowing down as the tidal forces transfer rotational energy into heat .
The other effect , related to this dissipation and conservation of angular momentum , is called “ locking ” or tidal synchronization .
It has already happened to most moons in our solar system , including Earth ’ s Moon .
The Moon keeps one face toward Earth—its rotation rate has locked into the orbital rate about Earth .
The same process is happening to Earth , and eventually it will keep one face toward the Moon .
If that does happen , we would no longer see tides , as the tidal bulge would remain in the same place on Earth , and half the planet would never see the Moon .
However , this locking will take many billions of years , perhaps not before our Sun expires .
One of the more dramatic example of tidal effects is found on Io , one of Jupiter ’ s moons .
In 1979 , the Voyager spacecraft sent back dramatic images of volcanic activity on Io .
It is the only other astronomical body in our solar system on which we have found such activity .
shows a more recent picture of Io taken by the New Horizons spacecraft on its way to Pluto , while using a gravity assist from Jupiter .
For some stars , the effect of tidal forces can be catastrophic .
The tidal forces in very close binary systems can be strong enough to rip matter from one star to the other , once the tidal forces exceed the cohesive self-gravitational forces that hold the stars together .
This effect can be seen in normal stars that orbit nearby compact stars , such as neutron stars or black holes .
shows an artist ’ s rendition of this process .
As matter falls into the compact star , it forms an accretion disc that becomes super-heated and radiates in the X-ray spectrum .
The energy output of these binary systems can exceed the typical output of thousands of stars .
Another example might be a quasar .
Quasars are very distant and immensely bright objects , often exceeding the energy output of entire galaxies .
It is the general consensus among astronomers that they are , in fact , massive black holes producing radiant energy as matter that has been tidally ripped from nearby stars falls into them .
Newton ’ s law of universal gravitation accurately predicts much of what we see within our solar system .
Indeed , only Newton ’ s laws have been needed to accurately send every space vehicle on its journey .
The paths of Earth-crossing asteroids , and most other celestial objects , can be accurately determined solely with Newton ’ s laws .
Nevertheless , many phenomena have shown a discrepancy from what Newton ’ s laws predict , including the orbit of Mercury and the effect that gravity has on light .
In this section , we examine a different way of envisioning gravitation .
In 1905 , Albert Einstein published his theory of special relativity .
This theory is discussed in great detail in , so we say only a few words here .
In this theory , no motion can exceed the speed of light—it is the speed limit of the Universe .
This simple fact has been verified in countless experiments .
However , it has incredible consequences—space and time are no longer absolute .
Two people moving relative to one another do not agree on the length of objects or the passage of time .
Almost all of the mechanics you learned in previous chapters , while remarkably accurate even for speeds of many thousands of miles per second , begin to fail when approaching the speed of light .
This speed limit on the Universe was also a challenge to the inherent assumption in Newton ’ s law of gravitation that gravity is an action-at-a-distance force .
That is , without physical contact , any change in the position of one mass is instantly communicated to all other masses .
This assumption does not come from any first principle , as Newton ’ s theory simply does not address the question .
( The same was believed of electromagnetic forces , as well .
It is fair to say that most scientists were not completely comfortable with the action-at-a-distance concept . )
A second assumption also appears in Newton ’ s law of gravitation .
The masses are assumed to be exactly the same as those used in Newton ’ s second law , .
We made that assumption in many of our derivations in this chapter .
Again , there is no underlying principle that this must be , but experimental results are consistent with this assumption .
In Einstein ’ s subsequent theory of general relativity ( 1916 ) , both of these issues were addressed .
His theory was a theory of space-time geometry and how mass ( and acceleration ) distort and interact with that space-time .
It was not a theory of gravitational forces .
The mathematics of the general theory is beyond the scope of this text , but we can look at some underlying principles and their consequences .
Einstein came to his general theory in part by wondering why someone who was free falling did not feel his or her weight .
Indeed , it is common to speak of astronauts orbiting Earth as being weightless , despite the fact that Earth ’ s gravity is still quite strong there .
In Einstein ’ s general theory , there is no difference between free fall and being weightless .
This is called the principle of equivalence .
The equally surprising corollary to this is that there is no difference between a uniform gravitational field and a uniform acceleration in the absence of gravity .
Let ’ s focus on this last statement .
Although a perfectly uniform gravitational field is not feasible , we can approximate it very well .
Within a reasonably sized laboratory on Earth , the gravitational field is essentially uniform .
The corollary states that any physical experiments performed there have the identical results as those done in a laboratory accelerating at in deep space , well away from all other masses .
illustrates the concept .
How can these two apparently fundamentally different situations be the same ?
The answer is that gravitation is not a force between two objects but is the result of each object responding to the effect that the other has on the space-time surrounding it .
A uniform gravitational field and a uniform acceleration have exactly the same effect on space-time .
Euclidian geometry assumes a “ flat ” space in which , among the most commonly known attributes , a straight line is the shortest distance between two points , the sum of the angles of all triangles must be 180 degrees , and parallel lines never intersect .
Non-Euclidean geometry was not seriously investigated until the nineteenth century , so it is not surprising that Euclidean space is inherently assumed in all of Newton ’ s laws .
The general theory of relativity challenges this long-held assumption .
Only empty space is flat .
The presence of mass—or energy , since relativity does not distinguish between the two—distorts or curves space and time , or space-time , around it .
The motion of any other mass is simply a response to this curved space-time .
is a two-dimensional representation of a smaller mass orbiting in response to the distorted space created by the presence of a larger mass .
In a more precise but confusing picture , we would also see space distorted by the orbiting mass , and both masses would be in motion in response to the total distortion of space .
Note that the figure is a representation to help visualize the concept .
These are distortions in our three-dimensional space and time .
We do not see them as we would a dimple on a ball .
We see the distortion only by careful measurements of the motion of objects and light as they move through space .
For weak gravitational fields , the results of general relativity do not differ significantly from Newton ’ s law of gravitation .
But for intense gravitational fields , the results diverge , and general relativity has been shown to predict the correct results .
Even in our Sun ’ s relatively weak gravitational field at the distance of Mercury ’ s orbit , we can observe the effect .
Starting in the mid-1800s , Mercury ’ s elliptical orbit has been carefully measured .
However , although it is elliptical , its motion is complicated by the fact that the perihelion position of the ellipse slowly advances .
Most of the advance is due to the gravitational pull of other planets , but a small portion of that advancement could not be accounted for by Newton ’ s law .
At one time , there was even a search for a “ companion ” planet that would explain the discrepancy .
But general relativity correctly predicts the measurements .
Since then , many measurements , such as the deflection of light of distant objects by the Sun , have verified that general relativity correctly predicts the observations .
We close this discussion with one final comment .
We have often referred to distortions of space-time or distortions in both space and time .
In both special and general relativity , the dimension of time has equal footing with each spatial dimension ( differing in its place in both theories only by an ultimately unimportant scaling factor ) .
Near a very large mass , not only is the nearby space “ stretched out , ” but time is dilated or “ slowed. ” We discuss these effects more in the next section .
Einstein ’ s theory of gravitation is expressed in one deceptively simple-looking tensor equation ( tensors are a generalization of scalars and vectors ) , which expresses how a mass determines the curvature of space-time around it .
The solutions to that equation yield one of the most fascinating predictions : the black hole .
The prediction is that if an object is sufficiently dense , it will collapse in upon itself and be surrounded by an event horizon from which nothing can escape .
The name “ black hole , ” which was coined by astronomer John Wheeler in 1969 , refers to the fact that light can not escape such an object .
Karl Schwarzschild was the first person to note this phenomenon in 1916 , but at that time , it was considered mostly to be a mathematical curiosity .
Surprisingly , the idea of a massive body from which light can not escape dates back to the late 1700s .
Independently , John Michell and Pierre Simon Laplace used Newton ’ s law of gravitation to show that light leaving the surface of a star with enough mass could not escape .
Their work was based on the fact that the speed of light had been measured by Ole Roemer in 1676 .
He noted discrepancies in the data for the orbital period of the moon Io about Jupiter .
Roemer realized that the difference arose from the relative positions of Earth and Jupiter at different times and that he could find the speed of light from that difference .
Michell and Laplace both realized that since light had a finite speed , there could be a star massive enough that the escape speed from its surface could exceed that speed .
Hence , light always would fall back to the star .
Oddly , observers far enough away from the very largest stars would not be able see them , yet they could see a smaller star from the same distance .
Recall that in , we found that the escape speed , given by , is independent of the mass of the object escaping .
Even though the nature of light was not fully understood at the time , the mass of light , if it had any , was not relevant .
Hence , should be valid for light .
Substituting c , the speed of light , for the escape velocity , we have Thus , we only need values for R and M such that the escape velocity exceeds c , and then light will not be able to escape .
Michell posited that if a star had the density of our Sun and a radius that extended just beyond the orbit of Mars , then light would not be able to escape from its surface .
He also conjectured that we would still be able to detect such a star from the gravitational effect it would have on objects around it .
This was an insightful conclusion , as this is precisely how we infer the existence of such objects today .
While we have yet to , and may never , visit a black hole , the circumstantial evidence for them has become so compelling that few astronomers doubt their existence .
Before we examine some of that evidence , we turn our attention back to Schwarzschild ’ s solution to the tensor equation from general relativity .
In that solution arises a critical radius , now called the Schwarzschild radius .
For any mass M , if that mass were compressed to the extent that its radius becomes less than the Schwarzschild radius , then the mass will collapse to a singularity , and anything that passes inside that radius can not escape .
Once inside , the arrow of time takes all things to the singularity .
( In a broad mathematical sense , a singularity is where the value of a function goes to infinity .
In this case , it is a point in space of zero volume with a finite mass .
Hence , the mass density and gravitational energy become infinite . )
The Schwarzschild radius is given by If you look at our escape velocity equation with , you will notice that it gives precisely this result .
But that is merely a fortuitous accident caused by several incorrect assumptions .
One of these assumptions is the use of the incorrect classical expression for the kinetic energy for light .
Just how dense does an object have to be in order to turn into a black hole ?
Calculate the Schwarzschild radius for both the Sun and Earth .
Compare the density of the nucleus of an atom to the density required to compress Earth ’ s mass uniformly to its Schwarzschild radius .
The density of a nucleus is about .
We use for this calculation .
We need only the masses of Earth and the Sun , which we obtain from the astronomical data given in .
Substituting the mass of the Sun , we have This is a diameter of only about 6 km .
If we use the mass of Earth , we get .
This is a diameter of less than 2 cm !
If we pack Earth ’ s mass into a sphere with the radius , we get a density of A neutron star is the most compact object known—outside of a black hole itself .
The neutron star is composed of neutrons , with the density of an atomic nucleus , and , like many black holes , is believed to be the remnant of a supernova—a star that explodes at the end of its lifetime .
To create a black hole from Earth , we would have to compress it to a density thirteen orders of magnitude greater than that of a neutron star .
This process would require unimaginable force .
There is no known mechanism that could cause an Earth-sized object to become a black hole .
For the Sun , you should be able to show that it would have to be compressed to a density only about 80 times that of a nucleus .
( Note : Once the mass is compressed within its Schwarzschild radius , general relativity dictates that it will collapse to a singularity .
These calculations merely show the density we must achieve to initiate that collapse . )
Check Your Understanding Consider the density required to make Earth a black hole compared to that required for the Sun .
What conclusion can you draw from this comparison about what would be required to create a black hole ?
Would you expect the Universe to have many black holes with small mass ?
The Schwarzschild radius is also called the event horizon of a black hole .
We noted that both space and time are stretched near massive objects , such as black holes .
illustrates that effect on space .
The distortion caused by our Sun is actually quite small , and the diagram is exaggerated for clarity .
Consider the neutron star , described in .
Although the distortion of space-time at the surface of a neutron star is very high , the radius is still larger than its Schwarzschild radius .
Objects could still escape from its surface .
However , if a neutron star gains additional mass , it would eventually collapse , shrinking beyond the Schwarzschild radius .
Once that happens , the entire mass would be pulled , inevitably , to a singularity .
In the diagram , space is stretched to infinity .
Time is also stretched to infinity .
As objects fall toward the event horizon , we see them approaching ever more slowly , but never reaching the event horizon .
As outside observers , we never see objects pass through the event horizon—effectively , time is stretched to a stop .
Visit this to view an animated example of these spatial distortions .
Not until the 1960s , when the first neutron star was discovered , did interest in the existence of black holes become renewed .
Evidence for black holes is based upon several types of observations , such as radiation analysis of X-ray binaries , gravitational lensing of the light from distant galaxies , and the motion of visible objects around invisible partners .
We will focus on these later observations as they relate to what we have learned in this chapter .
Although light can not escape from a black hole for us to see , we can nevertheless see the gravitational effect of the black hole on surrounding masses .
The closest , and perhaps most dramatic , evidence for a black hole is at the center of our Milky Way galaxy .
The UCLA Galactic Group , using data obtained by the W. M. Keck telescopes , has determined the orbits of several stars near the center of our galaxy .
Some of that data is shown in .
The orbits of two stars are highlighted .
From measurements of the periods and sizes of their orbits , it is estimated that they are orbiting a mass of approximately 4 million solar masses .
Note that the mass must reside in the region created by the intersection of the ellipses of the stars .
The region in which that mass must reside would fit inside the orbit of Mercury—yet nothing is seen there in the visible spectrum .
The physics of stellar creation and evolution is well established .
The ultimate source of energy that makes stars shine is the self-gravitational energy that triggers fusion .
The general behavior is that the more massive a star , the brighter it shines and the shorter it lives .
The logical inference is that a mass that is 4 million times the mass of our Sun , confined to a very small region , and that can not be seen , has no viable interpretation other than a black hole .
Extragalactic observations strongly suggest that black holes are common at the center of galaxies .
Visit the for information on X-ray binaries and gravitational lensing .
Visit this to view a three-dimensional visualization of the stars orbiting near the center of our galaxy , where the animation is near the bottom of the page .
Stars orbiting near the very heart of our galaxy provide strong evidence for a black hole there , but the orbits of stars far from the center suggest another intriguing phenomenon that is observed indirectly as well .
Recall from that we can consider the mass for spherical objects to be located at a point at the center for calculating their gravitational effects on other masses .
Similarly , we can treat the total mass that lies within the orbit of any star in our galaxy as being located at the center of the Milky Way disc .
We can estimate that mass from counting the visible stars and include in our estimate the mass of the black hole at the center as well .
But when we do that , we find the orbital speed of the stars is far too fast to be caused by that amount of matter .
shows the orbital velocities of stars as a function of their distance from the center of the Milky Way .
The blue line represents the velocities we would expect from our estimates of the mass , whereas the green curve is what we get from direct measurements .
Apparently , there is a lot of matter we don ’ t see , estimated to be about five times as much as what we do see , so it has been dubbed dark matter .
Furthermore , the velocity profile does not follow what we expect from the observed distribution of visible stars .
Not only is the estimate of the total mass inconsistent with the data , but the expected distribution is inconsistent as well .
And this phenomenon is not restricted to our galaxy , but seems to be a feature of all galaxies .
In fact , the issue was first noted in the 1930s when galaxies within clusters were measured to be orbiting about the center of mass of those clusters faster than they should based upon visible mass estimates .
There are two prevailing ideas of what this matter could be—WIMPs and MACHOs .
WIMPs stands for weakly interacting massive particles .
These particles ( neutrinos are one example ) interact very weakly with ordinary matter and , hence , are very difficult to detect directly .
MACHOs stands for massive compact halo objects , which are composed of ordinary baryonic matter , such as neutrons and protons .
There are unresolved issues with both of these ideas , and far more research will be needed to solve the mystery .
Picture yourself walking along a beach on the eastern shore of the United States .
The air smells of sea salt and the sun warms your body .
Suddenly , an alert appears on your cell phone .
A tropical depression has formed into a hurricane .
Atmospheric pressure has fallen to nearly 15 % below average .
As a result , forecasters expect torrential rainfall , winds in excess of 100 mph , and millions of dollars in damage .
As you prepare to evacuate , you wonder : How can such a small drop in pressure lead to such a severe change in the weather ?
Pressure is a physical phenomenon that is responsible for much more than just the weather .
Changes in pressure cause ears to “ pop ” during takeoff in an airplane .
Changes in pressure can also cause scuba divers to suffer a sometimes fatal disorder known as the “ bends , ” which occurs when nitrogen dissolved in the water of the body at extreme depths returns to a gaseous state in the body as the diver surfaces .
Pressure lies at the heart of the phenomena called buoyancy , which causes hot air balloons to rise and ships to float .
Before we can fully understand the role that pressure plays in these phenomena , we need to discuss the states of matter and the concept of density .
Matter most commonly exists as a solid , liquid , or gas ; these states are known as the three common phases of matter .
We will look at each of these phases in detail in this section .
Solids are rigid and have specific shapes and definite volumes .
The atoms or molecules in a solid are in close proximity to each other , and there is a significant force between these molecules .
Solids will take a form determined by the nature of these forces between the molecules .
Although true solids are not incompressible , it nevertheless requires a large force to change the shape of a solid .
In some cases , the force between molecules can cause the molecules to organize into a lattice as shown in .
The structure of this three-dimensional lattice is represented as molecules connected by rigid bonds ( modeled as stiff springs ) , which allow limited freedom for movement .
Even a large force produces only small displacements in the atoms or molecules of the lattice , and the solid maintains its shape .
Solids also resist shearing forces .
( Shearing forces are forces applied tangentially to a surface , as described in . )
Liquids and gases are considered to be fluids because they yield to shearing forces , whereas solids resist them .
Like solids , the molecules in a liquid are bonded to neighboring molecules , but possess many fewer of these bonds .
The molecules in a liquid are not locked in place and can move with respect to each other .
The distance between molecules is similar to the distances in a solid , and so liquids have definite volumes , but the shape of a liquid changes , depending on the shape of its container .
Gases are not bonded to neighboring atoms and can have large separations between molecules .
Gases have neither specific shapes nor definite volumes , since their molecules move to fill the container in which they are held .
Liquids deform easily when stressed and do not spring back to their original shape once a force is removed .
This occurs because the atoms or molecules in a liquid are free to slide about and change neighbors .
That is , liquids flow ( so they are a type of fluid ) , with the molecules held together by mutual attraction .
When a liquid is placed in a container with no lid , it remains in the container .
Because the atoms are closely packed , liquids , like solids , resist compression ; an extremely large force is necessary to change the volume of a liquid .
In contrast , atoms in gases are separated by large distances , and the forces between atoms in a gas are therefore very weak , except when the atoms collide with one another .
This makes gases relatively easy to compress and allows them to flow ( which makes them fluids ) .
When placed in an open container , gases , unlike liquids , will escape .
In this chapter , we generally refer to both gases and liquids simply as fluids , making a distinction between them only when they behave differently .
There exists one other phase of matter , plasma , which exists at very high temperatures .
At high temperatures , molecules may disassociate into atoms , and atoms disassociate into electrons ( with negative charges ) and protons ( with positive charges ) , forming a plasma .
Plasma will not be discussed in depth in this chapter because plasma has very different properties from the three other common phases of matter , discussed in this chapter , due to the strong electrical forces between the charges .
Suppose a block of brass and a block of wood have exactly the same mass .
If both blocks are dropped in a tank of water , why does the wood float and the brass sink ?
This occurs because the brass has a greater density than water , whereas the wood has a lower density than water .
Density is an important characteristic of substances .
It is crucial , for example , in determining whether an object sinks or floats in a fluid .
The average density of a substance or object is defined as its mass per unit volume , where the Greek letter ( rho ) is the symbol for density , m is the mass , and V is the volume .
The SI unit of density is .
lists some representative values .
The cgs unit of density is the gram per cubic centimeter , , where The metric system was originally devised so that water would have a density of , equivalent to .
Thus , the basic mass unit , the kilogram , was first devised to be the mass of 1000 mL of water , which has a volume of .
As you can see by examining , the density of an object may help identify its composition .
The density of gold , for example , is about 2.5 times the density of iron , which is about 2.5 times the density of aluminum .
Density also reveals something about the phase of the matter and its substructure .
Notice that the densities of liquids and solids are roughly comparable , consistent with the fact that their atoms are in close contact .
The densities of gases are much less than those of liquids and solids , because the atoms in gases are separated by large amounts of empty space .
The gases are displayed for a standard temperature of and a standard pressure of 101.3 kPa , and there is a strong dependence of the densities on temperature and pressure .
The densities of the solids and liquids displayed are given for the standard temperature of and the densities of solids and liquids depend on the temperature .
The density of solids and liquids normally increase with decreasing temperature .
shows the density of water in various phases and temperature .
The density of water increases with decreasing temperature , reaching a maximum at and then decreases as the temperature falls below .
This behavior of the density of water explains why ice forms at the top of a body of water .
The density of a substance is not necessarily constant throughout the volume of a substance .
If the density is constant throughout a substance , the substance is said to be a homogeneous substance .
A solid iron bar is an example of a homogeneous substance .
The density is constant throughout , and the density of any sample of the substance is the same as its average density .
If the density of a substance were not constant , the substance is said to be a heterogeneous substance .
A chunk of Swiss cheese is an example of a heterogeneous material containing both the solid cheese and gas-filled voids .
The density at a specific location within a heterogeneous material is called local density , and is given as a function of location , .
Since gases are free to expand and contract , the densities of the gases vary considerably with temperature , whereas the densities of liquids vary little with temperature .
Therefore , the densities of liquids are often treated as constant , with the density equal to the average density .
Density is a dimensional property ; therefore , when comparing the densities of two substances , the units must be taken into consideration .
For this reason , a more convenient , dimensionless quantity called the specific gravity is often used to compare densities .
Specific gravity is defined as the ratio of the density of the material to the density of water at and one atmosphere of pressure , which is : The comparison uses water because the density of water is , which was originally used to define the kilogram .
Specific gravity , being dimensionless , provides a ready comparison among materials without having to worry about the unit of density .
For instance , the density of aluminum is 2.7 in ( 2700 in ) , but its specific gravity is 2.7 , regardless of the unit of density .
Specific gravity is a particularly useful quantity with regard to buoyancy , which we will discuss later in this chapter .
You have no doubt heard the word ‘ pressure ’ used in relation to blood ( high or low blood pressure ) and in relation to weather ( highand low-pressure weather systems ) .
These are only two of many examples of pressure in fluids .
( Recall that we introduced the idea of pressure in , in the context of bulk stress and strain . )
A given force can have a significantly different effect , depending on the area over which the force is exerted .
Note that although force is a vector , pressure is a scalar .
Pressure is a scalar quantity because it is defined to be proportional to the magnitude of the force acting perpendicular to the surface area .
The SI unit for pressure is the pascal ( Pa ) , named after the French mathematician and physicist Blaise Pascal ( 1623–1662 ) , where Several other units are used for pressure , which we discuss later in the chapter .
Pressure is defined for all states of matter , but it is particularly important when discussing fluids .
An important characteristic of ﬂuids is that there is no significant resistance to the component of a force applied parallel to the surface of a fluid .
The molecules of the ﬂuid simply ﬂow to accommodate the horizontal force .
A force applied perpendicular to the surface compresses or expands the fluid .
If you try to compress a fluid , you find that a reaction force develops at each point inside the fluid in the outward direction , balancing the force applied on the molecules at the boundary .
Consider a fluid of constant density as shown in .
The pressure at the bottom of the container is due to the pressure of the atmosphere plus the pressure due to the weight of the fluid .
The pressure due to the fluid is equal to the weight of the fluid divided by the area .
The weight of the fluid is equal to its mass times the acceleration due to gravity .
Consider the pressure and force acting on the dam retaining a reservoir of water .
Suppose the dam is 500-m wide and the water is 80.0-m deep at the dam , as illustrated below .
( a ) What is the average pressure on the dam due to the water ?
( b ) Calculate the force exerted against the dam .
The average pressure p due to the weight of the water is the pressure at the average depth h of 40.0 m , since pressure increases linearly with depth .
The area of the dam is so that Although this force seems large , it is small compared with the weight of the water in the reservoir .
In fact , it is only 0.0800 % of the weight .
Check Your Understanding If the reservoir in covered twice the area , but was kept to the same depth , would the dam need to be redesigned ?
A static fluid is a fluid that is not in motion .
At any point within a static fluid , the pressure on all sides must be equal—otherwise , the fluid at that point would react to a net force and accelerate .
The pressure at any point in a static fluid depends only on the depth at that point .
As discussed , pressure in a fluid near Earth varies with depth due to the weight of fluid above a particular level .
In the above examples , we assumed density to be constant and the average density of the fluid to be a good representation of the density .
This is a reasonable approximation for liquids like water , where large forces are required to compress the liquid or change the volume .
In a swimming pool , for example , the density is approximately constant , and the water at the bottom is compressed very little by the weight of the water on top .
Traveling up in the atmosphere is quite a different situation , however .
The density of the air begins to change significantly just a short distance above Earth ’ s surface .
To derive a formula for the variation of pressure with depth in a tank containing a fluid of density ρ on the surface of Earth , we must start with the assumption that the density of the fluid is not constant .
Fluid located at deeper levels is subjected to more force than fluid nearer to the surface due to the weight of the fluid above it .
Therefore , the pressure calculated at a given depth is different than the pressure calculated using a constant density .
Imagine a thin element of fluid at a depth h , as shown in .
Let the element have a cross-sectional area A and height .
The forces acting upon the element are due to the pressures p ( y ) above and below it .
The weight of the element itself is also shown in the free-body diagram .
Since the element of fluid between y and is not accelerating , the forces are balanced .
Using a Cartesian y -axis oriented up , we find the following equation for the y -component : Note that if the element had a non-zero y -component of acceleration , the right-hand side would not be zero but would instead be the mass times the y -acceleration .
The solution of this equation depends upon whether the density ρ is constant or changes with depth ; that is , the function ρ ( y ) .
If the range of the depth being analyzed is not too great , we can assume the density to be constant .
But if the range of depth is large enough for the density to vary appreciably , such as in the case of the atmosphere , there is significant change in density with depth .
In that case , we can not use the approximation of a constant density .
Let ’ s use to work out a formula for the pressure at a depth h from the surface in a tank of a liquid such as water , where the density of the liquid can be taken to be constant .
Note that the pressure in a fluid depends only on the depth from the surface and not on the shape of the container .
Thus , in a container where a fluid can freely move in various parts , the liquid stays at the same level in every part , regardless of the shape , as shown in .
The change in atmospheric pressure with height is of particular interest .
Assuming the temperature of air to be constant , and that the ideal gas law of thermodynamics describes the atmosphere to a good approximation , we can find the variation of atmospheric pressure with height , when the temperature is constant .
( We discuss the ideal gas law in a later chapter , but we assume you have some familiarity with it from high school and chemistry . )
Let p ( y ) be the atmospheric pressure at height y .
You may have encountered the ideal gas law in the form , where n is the number of moles and R is the gas constant .
Here , the same law has been written in a different form , using the density instead of volume V .
Therefore , if pressure p changes with height , so does the density Using density from the ideal gas law , the rate of variation of pressure with height is given as where constant quantities have been collected inside the parentheses .
Replacing these constants with a single symbol the equation looks much simpler : This gives the solution Thus , atmospheric pressure drops exponentially with height , since the y -axis is pointed up from the ground and y has positive values in the atmosphere above sea level .
The pressure drops by a factor of when the height is which gives us a physical interpretation for : The constant is a length scale that characterizes how pressure varies with height and is often referred to as the pressure scale height .
We can obtain an approximate value of by using the mass of a nitrogen molecule as a proxy for an air molecule .
At temperature or 300 K , we find Therefore , for every 8800 meters , the air pressure drops by a factor 1/ e , or approximately one-third of its value .
This gives us only a rough estimate of the actual situation , since we have assumed both a constant temperature and a constant g over such great distances from Earth , neither of which is correct in reality .
Fluid pressure has no direction , being a scalar quantity , whereas the forces due to pressure have well-defined directions : They are always exerted perpendicular to any surface .
The reason is that fluids can not withstand or exert shearing forces .
Thus , in a static fluid enclosed in a tank , the force exerted on the walls of the tank is exerted perpendicular to the inside surface .
Likewise , pressure is exerted perpendicular to the surfaces of any object within the fluid .
illustrates the pressure exerted by air on the walls of a tire and by water on the body of a swimmer .
In the preceding section , we derived a formula for calculating the variation in pressure for a fluid in hydrostatic equilibrium .
As it turns out , this is a very useful calculation .
Measurements of pressure are important in daily life as well as in science and engineering applications .
In this section , we discuss different ways that pressure can be reported and measured .
Suppose the pressure gauge on a full scuba tank reads 3000 psi , which is approximately 207 atmospheres .
When the valve is opened , air begins to escape because the pressure inside the tank is greater than the atmospheric pressure outside the tank .
Air continues to escape from the tank until the pressure inside the tank equals the pressure of the atmosphere outside the tank .
At this point , the pressure gauge on the tank reads zero , even though the pressure inside the tank is actually 1 atmosphere—the same as the air pressure outside the tank .
Most pressure gauges , like the one on the scuba tank , are calibrated to read zero at atmospheric pressure .
Pressure readings from such gauges are called gauge pressure , which is the pressure relative to the atmospheric pressure .
When the pressure inside the tank is greater than atmospheric pressure , the gauge reports a positive value .
Some gauges are designed to measure negative pressure .
For example , many physics experiments must take place in a vacuum chamber , a rigid chamber from which some of the air is pumped out .
The pressure inside the vacuum chamber is less than atmospheric pressure , so the pressure gauge on the chamber reads a negative value .
Unlike gauge pressure , absolute pressure accounts for atmospheric pressure , which in effect adds to the pressure in any fluid not enclosed in a rigid container .
The absolute pressure , or total pressure , is the sum of gauge pressure and atmospheric pressure : where is absolute pressure , is gauge pressure , and is atmospheric pressure .
For example , if a tire gauge reads 34 psi , then the absolute pressure is 34 psi plus 14.7 psi ( in psi ) , or 48.7 psi ( equivalent to 336 kPa ) .
In most cases , the absolute pressure in fluids can not be negative .
Fluids push rather than pull , so the smallest absolute pressure in a fluid is zero ( a negative absolute pressure is a pull ) .
Thus , the smallest possible gauge pressure is ( which makes zero ) .
There is no theoretical limit to how large a gauge pressure can be .
A host of devices are used for measuring pressure , ranging from tire gauges to blood pressure monitors .
Many other types of pressure gauges are commonly used to test the pressure of fluids , such as mechanical pressure gauges .
We will explore some of these in this section .
Any property that changes with pressure in a known way can be used to construct a pressure gauge .
Different pressure gauges are useful in different pressure ranges and under different physical situations .
Some examples are shown in .
One of the most important classes of pressure gauges applies the property that pressure due to the weight of a fluid of constant density is given by .
The U-shaped tube shown in is an example of a manometer ; in part ( a ) , both sides of the tube are open to the atmosphere , allowing atmospheric pressure to push down on each side equally so that its effects cancel .
A manometer with only one side open to the atmosphere is an ideal device for measuring gauge pressures .
The gauge pressure is and is found by measuring h .
For example , suppose one side of the U-tube is connected to some source of pressure such as the balloon in part ( b ) of the figure or the vacuum-packed peanut jar shown in part ( c ) .
Pressure is transmitted undiminished to the manometer , and the fluid levels are no longer equal .
In part ( b ) , is greater than atmospheric pressure , whereas in part ( c ) , is less than atmospheric pressure .
In both cases , differs from atmospheric pressure by an amount where is the density of the fluid in the manometer .
In part ( b ) , can support a column of fluid of height h , so it must exert a pressure greater than atmospheric pressure ( the gauge pressure is positive ) .
In part ( c ) , atmospheric pressure can support a column of fluid of height h , so is less than atmospheric pressure by an amount ( the gauge pressure is negative ) .
Manometers typically use a U-shaped tube of a fluid ( often mercury ) to measure pressure .
A barometer ( see ) is a device that typically uses a single column of mercury to measure atmospheric pressure .
The barometer , invented by the Italian mathematician and physicist Evangelista Torricelli ( 1608–1647 ) in 1643 , is constructed from a glass tube closed at one end and filled with mercury .
The tube is then inverted and placed in a pool of mercury .
This device measures atmospheric pressure , rather than gauge pressure , because there is a nearly pure vacuum above the mercury in the tube .
The height of the mercury is such that .
When atmospheric pressure varies , the mercury rises or falls .
Weather forecasters closely monitor changes in atmospheric pressure ( often reported as barometric pressure ) , as rising mercury typically signals improving weather and falling mercury indicates deteriorating weather .
The barometer can also be used as an altimeter , since average atmospheric pressure varies with altitude .
Mercury barometers and manometers are so common that units of mm Hg are often quoted for atmospheric pressure and blood pressures .
A U-tube with both ends open is filled with a liquid of density to a height h on both sides .
A liquid of density is poured into one side and Liquid 2 settles on top of Liquid 1 .
The heights on the two sides are different .
The height to the top of Liquid 2 from the interface is and the height to the top of Liquid 1 from the level of the interface is .
Derive a formula for the height difference .
The pressure at points at the same height on the two sides of a U-tube must be the same as long as the two points are in the same liquid .
The pressure at each point is due to atmospheric pressure plus the weight of the liquid above it .
Since the two points are in Liquid 1 and are at the same height , the pressure at the two points must be the same .
Therefore , we have Hence , This means that the difference in heights on the two sides of the U-tube is The result makes sense if we set which gives If the two sides have the same density , they have the same height .
Check Your Understanding Mercury is a hazardous substance .
Why do you suppose mercury is typically used in barometers instead of a safer fluid such as water ?
As stated earlier , the SI unit for pressure is the pascal ( Pa ) , where In addition to the pascal , many other units for pressure are in common use .
In meteorology , atmospheric pressure is often described in the unit of millibars ( mbar ) , where The millibar is a convenient unit for meteorologists because the average atmospheric pressure at sea level on Earth is .
Using the equations derived when considering pressure at a depth in a fluid , pressure can also be measured as millimeters or inches of mercury .
The pressure at the bottom of a 760-mm column of mercury at in a container where the top part is evacuated is equal to the atmospheric pressure .
Thus , 760 mm Hg is also used in place of 1 atmosphere of pressure .
In vacuum physics labs , scientists often use another unit called the torr , named after Torricelli , who , as we have just seen , invented the mercury manometer for measuring pressure .
One torr is equal to a pressure of 1 mm Hg .
In 1653 , the French philosopher and scientist Blaise Pascal published his Treatise on the Equilibrium of Liquids , in which he discussed principles of static fluids .
A static fluid is a fluid that is not in motion .
When a fluid is not flowing , we say that the fluid is in static equilibrium .
If the fluid is water , we say it is in hydrostatic equilibrium .
For a fluid in static equilibrium , the net force on any part of the fluid must be zero ; otherwise the fluid will start to flow .
Pascal ’ s observations—since proven experimentally—provide the foundation for hydraulics , one of the most important developments in modern mechanical technology .
Pascal observed that a change in pressure applied to an enclosed fluid is transmitted undiminished throughout the fluid and to the walls of its container .
Because of this , we often know more about pressure than other physical quantities in fluids .
Moreover , Pascal ’ s principle implies that the total pressure in a fluid is the sum of the pressures from different sources .
A good example is the fluid at a depth depends on the depth of the fluid and the pressure of the atmosphere .
Pascal ’ s principle ( also known as Pascal ’ s law ) states that when a change in pressure is applied to an enclosed fluid , it is transmitted undiminished to all portions of the fluid and to the walls of its container .
In an enclosed fluid , since atoms of the fluid are free to move about , they transmit pressure to all parts of the fluid and to the walls of the container .
Any change in pressure is transmitted undiminished .
Note that this principle does not say that the pressure is the same at all points of a fluid—which is not true , since the pressure in a fluid near Earth varies with height .
Rather , this principle applies to the change in pressure .
Suppose you place some water in a cylindrical container of height H and cross-sectional area A that has a movable piston of mass m .
Thus , the pressure at the bottom also increases by Mg / A .
The pressure at the bottom of the container is equal to the sum of the atmospheric pressure , the pressure due the fluid , and the pressure supplied by the mass .
Watch demonstration Pascal ’ s great of is a a Hydraulic systems are used to operate automotive brakes , hydraulic jacks , and numerous other mechanical systems .
We can derive a relationship between the forces in this simple hydraulic system by applying Pascal ’ s principle .
Note first that the two pistons in the system are at the same height , so there is no difference in pressure due to a difference in depth .
The pressure due to acting on area is simply According to Pascal ’ s principle , this pressure is transmitted undiminished throughout the fluid and to all walls of the container .
Thus , a pressure is felt at the other piston that is equal to .
That is , However , since we see that This equation relates the ratios of force to area in any hydraulic system , provided that the pistons are at the same vertical height and that friction in the system is negligible .
Hydraulic systems can increase or decrease the force applied to them .
To make the force larger , the pressure is applied to a larger area .
The hydraulic jack is such a hydraulic system .
A hydraulic jack is used to lift heavy loads , such as the ones used by auto mechanics to raise an automobile .
It consists of an incompressible fluid in a U-tube fitted with a movable piston on each side .
One side of the U-tube is narrower than the other .
A small force applied over a small area can balance a much larger force on the other side over a larger area .
Consider the automobile hydraulic system shown in .
Suppose a force of 100 N is applied to the brake pedal , which acts on the pedal cylinder ( acting as a “ master ” cylinder ) through a lever .
A force of 500 N is exerted on the pedal cylinder .
Pressure created in the pedal cylinder is transmitted to the four wheel cylinders .
The pedal cylinder has a diameter of 0.500 cm and each wheel cylinder has a diameter of 2.50 cm .
Calculate the magnitude of the force created at each of the wheel cylinders .
We are given the force applied to the pedal cylinder .
The cross-sectional areas and can be calculated from their given diameters .
Then we can use the following relationship to find the force : Manipulate this algebraically to get on one side and substitute known values .
Pascal ’ s principle applied to hydraulic systems is given by This value is the force exerted by each of the four wheel cylinders .
Note that we can add as many wheel cylinders as we wish .
If each has a 2.50-cm diameter , each will exert A simple hydraulic system , as an example of a simple machine , can increase force but can not do more work than is done on it .
Work is force times distance moved , and the wheel cylinder moves through a smaller distance than the pedal cylinder .
Furthermore , the more wheels added , the smaller the distance each one moves .
Many hydraulic systems—such as power brakes and those in bulldozers—have a motorized pump that actually does most of the work in the system .
Check Your Understanding Would a hydraulic press still operate properly if a gas is used instead of a liquid ?
When placed in a fluid , some objects float due to a buoyant force .
Where does this buoyant force come from ?
Why is it that some things float and others do not ?
Do objects that sink get any support at all from the fluid ?
Is your body buoyed by the atmosphere , or are only helium balloons affected ?
Answers to all these questions , and many others , are based on the fact that pressure increases with depth in a fluid .
This means that the upward force on the bottom of an object in a fluid is greater than the downward force on top of the object .
There is an upward force , or buoyant force , on any object in any fluid .
If the buoyant force is greater than the object ’ s weight , the object rises to the surface and floats .
If the buoyant force is less than the object ’ s weight , the object sinks .
If the buoyant force equals the object ’ s weight , the object can remain suspended at its present depth .
The buoyant force is always present , whether the object floats , sinks , or is suspended in a fluid .
The buoyant force is the upward force on any object in any fluid .
Just how large a force is buoyant force ?
To answer this question , think about what happens when a submerged object is removed from a fluid , as in .
If the object were not in the fluid , the space the object occupied would be filled by fluid having a weight This weight is supported by the surrounding fluid , so the buoyant force must equal the weight of the fluid displaced by the object .
The buoyant force on an object equals the weight of the fluid it displaces .
In equation form , Archimedes ’ principle is where is the buoyant force and is the weight of the fluid displaced by the object .
This principle is named after the Greek mathematician and inventor Archimedes ( ca .
287–212 BCE ) , who stated this principle long before concepts of force were well established .
Archimedes ’ principle refers to the force of buoyancy that results when a body is submerged in a fluid , whether partially or wholly .
The force that provides the pressure of a fluid acts on a body perpendicular to the surface of the body .
In other words , the force due to the pressure at the bottom is pointed up , while at the top , the force due to the pressure is pointed down ; the forces due to the pressures at the sides are pointing into the body .
Since the bottom of the body is at a greater depth than the top of the body , the pressure at the lower part of the body is higher than the pressure at the upper part , as shown in .
Therefore a net upward force acts on the body .
This upward force is the force of buoyancy , or simply buoyancy .
The exclamation “ Eureka ” ( meaning “ I found it ” ) has often been credited to Archimedes as he made the discovery that would lead to Archimedes ’ principle .
Some say it all started in a bathtub .
To hear this story , watch this to learn more .
explore or If you drop a lump of clay in water , it will sink .
But if you mold the same lump of clay into the shape of a boat , it will float .
Because of its shape , the clay boat displaces more water than the lump and experiences a greater buoyant force , even though its mass is the same .
The same is true of steel ships .
The average density of an object is what ultimately determines whether it floats .
If an object ’ s average density is less than that of the surrounding fluid , it will float .
The reason is that the fluid , having a higher density , contains more mass and hence more weight in the same volume .
The buoyant force , which equals the weight of the fluid displaced , is thus greater than the weight of the object .
Likewise , an object denser than the fluid will sink .
The extent to which a floating object is submerged depends on how the object ’ s density compares to the density of the fluid .
In , for example , the unloaded ship has a lower density and less of it is submerged compared with the same ship when loaded .
We can derive a quantitative expression for the fraction submerged by considering density .
The fraction submerged is the ratio of the volume submerged to the volume of the object , or The volume submerged equals the volume of fluid displaced , which we call .
Now we can obtain the relationship between the densities by substituting into the expression .
This gives where is the average density of the object and is the density of the fluid .
Since the object floats , its mass and that of the displaced fluid are equal , so they cancel from the equation , leaving We can use this relationship to measure densities .
Suppose a 60.0-kg woman floats in fresh water with 97.0 % of her volume submerged when her lungs are full of air .
What is her average density ?
We can find the woman ’ s density by solving the equation for the density of the object .
This yields We know both the fraction submerged and the density of water , so we can calculate the woman ’ s density .
Entering the known values into the expression for her density , we obtain The woman ’ s density is less than the fluid density .
We expect this because she floats .
Numerous lower-density objects or substances float in higher-density fluids : oil on water , a hot-air balloon in the atmosphere , a bit of cork in wine , an iceberg in salt water , and hot wax in a “ lava lamp , ” to name a few .
A less obvious example is mountain ranges floating on the higher-density crust and mantle beneath them .
Even seemingly solid Earth has fluid characteristics .
One of the most common techniques for determining density is shown in .
An object , here a coin , is weighed in air and then weighed again while submerged in a liquid .
The density of the coin , an indication of its authenticity , can be calculated if the fluid density is known .
We can use this same technique to determine the density of the fluid if the density of the coin is known .
All of these calculations are based on Archimedes ’ principle , which states that the buoyant force on the object equals the weight of the fluid displaced .
This , in turn , means that the object appears to weigh less when submerged ; we call this measurement the object ’ s apparent weight .
The object suffers an apparent weight loss equal to the weight of the fluid displaced .
Alternatively , on balances that measure mass , the object suffers an apparent mass loss equal to the mass of fluid displaced .
That is , apparent weight loss equals weight of fluid displaced , or apparent mass loss equals mass of fluid displaced .
The first part of this chapter dealt with fluid statics , the study of fluids at rest .
The rest of this chapter deals with fluid dynamics , the study of fluids in motion .
Even the most basic forms of fluid motion can be quite complex .
For this reason , we limit our investigation to ideal fluids in many of the examples .
An ideal fluid is a fluid with negligible viscosity .
Viscosity is a measure of the internal friction in a fluid ; we examine it in more detail in .
In a few examples , we examine an incompressible fluid—one for which an extremely large force is required to change the volume—since the density in an incompressible fluid is constant throughout .
Velocity vectors are often used to illustrate fluid motion in applications like meteorology .
For example , wind—the fluid motion of air in the atmosphere—can be represented by vectors indicating the speed and direction of the wind at any given point on a map .
shows velocity vectors describing the winds during Hurricane Arthur in 2014 .
Another method for representing fluid motion is a streamline .
A streamline represents the path of a small volume of fluid as it flows .
The velocity is always tangential to the streamline .
The diagrams in use streamlines to illustrate two examples of fluids moving through a pipe .
The first fluid exhibits a laminar flow ( sometimes described as a steady flow ) , represented by smooth , parallel streamlines .
Note that in the example shown in part ( a ) , the velocity of the fluid is greatest in the center and decreases near the walls of the pipe due to the viscosity of the fluid and friction between the pipe walls and the fluid .
This is a special case of laminar flow , where the friction between the pipe and the fluid is high , known as no slip boundary conditions .
The second diagram represents turbulent flow , in which streamlines are irregular and change over time .
In turbulent flow , the paths of the fluid flow are irregular as different parts of the fluid mix together or form small circular regions that resemble whirlpools .
This can occur when the speed of the fluid reaches a certain critical speed .
The volume of fluid passing by a given location through an area during a period of time is called flow rate Q , or more precisely , volume flow rate .
In symbols , this is written as where V is the volume and t is the elapsed time .
In , the volume of the cylinder is Ax , so the flow rate is The SI unit for flow rate is but several other units for Q are in common use , such as liters per minute ( L/min ) .
Note that a liter ( L ) is 1/1000 of a cubic meter or 1000 cubic centimeters Flow rate and velocity are related , but quite different , physical quantities .
To make the distinction clear , consider the flow rate of a river .
The greater the velocity of the water , the greater the flow rate of the river .
But flow rate also depends on the size and shape of the river .
A rapid mountain stream carries far less water than the Amazon River in Brazil , for example .
illustrates the volume flow rate .
The volume flow rate is where is the cross-sectional area of the pipe and v is the magnitude of the velocity .
The precise relationship between flow rate Q and average speed v is where A is the cross-sectional area and is the average speed .
The relationship tells us that flow rate is directly proportional to both the average speed of the fluid and the cross-sectional area of a river , pipe , or other conduit .
The larger the conduit , the greater its cross-sectional area .
illustrates how this relationship is obtained .
The shaded cylinder has a volume , which flows past the point P in a time t .
Dividing both sides of this relationship by t gives We note that and the average speed is .
Thus the equation becomes .
shows an incompressible fluid flowing along a pipe of decreasing radius .
Because the fluid is incompressible , the same amount of fluid must flow past any point in the tube in a given time to ensure continuity of flow .
The flow is continuous because they are no sources or sinks that add or remove mass , so the mass flowing into the pipe must be equal the mass flowing out of the pipe .
In this case , because the cross-sectional area of the pipe decreases , the velocity must necessarily increase .
This logic can be extended to say that the flow rate must be the same at all points along the pipe .
In particular , for arbitrary points 1 and 2 , This is called the equation of continuity and is valid for any incompressible fluid ( with constant density ) .
The consequences of the equation of continuity can be observed when water flows from a hose into a narrow spray nozzle : It emerges with a large speed—that is the purpose of the nozzle .
Conversely , when a river empties into one end of a reservoir , the water slows considerably , perhaps picking up speed again when it leaves the other end of the reservoir .
In other words , speed increases when cross-sectional area decreases , and speed decreases when cross-sectional area increases .
Since liquids are essentially incompressible , the equation of continuity is valid for all liquids .
However , gases are compressible , so the equation must be applied with caution to gases if they are subjected to compression or expansion .
A nozzle with a diameter of 0.500 cm is attached to a garden hose with a radius of 0.900 cm .
The flow rate through hose and nozzle is 0.500 L/s .
Calculate the speed of the water ( a ) in the hose and ( b ) in the nozzle .
We can use the relationship between flow rate and speed to find both speeds .
We use the subscript 1 for the hose and 2 for the nozzle .
The equation states Solving for and substituting for the cross-sectional area yields Substituting known values , A speed of 1.96 m/s is about right for water emerging from a hose with no nozzle .
The nozzle produces a considerably faster stream merely by constricting the flow to a narrower tube .
The solution to the last part of the example shows that speed is inversely proportional to the square of the radius of the tube , making for large effects when radius varies .
We can blow out a candle at quite a distance , for example , by pursing our lips , whereas blowing on a candle with our mouth wide open is quite ineffective .
The rate of flow of a fluid can also be described by the mass flow rate or mass rate of flow .
This is the rate at which a mass of the fluid moves past a point .
Refer once again to , but this time consider the mass in the shaded volume .
The mass can be determined from the density and the volume : The mass flow rate is then where is the density , A is the cross-sectional area , and v is the magnitude of the velocity .
The mass flow rate is an important quantity in fluid dynamics and can be used to solve many problems .
The pipe in the figure starts at the inlet with a cross sectional area of and constricts to an outlet with a smaller cross sectional area of .
The mass of fluid entering the pipe has to be equal to the mass of fluid leaving the pipe .
For this reason the velocity at the outlet is greater than the velocity of the inlet .
If the density of the fluid remains constant through the constriction—that is , the fluid is incompressible—then the density cancels from the continuity equation , The equation reduces to show that the volume flow rate into the pipe equals the volume flow rate out of the pipe .
As we showed in , when a fluid flows into a narrower channel , its speed increases .
That means its kinetic energy also increases .
The increased kinetic energy comes from the net work done on the fluid to push it into the channel .
Also , if the fluid changes vertical position , work is done on the fluid by the gravitational force .
A pressure difference occurs when the channel narrows .
This pressure difference results in a net force on the fluid because the pressure times the area equals the force , and this net force does work .
Recall the work-energy theorem , The net work done increases the fluid ’ s kinetic energy .
As a result , the pressure drops in a rapidly moving fluid whether or not the fluid is confined to a tube .
There are many common examples of pressure dropping in rapidly moving fluids .
For instance , shower curtains have a disagreeable habit of bulging into the shower stall when the shower is on .
The reason is that the high-velocity stream of water and air creates a region of lower pressure inside the shower , whereas the pressure on the other side remains at the standard atmospheric pressure .
This pressure difference results in a net force , pushing the curtain inward .
Similarly , when a car passes a truck on the highway , the two vehicles seem to pull toward each other .
The reason is the same : The high velocity of the air between the car and the truck creates a region of lower pressure between the vehicles , and they are pushed together by greater pressure on the outside .
This effect was observed as far back as the mid-1800s , when it was found that trains passing in opposite directions tipped precariously toward one another .
The application of the principle of conservation of energy to frictionless laminar flow leads to a very useful relation between pressure and flow speed in a fluid .
This relation is called Bernoulli ’ s equation , named after Daniel Bernoulli ( 1700–1782 ) , who published his studies on fluid motion in his book Hydrodynamica ( 1738 ) .
Consider an incompressible fluid flowing through a pipe that has a varying diameter and height , as shown in .
Subscripts 1 and 2 in the figure denote two locations along the pipe and illustrate the relationships between the areas of the cross sections A , the speed of flow v , the height from ground y , and the pressure p at each point .
We assume here that the density at the two points is the same—therefore , density is denoted by without any subscripts—and since the fluid in incompressible , the shaded volumes must be equal .
We also assume that there are no viscous forces in the fluid , so the energy of any part of the fluid will be conserved .
To derive Bernoulli ’ s equation , we first calculate the work that was done on the fluid : The work done was due to the conservative force of gravity and the change in the kinetic energy of the fluid .
Since the two points were chosen arbitrarily , we can write Bernoulli ’ s equation more generally as a conservation principle along the flow .
According to Bernoulli ’ s equation , if we follow a small volume of fluid along its path , various quantities in the sum may change , but the total remains constant .
Bernoulli ’ s equation is , in fact , just a convenient statement of conservation of energy for an incompressible fluid in the absence of friction .
The general form of Bernoulli ’ s equation has three terms in it , and it is broadly applicable .
To understand it better , let us consider some specific situations that simplify and illustrate its use and meaning .
In this case , we get This equation tells us that , in static fluids , pressure increases with depth .
As we go from point 1 to point 2 in the fluid , the depth increases by , and consequently , is greater than by an amount .
In the very simplest case , is zero at the top of the fluid , and we get the familiar relationship .
and Thus , Bernoulli ’ s equation confirms the fact that the pressure change due to the weight of a fluid is .
Although we introduce Bernoulli ’ s equation for fluid motion , it includes much of what we studied for static fluids earlier .
Suppose a fluid is moving but its depth is constant—that is , .
Under this condition , Bernoulli ’ s equation becomes Situations in which fluid flows at a constant depth are so common that this equation is often also called Bernoulli ’ s principle , which is simply Bernoulli ’ s equation for fluids at constant depth .
( Note again that this applies to a small volume of fluid as we follow it along its path . )
Bernoulli ’ s principle reinforces the fact that pressure drops as speed increases in a moving fluid : If is greater than in the equation , then must be less than for the equality to hold .
In , we found that the speed of water in a hose increased from 1.96 m/s to 25.5 m/s going from the hose to the nozzle .
Calculate the pressure in the hose , given that the absolute pressure in the nozzle is ( atmospheric , as it must be ) and assuming level , frictionless flow .
Level flow means constant depth , so Bernoulli ’ s principle applies .
We use the subscript 1 for values in the hose and 2 for those in the nozzle .
We are thus asked to find .
Solving Bernoulli ’ s principle for yields Substituting known values , This absolute pressure in the hose is greater than in the nozzle , as expected , since v is greater in the nozzle .
The pressure in the nozzle must be atmospheric , because the water emerges into the atmosphere without other changes in conditions .
Many devices and situations occur in which fluid flows at a constant height and thus can be analyzed with Bernoulli ’ s principle .
People have long put the Bernoulli principle to work by using reduced pressure in high-velocity fluids to move things about .
With a higher pressure on the outside , the high-velocity fluid forces other fluids into the stream .
This process is called entrainment .
Entrainment devices have been in use since ancient times as pumps to raise water to small heights , as is necessary for draining swamps , fields , or other low-lying areas .
Some other devices that use the concept of entrainment are shown in .
shows two devices that apply Bernoulli ’ s principle to measure fluid velocity .
The manometer in part ( a ) is connected to two tubes that are small enough not to appreciably disturb the flow .
The tube facing the oncoming fluid creates a dead spot having zero velocity in front of it , while fluid passing the other tube has velocity .
All preceding applications of Bernoulli ’ s equation involved simplifying conditions , such as constant height or constant pressure .
The next example is a more general application of Bernoulli ’ s equation in which pressure , velocity , and height all change .
Fire hoses used in major structural fires have an inside diameter of 6.40 cm .
Suppose such a hose carries a flow of 40.0 L/s , starting at a gauge pressure of .
The hose rises up 10.0 m along a ladder to a nozzle having an inside diameter of 3.00 cm .
What is the pressure in the nozzle ?
We must use Bernoulli ’ s equation to solve for the pressure , since depth is not constant .
Bernoulli ’ s equation is where subscripts 1 and 2 refer to the initial conditions at ground level and the final conditions inside the nozzle , respectively .
We must first find the speeds and .
Since , we get Similarly , we find This rather large speed is helpful in reaching the fire .
Now , taking to be zero , we solve Bernoulli ’ s equation for : Substituting known values yields This value is a gauge pressure , since the initial pressure was given as a gauge pressure .
Thus , the nozzle pressure equals atmospheric pressure as it must , because the water exits into the atmosphere without changes in its conditions .
In , which introduced the concept of friction , we saw that an object sliding across the floor with an initial velocity and no applied force comes to rest due to the force of friction .
Friction depends on the types of materials in contact and is proportional to the normal force .
We also discussed drag and air resistance in that same chapter .
We explained that at low speeds , the drag is proportional to the velocity , whereas at high speeds , drag is proportional to the velocity squared .
In this section , we introduce the forces of friction that act on fluids in motion .
For example , a fluid flowing through a pipe is subject to resistance , a type of friction , between the fluid and the walls .
Friction also occurs between the different layers of fluid .
These resistive forces affect the way the fluid flows through the pipe .
When you pour yourself a glass of juice , the liquid flows freely and quickly .
But if you pour maple syrup on your pancakes , that liquid flows slowly and sticks to the pitcher .
The difference is fluid friction , both within the fluid itself and between the fluid and its surroundings .
We call this property of fluids viscosity .
Juice has low viscosity , whereas syrup has high viscosity .
The precise definition of viscosity is based on laminar , or nonturbulent , flow .
shows schematically how laminar and turbulent flow differ .
When flow is laminar , layers flow without mixing .
When flow is turbulent , the layers mix , and significant velocities occur in directions other than the overall direction of flow .
Turbulence is a fluid flow in which layers mix together via eddies and swirls .
It has two main causes .
First , any obstruction or sharp corner , such as in a faucet , creates turbulence by imparting velocities perpendicular to the flow .
Second , high speeds cause turbulence .
The drag between adjacent layers of fluid and between the fluid and its surroundings can form swirls and eddies if the speed is great enough .
In , the speed of the accelerating smoke reaches the point that it begins to swirl due to the drag between the smoke and the surrounding air .
shows how viscosity is measured for a fluid .
The fluid to be measured is placed between two parallel plates .
The bottom plate is held fixed , while the top plate is moved to the right , dragging fluid with it .
The layer ( or lamina ) of fluid in contact with either plate does not move relative to the plate , so the top layer moves at speed v while the bottom layer remains at rest .
Each successive layer from the top down exerts a force on the one below it , trying to drag it along , producing a continuous variation in speed from v to 0 as shown .
Care is taken to ensure that the flow is laminar , that is , the layers do not mix .
The motion in the figure is like a continuous shearing motion .
Fluids have zero shear strength , but the rate at which they are sheared is related to the same geometrical factors A and L as is shear deformation for solids .
In the diagram , the fluid is initially at rest .
The layer of fluid in contact with the moving plate is accelerated and starts to move due to the internal friction between moving plate and the fluid .
The next layer is in contact with the moving layer ; since there is internal friction between the two layers , it also accelerates , and so on through the depth of the fluid .
There is also internal friction between the stationary plate and the lowest layer of fluid , next to the station plate .
The force is required to keep the plate moving at a constant velocity due to the internal friction .
A force F is required to keep the top plate in moving at a constant velocity v , and experiments have shown that this force depends on four factors .
First , F is directly proportional to v ( until the speed is so high that turbulence occurs—then a much larger force is needed , and it has a more complicated dependence on v ) .
Second , F is proportional to the area A of the plate .
This relationship seems reasonable , since A is directly proportional to the amount of fluid being moved .
Third , F is inversely proportional to the distance between the plates L .
This relationship is also reasonable ; L is like a lever arm , and the greater the lever arm , the less the force that is needed .
Fourth , F is directly proportional to the coefficient of viscosity , .
The greater the viscosity , the greater the force required .
These dependencies are combined into the equation This equation gives us a working definition of fluid viscosity .
Solving for gives which defines viscosity in terms of how it is measured .
The SI unit of viscosity is .
lists the coefficients of viscosity for various fluids .
Viscosity varies from one fluid to another by several orders of magnitude .
As you might expect , the viscosities of gases are much less than those of liquids , and these viscosities often depend on temperature .
What causes flow ?
The answer , not surprisingly , is a pressure difference .
In fact , there is a very simple relationship between horizontal flow and pressure .
Flow rate Q is in the direction from high to low pressure .
The greater the pressure differential between two points , the greater the flow rate .
This relationship can be stated as where and are the pressures at two points , such as at either end of a tube , and R is the resistance to flow .
The resistance R includes everything , except pressure , that affects flow rate .
For example , R is greater for a long tube than for a short one .
The greater the viscosity of a fluid , the greater the value of R .
Turbulence greatly increases R , whereas increasing the diameter of a tube decreases R .
If viscosity is zero , the fluid is frictionless and the resistance to flow is also zero .
Comparing frictionless flow in a tube to viscous flow , as in , we see that for a viscous fluid , speed is greatest at midstream because of drag at the boundaries .
We can see the effect of viscosity in a Bunsen burner flame [ part ( c ) ] , even though the viscosity of natural gas is small .
Let us examine Poiseuille ’ s expression for R to see if it makes good intuitive sense .
We see that resistance is directly proportional to both fluid viscosity and the length l of a tube .
After all , both of these directly affect the amount of friction encountered—the greater either is , the greater the resistance and the smaller the flow .
The radius r of a tube affects the resistance , which again makes sense , because the greater the radius , the greater the flow ( all other factors remaining the same ) .
But it is surprising that r is raised to the fourth power in Poiseuille ’ s law .
This exponent means that any change in the radius of a tube has a very large effect on resistance .
For example , doubling the radius of a tube decreases resistance by a factor of .
Taken together , give the following expression for flow rate : and This equation describes laminar flow through a tube .
It is sometimes called Poiseuille ’ s law for laminar flow , or simply Poiseuille ’ s law .
An air conditioning system is being designed to supply air at a gauge pressure of 0.054 Pa at a temperature of The air is sent through an insulated , round conduit with a diameter of 18.00 cm .
The conduit is 20-meters long and is open to a room at atmospheric pressure 101.30 kPa .
The room has a length of 12 meters , a width of 6 meters , and a height of 3 meters .
( a ) What is the volume flow rate through the pipe , assuming laminar flow ?
( b ) Estimate the length of time to completely replace the air in the room .
( c ) The builders decide to save money by using a conduit with a diameter of 9.00 cm .
What is the new flow rate ?
Assuming laminar flow , Poiseuille ’ s law states that We need to compare the artery radius before and after the flow rate reduction .
Note that we are given the diameter of the conduit , so we must divide by two to get the radius .
Assuming a constant pressure difference and using the viscosity , Assuming constant flow Using laminar flow , Poiseuille ’ s law yields Thus , the radius of the conduit decreases by half reduces the flow rate to 6.25 % of the original value .
In general , assuming laminar flow , decreasing the radius has a more dramatic effect than changing the length .
If the length is increased and all other variables remain constant , the flow rate is decreased : Doubling the length cuts the flow rate to one-half the original flow rate .
If the radius is decreased and all other variables remain constant , the volume flow rate decreases by a much larger factor .
Cutting the radius in half decreases the flow rate to one-sixteenth the original flow rate .
Water pressure in homes is sometimes lower than normal during times of heavy use , such as hot summer days .
The drop in pressure occurs in the water main before it reaches individual homes .
Let us consider flow through the water main as illustrated in .
We can understand why the pressure to the home drops during times of heavy use by rearranging the equation for flow rate : In this case , is the pressure at the water works and R is the resistance of the water main .
During times of heavy use , the flow rate Q is large .
This means that must also be large .
Thus must decrease .
It is correct to think of flow and resistance as causing the pressure to drop from to .
The equation is valid for both laminar and turbulent flows .
We can also use to analyze pressure drops occurring in more complex systems in which the tube radius is not the same everywhere .
Resistance is much greater in narrow places , such as in an obstructed coronary artery .
For a given flow rate Q , the pressure drop is greatest where the tube is most narrow .
This is how water faucets control flow .
Additionally , R is greatly increased by turbulence , and a constriction that creates turbulence greatly reduces the pressure downstream .
Plaque in an artery reduces pressure and hence flow , both by its resistance and by the turbulence it creates .
An indicator called the Reynolds number can reveal whether flow is laminar or turbulent .
For flow in a tube of uniform diameter , the Reynolds number is defined as where is the fluid density , v its speed , its viscosity , and r the tube radius .
The Reynolds number is a dimensionless quantity .
Experiments have revealed that is related to the onset of turbulence .
For below about 2000 , flow is laminar .
For above about 3000 , flow is turbulent .
For values of between about 2000 and 3000 , flow is unstable—that is , it can be laminar , but small obstructions and surface roughness can make it turbulent , and it may oscillate randomly between being laminar and turbulent .
In fact , the flow of a fluid with a Reynolds number between 2000 and 3000 is a good example of chaotic behavior .
A system is defined to be chaotic when its behavior is so sensitive to some factor that it is extremely difficult to predict .
It is difficult , but not impossible , to predict whether flow is turbulent or not when a fluid ’ s Reynold ’ s number falls in this range due to extremely sensitive dependence on factors like roughness and obstructions on the nature of the flow .
A tiny variation in one factor has an exaggerated ( or nonlinear ) effect on the flow .
In , we found the volume flow rate of an air conditioning system to be This calculation assumed laminar flow .
( a ) Was this a good assumption ?
( b ) At what velocity would the flow become turbulent ?
The assumption that the flow was laminar is valid .
To find the maximum speed of the air to keep the flow laminar , consider the Reynold ’ s number .
When transferring a fluid from one point to another , it desirable to limit turbulence .
Turbulence results in wasted energy , as some of the energy intended to move the fluid is dissipated when eddies are formed .
In this case , the air conditioning system will become less efficient once the velocity exceeds 0.16 m/s , since this is the point at which turbulence will begin to occur .
We begin the study of oscillations with simple systems of pendulums and springs .
Although these systems may seem quite basic , the concepts involved have many real-life applications .
For example , the Comcast Building in Philadelphia , Pennsylvania , stands approximately 305 meters ( 1000 feet ) tall .
As buildings are built taller , they can act as inverted , physical pendulums , with the top floors oscillating due to seismic activity and fluctuating winds .
In the Comcast Building , a tuned-mass damper is used to reduce the oscillations .
Installed at the top of the building is a tuned , liquid-column mass damper , consisting of a 300,000-gallon reservoir of water .
This U-shaped tank allows the water to oscillate freely at a frequency that matches the natural frequency of the building .
Damping is provided by tuning the turbulence levels in the moving water using baffles .
When you pluck a guitar string , the resulting sound has a steady tone and lasts a long time .
The string vibrates around an equilibrium position , and one oscillation is completed when the string starts from the initial position , travels to one of the extreme positions , then to the other extreme position , and returns to its initial position .
We define periodic motion to be any motion that repeats itself at regular time intervals , such as exhibited by the guitar string or by a child swinging on a swing .
In this section , we study the basic characteristics of oscillations and their mathematical description .
In the absence of friction , the time to complete one oscillation remains constant and is called the period ( T ) .
Its units are usually seconds , but may be any convenient unit of time .
The word ‘ period ’ refers to the time for some event whether repetitive or not , but in this chapter , we shall deal primarily in periodic motion , which is by definition repetitive .
A concept closely related to period is the frequency of an event .
Frequency ( f ) is defined to be the number of events per unit time .
For periodic motion , frequency is the number of oscillations per unit time .
The relationship between frequency and period is The SI unit for frequency is the hertz ( Hz ) and is defined as one cycle per second : A cycle is one complete oscillation .
Ultrasound machines are used by medical professionals to make images for examining internal organs of the body .
An ultrasound machine emits high-frequency sound waves , which reflect off the organs , and a computer receives the waves , using them to create a picture .
We can use the formulas presented in this module to determine the frequency , based on what we know about oscillations .
Consider a medical imaging device that produces ultrasound by oscillating with a period of .
What is the frequency of this oscillation ?
The period ( T ) is given and we are asked to find frequency ( f ) .
Substitute for T in : Solve to find This frequency of sound is much higher than the highest frequency that humans can hear ( the range of human hearing is 20 Hz to 20,000 Hz ) ; therefore , it is called ultrasound .
Appropriate oscillations at this frequency generate ultrasound used for noninvasive medical diagnoses , such as observations of a fetus in the womb .
A very common type of periodic motion is called simple harmonic motion ( SHM ) .
A system that oscillates with SHM is called a simple harmonic oscillator .
In simple harmonic motion , the acceleration of the system , and therefore the net force , is proportional to the displacement and acts in the opposite direction of the displacement .
A good example of SHM is an object with mass m attached to a spring on a frictionless surface , as shown in .
The object oscillates around the equilibrium position , and the net force on the object is equal to the force provided by the spring .
This force obeys Hooke ’ s law as discussed in a previous chapter .
The maximum displacement from equilibrium is called the amplitude ( A ) .
The units for amplitude and displacement are the same but depend on the type of oscillation .
For the object on the spring , the units of amplitude and displacement are meters .
What is so significant about SHM ?
For one thing , the period T and frequency f of a simple harmonic oscillator are independent of amplitude .
The string of a guitar , for example , oscillates with the same frequency whether plucked gently or hard .
Two important factors do affect the period of a simple harmonic oscillator .
The period is related to how stiff the system is .
A very stiff object has a large force constant ( k ) , which causes the system to have a smaller period .
For example , you can adjust a diving board ’ s stiffness—the stiffer it is , the faster it vibrates , and the shorter its period .
Period also depends on the mass of the oscillating system .
The more massive the system is , the longer the period .
For example , a heavy person on a diving board bounces up and down more slowly than a light one .
In fact , the mass m and the force constant k are the only factors that affect the period and frequency of SHM .
To derive an equation for the period and the frequency , we must first define and analyze the equations of motion .
Note that the force constant is sometimes referred to as the spring constant .
Consider a block attached to a spring on a frictionless table .
The equilibrium position ( the position where the spring is neither stretched nor compressed ) is marked as .
At the equilibrium position , the net force is zero .
Work is done on the block to pull it out to a position of and it is then released from rest .
The maximum x -position ( A ) is called the amplitude of the motion .
The block begins to oscillate in SHM between and where A is the amplitude of the motion and T is the period of the oscillation .
The period is the time for one oscillation .
shows the motion of the block as it completes one and a half oscillations after release .
shows a plot of the position of the block versus time .
When the position is plotted versus time , it is clear that the data can be modeled by a cosine function with an amplitude A and a period T .
The cosine function repeats every multiple of whereas the motion of the block repeats every period T .
However , the function repeats every integer multiple of the period .
The maximum of the cosine function is one , so it is necessary to multiply the cosine function by the amplitude A .
Recall from the chapter on rotation that the angular frequency equals angular frequency is defined as divided by the period , .
In this case , the period is constant , so the The equation for the position as a function of time is good for modeling data , where the position of the block at the initial time is at the amplitude A and the initial velocity is zero .
Often when taking experimental data , the position of the mass at the initial time is not equal to the amplitude and the initial velocity is not zero .
Consider 10 seconds of data collected by a student in lab , shown in .
The data in can still be modeled with a periodic function , like a cosine function , but the function is shifted to the right .
This shift is known as a phase shift and is usually represented by the Greek letter phi .
It should be noted that because sine and cosine functions differ only by a phase shift , this motion could be modeled using either the cosine or sine function .
The velocity of the mass on a spring , oscillating in SHM , can be found by taking the derivative of the position equation : Because the sine function oscillates between –1 and +1 , the maximum velocity is the amplitude times the angular frequency , .
The maximum velocity occurs at the equilibrium position when the mass is moving toward .
The maximum velocity in the negative direction is attained at the equilibrium position when the mass is moving toward and is equal to .
The acceleration of the mass on the spring can be found by taking the time derivative of the velocity : The maximum acceleration is .
The maximum acceleration occurs at the position , and the acceleration at the position and is equal to .
is the angular frequency A 2.00-kg block is placed on a frictionless surface .
A spring with a force constant of is attached to the block , and the opposite end of the spring is attached to the wall .
The spring can be compressed or extended .
The equilibrium position is marked as Work is done on the block , pulling it out to The block is released from rest and oscillates between and The period of the motion is 1.57 s. Determine the equations of motion .
We first find the angular frequency .
The phase shift is zero , because the block is released from rest at Once the angular frequency is found , we can determine the maximum velocity and maximum acceleration .
The angular frequency can be found and used to find the maximum velocity and maximum acceleration : All that is left is to fill in the equations of motion : The position , velocity , and acceleration can be found for any time .
It is important to remember that when using these equations , your calculator must be in radians mode .
We can use the equations of motion and Newton ’ s second law to find equations for the angular frequency , frequency , and period .
Consider the block on a spring on a frictionless surface .
There are three forces on the mass : the weight , the normal force , and the force due to the spring .
The only two forces that act perpendicular to the surface are the weight and the normal force , which have equal magnitudes and opposite directions , and thus sum to zero .
The angular frequency is defined as which yields an equation for the period of the motion : The period also depends only on the mass and the force constant .
The greater the mass , the longer the period .
The stiffer the spring , the shorter the period .
The frequency is When a spring is hung vertically and a block is attached and set in motion , the block oscillates in SHM .
In this case , there is no normal force , and the net effect of the force of gravity is to change the equilibrium position .
Two forces act on the block : the weight and the force of the spring .
The weight is constant and the force of the spring changes as the length of the spring changes .
As shown in , if the position of the block is recorded as a function of time , the recording is a periodic function .
If the block is displaced to a position y , the net force becomes .
But we found that at the equilibrium position , .
The constant force of gravity only served to shift the equilibrium location of the mass .
Therefore , the solution should be the same form as for a block on a horizontal spring , The equations for the velocity and the acceleration also have the same form as for the horizontal case .
Note that the inclusion of the phase shift means that the motion can actually be modeled using either a cosine or a sine function , since these two functions only differ by a phase shift .
To produce a deformation in an object , we must do work .
That is , whether you pluck a guitar string or compress a car ’ s shock absorber , a force must be exerted through a distance .
If the only result is deformation , and no work goes into thermal , sound , or kinetic energy , then all the work is initially stored in the deformed object as some form of potential energy .
Consider the example of a block attached to a spring on a frictionless table , oscillating in SHM .
The force of the spring is a conservative force ( which you studied in the chapter on potential energy and conservation of energy ) , and we can define a potential energy for it .
This potential energy is the energy stored in the spring when the spring is extended or compressed .
When the spring is stretched or compressed a distance x , the potential energy stored in the spring is To study the energy of a simple harmonic oscillator , we need to consider all the forms of energy .
Consider the example of a block attached to a spring , placed on a frictionless surface , oscillating in SHM .
The potential energy stored in the deformation of the spring is In a simple harmonic oscillator , the energy oscillates between kinetic energy of the mass and potential energy stored in the spring .
In the SHM of the mass and spring system , there are no dissipative forces , so the total energy is the sum of the potential energy and kinetic energy .
In this section , we consider the conservation of energy of the system .
The concepts examined are valid for all simple harmonic oscillators , including those where the gravitational force plays a role .
Consider , which shows an oscillating block attached to a spring .
In the case of undamped SHM , the energy oscillates back and forth between kinetic and potential , going completely from one form of energy to the other as the system oscillates .
So for the simple example of an object on a frictionless surface attached to a spring , the motion starts with all of the energy stored in the spring as elastic potential energy .
As the object starts to move , the elastic potential energy is converted into kinetic energy , becoming entirely kinetic energy at the equilibrium position .
The energy is then converted back into elastic potential energy by the spring as it is stretched or compressed .
The velocity becomes zero when the kinetic energy is completely converted , and this cycle then repeats .
Understanding the conservation of energy in these cycles will provide extra insight here and in later applications of SHM , such as alternating circuits .
Consider , which shows the energy at specific points on the periodic motion .
While staying constant , the energy oscillates between the kinetic energy of the block and the potential energy stored in the spring : The motion of the block on a spring in SHM is defined by the position the total energy of the system : .
A closer look at the energy of the system shows that the kinetic energy oscillates like a sine-squared function , while the potential energy oscillates like a cosine-squared function .
However , the total energy for the system is constant and is proportional to the amplitude squared .
shows a plot of the potential , kinetic , and total energies of the block and spring system as a function of time .
Also plotted are the position and velocity as a function of time .
Before time the block is attached to the spring and placed at the equilibrium position .
Work is done on the block by applying an external force , pulling it out to a position of .
The system now has potential energy stored in the spring .
At time the position of the block is equal to the amplitude , the potential energy stored in the spring is equal to .
The velocity and kinetic energy of the block are zero at time At time the block is released from rest .
, and the force on the block is maximum and points in the negative x -direction We have just considered the energy of SHM as a function of time .
Another interesting view of the simple harmonic oscillator is to consider the energy as a function of position .
shows a graph of the energy versus position of a system undergoing SHM .
The potential energy curve in resembles a bowl .
When a marble is placed in a bowl , it settles to the equilibrium position at the lowest point of the bowl .
This happens because a restoring force points toward the equilibrium point .
This equilibrium point is sometimes referred to as a fixed point .
When the marble is disturbed to a different position , the marble oscillates around the equilibrium position .
Looking back at the graph of potential energy , the force can be found by looking at the slope of the potential energy graph .
Since the force on either side of the fixed point points back toward the equilibrium point , the equilibrium point is called a stable equilibrium point .
The points and are called the turning points .
( See . )
Stability is an important concept .
If an equilibrium point is stable , a slight disturbance of an object that is initially at the stable equilibrium point will cause the object to oscillate around that point .
The stable equilibrium point occurs because the force on either side is directed toward it .
For an unstable equilibrium point , if the object is disturbed slightly , it does not return to the equilibrium point .
Consider the marble in the bowl example .
If the bowl is right-side up , the marble , if disturbed slightly , will oscillate around the stable equilibrium point .
If the bowl is turned upside down , the marble can be balanced on the top , at the equilibrium point where the net force is zero .
However , if the marble is disturbed slightly , it will not return to the equilibrium point , but will instead roll off the bowl .
The reason is that the force on either side of the equilibrium point is directed away from that point .
This point is an unstable equilibrium point .
shows three conditions .
The first is a stable equilibrium point ( a ) , the second is an unstable equilibrium point ( b ) , and the last is also an unstable equilibrium point ( c ) , because the force on only one side points toward the equilibrium point .
The process of determining whether an equilibrium point is stable or unstable can be formalized .
Consider the potential energy curves shown in .
The force can be found by analyzing the slope of the graph .
The force is In ( a ) , the fixed point is at When the force is positive .
When the force is negative .
This is a stable point .
In ( b ) , the fixed point is at When the force is negative .
When the force is also negative .
This is an unstable point .
A practical application of the concept of stable equilibrium points is the force between two neutral atoms in a molecule .
If two molecules are in close proximity , separated by a few atomic diameters , they can experience an attractive force .
If the molecules move close enough so that the electron shells of the other electrons overlap , the force between the molecules becomes repulsive .
The attractive force between the two atoms may cause the atoms to form a molecule .
The force between the two molecules is not a linear force and can not be modeled simply as two masses separated by a spring , but the atoms of the molecule can oscillate around an equilibrium point when displaced a small amount from the equilibrium position .
The atoms oscillate due the attractive force and repulsive force between the two atoms .
Consider one example of the interaction between two atoms known as the van Der Waals interaction .
It is beyond the scope of this chapter to discuss in depth the interactions of the two atoms , but the oscillations of the atoms can be examined by considering one example of a model of the potential energy of the system .
One suggestion to model the potential energy of this molecule is with the Lennard-Jones 6-12 potential : A graph of this function is shown in .
The two parameters and are found experimentally .
From the graph , you can see that there is a potential energy well , which has some similarities to the potential energy well of the potential energy function of the simple harmonic oscillator discussed in .
The Lennard-Jones potential has a stable equilibrium point where the potential energy is minimum and the force on either side of the equilibrium point points toward equilibrium point .
Note that unlike the simple harmonic oscillator , the potential well of the Lennard-Jones potential is not symmetric .
This is due to the fact that the force between the atoms is not a Hooke ’ s law force and is not linear .
The atoms can still oscillate around the equilibrium position because when , the force is positive ; when , the force is negative .
Notice that as x approaches zero , the slope is quite steep and negative , which means that the force is large and positive .
This suggests that it takes a large force to try to push the atoms close together .
As x becomes increasingly large , the slope becomes less steep and the force is smaller and negative .
This suggests that if given a large enough energy , the atoms can be separated .
If you are interested in this interaction , find the force between the molecules by taking the derivative of the potential energy function .
You will see immediately that the force does not resemble a Hooke ’ s law force , but if you are familiar with the binomial theorem : the force can be approximated by a Hooke ’ s law force .
Getting back to the system of a block and a spring in , once the block is released from rest , it begins to move in the negative direction toward the equilibrium position .
The potential energy decreases and the magnitude of the velocity and the kinetic energy increase .
At time , the block reaches the equilibrium position where the force on the block and the potential energy are zero .
At the equilibrium position , the block reaches a negative velocity with a magnitude equal to the maximum velocity .
The kinetic energy is maximum and equal to At this point , the force on the block is zero , but momentum carries the block , and it continues in the negative direction toward .
As the block continues to move , the force on it acts in the positive direction and the magnitude of the velocity and kinetic energy decrease .
The potential energy increases as the spring compresses .
At time , the block reaches .
Here the velocity and kinetic energy are equal to zero .
The force on the block is and the potential energy stored in the spring is .
When considering many forms of oscillations , you will find the energy proportional to the amplitude squared .
Check Your Understanding Why would it hurt more if you snapped your hand with a ruler than with a loose spring , even if the displacement of each system is equal ?
Check Your Understanding Identify one way you could decrease the maximum velocity of a simple harmonic oscillator .
An easy way to model SHM is by considering uniform circular motion .
shows one way of using this method .
A peg ( a cylinder of wood ) is attached to a vertical disk , rotating with a constant angular frequency .
shows a side view of the disk and peg .
If a lamp is placed above the disk and peg , the peg produces a shadow .
Let the disk have a radius of and define the position of the shadow that coincides with the center line of the disk to be .
As the disk rotates at a constant rate , the shadow oscillates between and .
Now imagine a block on a spring beneath the floor as shown in .
If the disk turns at the proper angular frequency , the shadow follows along with the block .
The position of the shadow can be modeled with the equation Recall that the block attached to the spring does not move at a constant velocity .
How often does the wheel have to turn to have the peg ’ s shadow always on the block ?
The disk must turn at a constant angular frequency equal to times the frequency of oscillation .
shows the basic relationship between uniform circular motion and SHM .
The peg lies at the tip of the radius , a distance A from the center of the disk .
The x -axis is defined by a line drawn parallel to the ground , cutting the disk in half .
The y -axis ( not shown ) is defined by a line perpendicular to the ground , cutting the disk into a left half and a right half .
The center of the disk is the point The projection of the position of the peg onto the fixed x -axis gives the position of the shadow , which undergoes SHM analogous to the system of the block and spring .
At the time shown in the figure , the projection has position x and moves to the left with velocity v .
The tangential velocity of the peg around the circle equals of the block on the spring .
The x -component of the velocity is equal to the velocity of the block on the spring .
We can use to analyze the velocity of the shadow as the disk rotates .
The peg moves in a circle with a speed of .
The shadow moves with a velocity equal to the component of the peg ’ s velocity that is parallel to the surface where the shadow is being produced : It follows that the acceleration is Check Your Understanding Identify an object that undergoes uniform circular motion .
Describe how you could trace the SHM of this object .
Pendulums are in common usage .
Grandfather clocks use a pendulum to keep time and a pendulum can be used to measure the acceleration due to gravity .
For small displacements , a pendulum is a simple harmonic oscillator .
A simple pendulum is defined to have a point mass , also known as the pendulum bob , which is suspended from a string of length L with negligible mass .
Here , the only forces acting on the bob are the force of gravity ( i.e. , the weight of the bob ) and tension from the string .
The mass of the string is assumed to be negligible as compared to the mass of the bob .
Consider the torque on the pendulum .
The force providing the restoring torque is the component of the weight of the pendulum bob that acts along the arc length .
The torque is the length of the string L times the component of the net force that is perpendicular to the radius of the arc .
The minus sign indicates the torque acts in the opposite direction of the angular displacement : The solution to this differential equation involves advanced calculus , and is beyond the scope of this text .
But note that for small angles ( less than 15 degrees ) , and differ by less than 1 % , so we can use the small angle approximation The angle describes the position of the pendulum .
Using the small angle approximation gives an approximate solution for small angles , Because this equation has the same form as the equation for SHM , the solution is easy to find .
The angular frequency is and the period is The period of a simple pendulum depends on its length and the acceleration due to gravity .
The period is completely independent of other factors , such as mass and the maximum displacement .
As with simple harmonic oscillators , the period T for a pendulum is nearly independent of amplitude , especially if is less than about Even simple pendulum clocks can be finely adjusted and remain accurate .
Note the dependence of T on g .
If the length of a pendulum is precisely known , it can actually be used to measure the acceleration due to gravity , as in the following example .
What is the acceleration due to gravity in a region where a simple pendulum having a length 75.000 cm has a period of 1.7357 s ?
We are asked to find g given the period T and the length L of a pendulum .
We can solve assuming only that the angle of deflection is less than .
for g , Square and solve for g : Substitute known values into the new equation : Calculate to find g : This method for determining g can be very accurate , which is why length and period are given to five digits in this example .
For the precision of the approximation to be better than the precision of the pendulum length and period , the maximum displacement angle should be kept below about .
Check Your Understanding An engineer builds two simple pendulums .
Both are suspended from small wires secured to the ceiling of a room .
Each pendulum hovers 2 cm above the floor .
Pendulum 1 has a bob with a mass of 10 kg .
Pendulum 2 has a bob with a mass of 100 kg .
Describe how the motion of the pendulums will differ if the bobs are both displaced by .
Any object can oscillate like a pendulum .
Consider a coffee mug hanging on a hook in the pantry .
If the mug gets knocked , it oscillates back and forth like a pendulum until the oscillations die out .
We have described a simple pendulum as a point mass and a string .
A physical pendulum is any object whose oscillations are similar to those of the simple pendulum , but can not be modeled as a point mass on a string , and the mass distribution must be included into the equation of motion .
As for the simple pendulum , the restoring force of the physical pendulum is the force of gravity .
With the simple pendulum , the force of gravity acts on the center of the pendulum bob .
In the case of the physical pendulum , the force of gravity acts on the center of mass ( CM ) of an object .
The object oscillates about a point O .
Consider an object of a generic shape as shown in .
When a physical pendulum is hanging from a point but is free to rotate , it rotates because of the torque applied at the CM , produced by the component of the object ’ s weight that acts tangent to the motion of the CM .
Taking the counterclockwise direction to be positive , the component of the gravitational force that acts tangent to the motion is .
The minus sign is the result of the restoring force acting in the opposite direction of the increasing angle .
Recall that the torque is .
The magnitude of the torque is equal to the length of the radius arm times the tangential equal to .
Here , the length L of the radius arm is the distance between the point of component of the force applied , rotation and the CM .
To analyze the motion , start with the net torque .
Like the simple pendulum , consider only small angles so that .
The solution is where is the maximum angular displacement .
The angular frequency is The period is therefore Note that for a simple pendulum , the moment of inertia is and the period reduces to .
In extreme conditions , skyscrapers can sway up to two meters with a frequency of up to 20.00 Hz due to high winds or seismic activity .
Several companies have developed physical pendulums that are placed on the top of the skyscrapers .
As the skyscraper sways to the right , the pendulum swings to the left , reducing the sway .
Assuming the oscillations have a frequency of 0.50 Hz , design a pendulum that consists of a long beam , of constant density , with a mass of 100 metric tons and a pivot point at one end of the beam .
What should be the length of the beam ?
We are asked to find the length of the physical pendulum with a known mass .
We first need to find the moment of inertia of the beam .
We can then use the equation for the period of a physical pendulum to find the length .
Find the moment of inertia for the CM : Use the parallel axis theorem to find the moment of inertia about the point of rotation : The period of a physical pendulum has a period of .
Use the moment of inertia to solve for the length L : There are many ways to reduce the oscillations , including modifying the shape of the skyscrapers , using multiple physical pendulums , and using tuned-mass dampers .
A torsional pendulum consists of a rigid body suspended by a light wire or spring .
When the body is twisted some small maximum angle and released from rest , the body oscillates between and .
The restoring torque is supplied by the shearing of the string or wire .
The restoring torque can be modeled as being proportional to the angle : The variable kappa is known as the torsion constant of the wire or string .
The minus sign shows that the restoring torque acts in the opposite direction to increasing angular displacement .
The net torque is equal to the moment of inertia times the angular acceleration : This equation says that the second time derivative of the position ( in this case , the angle ) equals a negative constant times the position .
This looks very similar to the equation of motion for the SHM , where the period was found to be .
Therefore , the period of the torsional pendulum can be found using The units for the torsion constant are which show that the unit for the period is the second .
and the units for the moment of inertial are A rod has a length of and a mass of 4.00 kg .
A string is attached to the CM of the rod and the system is hung from the ceiling .
The rod is displaced 10 degrees from the equilibrium position and released from rest .
The rod oscillates with a period of 0.5 s. What is the torsion constant ?
We are asked to find the torsion constant of the string .
We first need to find the moment of inertia .
Find the moment of inertia for the CM : Calculate the torsion constant using the equation for the period : Like the force constant of the system of a block and a spring , the larger the torsion constant , the shorter the period .
In the real world , oscillations seldom follow true SHM .
Friction of some sort usually acts to dampen the motion so it dies away , or needs more force to continue .
In this section , we examine some examples of damped harmonic motion and see how to modify the equations of motion to describe this more general case .
A guitar string stops oscillating a few seconds after being plucked .
To keep swinging on a playground swing , you must keep pushing .
Although we can often make friction and other nonconservative forces small or negligible , completely undamped motion is rare .
In fact , we may even want to damp oscillations , such as with car shock absorbers .
shows a mass m attached to a spring with a force constant The mass is raised to a position , the initial amplitude , and then released .
The mass oscillates around the equilibrium position in a fluid with viscosity but the amplitude decreases for each oscillation .
For a system that has a small amount of damping , the period and frequency are constant and are nearly the same as for SHM , but the amplitude gradually decreases as shown .
This occurs because the non-conservative damping force removes energy from the system , usually in the form of thermal energy .
Consider the forces acting on the mass .
Note that the only contribution of the weight is to change the equilibrium position , as discussed earlier in the chapter .
Therefore , the net force is equal to the force of the spring and the damping force .
If the magnitude of the velocity is small , meaning the mass oscillates slowly , the damping force is proportional to the velocity and acts against the direction of motion .
The net force on the mass is therefore Writing this as a differential equation in x , we obtain To determine the solution to this equation , consider the plot of position versus time shown in .
The curve resembles a cosine curve oscillating in the envelope of an exponential function where .
The solution is It is left as an exercise to prove that this is , in fact , the solution .
To prove that it is the right solution , take the first and second derivatives with respect to time and substitute them into .
It is found that is the solution if Recall that the angular frequency of a mass undergoing SHM is equal to the square root of the force constant divided by the mass .
This is often referred to as the natural angular frequency , which is represented as The angular frequency for damped harmonic motion becomes Recall that when we began this description of damped harmonic motion , we stated that the damping must be small .
Two questions come to mind .
Why must the damping be small ?
And how small is small ?
If you gradually increase the amount of damping in a system , the period and frequency begin to be affected , because damping opposes and hence slows the back and forth motion .
( The net force is smaller in both directions . )
If there is very large damping , the system does not even oscillate—it slowly moves toward equilibrium .
The angular frequency is equal to is a complex number .
becomes a negative number and becomes smaller and eventually reaches zero when .
If b becomes any larger , As b increases , shows the displacement of a harmonic oscillator for different amounts of damping .
When the damping constant is small , , the system oscillates while the amplitude of the motion decays exponentially .
This system is said to be underdamped , as in curve ( a ) .
Many systems are underdamped , and oscillate while the amplitude decreases exponentially , such as the mass oscillating on a spring .
The damping may be quite small , but eventually the mass comes to rest .
If the damping constant is , the system is said to be critically damped , as in curve ( b ) .
An example of a critically damped system is the shock absorbers in a car .
It is advantageous to have the oscillations decay as fast as possible .
Here , the system does not oscillate , but asymptotically approaches the equilibrium condition as quickly as possible .
Curve ( c ) in represents an overdamped system where An overdamped system will approach equilibrium over a longer period of time .
Critical damping is often desired , because such a system returns to equilibrium rapidly and remains at equilibrium as well .
In addition , a constant force applied to a critically damped system moves the system to a new equilibrium position in the shortest time possible without overshooting or oscillating about the new position .
Check Your Understanding Why are completely undamped harmonic oscillators so rare ?
Sit in front of a piano sometime and sing a loud brief note at it with the dampers off its strings .
It will sing the same note back at you—the strings , having the same frequencies as your voice , are resonating in response to the forces from the sound waves that you sent to them .
This is a good example of the fact that objects—in this case , piano strings—can be forced to oscillate , and oscillate most easily at their natural frequency .
In this section , we briefly explore applying a periodic driving force acting on a simple harmonic oscillator .
The driving force puts energy into the system at a certain frequency , not necessarily the same as the natural frequency of the system .
Recall that the natural frequency is the frequency at which a system would oscillate if there were no driving and no damping force .
Most of us have played with toys involving an object supported on an elastic band , something like the paddle ball suspended from a finger in .
Imagine the finger in the figure is your finger .
At first , you hold your finger steady , and the ball bounces up and down with a small amount of damping .
If you move your finger up and down slowly , the ball follows along without bouncing much on its own .
As you increase the frequency at which you move your finger up and down , the ball responds by oscillating with increasing amplitude .
When you drive the ball at its natural frequency , the ball ’ s oscillations increase in amplitude with each oscillation for as long as you drive it .
The phenomenon of driving a system with a frequency equal to its natural frequency is called resonance .
A system being driven at its natural frequency is said to resonate .
As the driving frequency gets progressively higher than the resonant or natural frequency , the amplitude of the oscillations becomes smaller until the oscillations nearly disappear , and your finger simply moves up and down with little effect on the ball .
Consider a simple experiment .
Attach a mass m to a spring in a viscous fluid , similar to the apparatus discussed in the damped harmonic oscillator .
This time , instead of fixing the free end of the spring , attach the free end to a disk that is driven by a variable-speed motor .
The motor turns with an angular driving frequency of .
The rotating disk provides energy to the system by the work done by the driving force .
The experimental apparatus is shown in .
Using Newton ’ s second law to the force equation for the damped harmonic oscillator , with the addition of the driving force : we can analyze the motion of the mass .
The resulting equation is similar When an oscillator is forced with a periodic driving force , the motion may seem chaotic .
The motions of the oscillator is known as transients .
After the transients die out , the oscillator reaches a steady state , where the motion is periodic .
After some time , the steady state solution to this differential equation is Once again , it is left as an exercise to prove that this equation is a solution .
Taking the first and second time derivative of x ( t ) and substituting them into the force equation shows that is a solution as long as the amplitude is equal to where is the natural angular frequency of the system of the mass and spring .
Recall that the angular frequency , and therefore the frequency , of the motor can be adjusted .
As the frequency of the driving force approaches the natural frequency of the system , the denominator becomes small and the amplitude of the oscillations becomes large .
The maximum amplitude results when the frequency of the driving force equals the natural frequency of the system .
shows a graph of the amplitude of a damped harmonic oscillator as a function of the frequency of the periodic force driving it .
Each of the three curves on the graph represents a different amount of damping .
All three curves peak at the point where the frequency of the driving force equals the natural frequency of the harmonic oscillator .
The highest peak , or greatest response , is for the least amount of damping , because less energy is removed by the damping force .
Note that since the amplitude grows as the damping decreases , taking this to the limit where there is no damping , the amplitude becomes infinite .
Note that a small-amplitude driving force can produce a large-amplitude response .
This phenomenon is known as resonance .
A common example of resonance is a parent pushing a small child on a swing .
When the child wants to go higher , the parent does not move back and then , getting a running start , slam into the child , applying a great force in a short interval .
Instead , the parent applies small pushes to the child at just the right frequency , and the amplitude of the child ’ s swings increases .
It is interesting to note that the widths of the resonance curves shown in depend on damping : the less the damping , the narrower the resonance .
The consequence is that if you want a driven oscillator to resonate at a very specific frequency , you need as little damping as possible .
For instance , a radio has a circuit that is used to choose a particular radio station .
In this case , the forced damped oscillator consists of a resistor , capacitor , and inductor , which will be discussed later in this course .
The circuit is “ tuned ” to pick a particular radio station .
Here it is desirable to have the resonance curve be very narrow , to pick out the exact frequency of the radio station chosen .
The narrowness of the graph , and the ability to pick out a certain frequency , is known as the quality of the system .
The quality is defined as the spread of the angular frequency , or equivalently , the spread in the frequency , at half the maximum amplitude , divided by the natural frequency as shown in .
For a small damping , the quality is approximately equal to .
These features of driven harmonic oscillators apply to a huge variety of systems .
For instance , magnetic resonance imaging ( MRI ) is a widely used medical diagnostic tool in which atomic nuclei ( mostly hydrogen nuclei or protons ) are made to resonate by incoming radio waves ( on the order of 100 MHz ) .
In all of these cases , the efficiency of energy transfer from the driving force into the oscillator is best at resonance .
shows a photograph of a famous example ( the Tacoma Narrows bridge ) of the destructive effects of a driven harmonic oscillation .
The Millennium bridge in London was closed for a short period of time for the same reason while inspections were carried out .
Observations lead to modifications being made to the bridge prior to the reopening .
glass until the glass shatters .
Explain why the trick works in terms of resonance and natural frequency .
Check Your Understanding A famous magic trick involves a performer singing a note toward a crystal In this chapter , we study the physics of wave motion .
We concentrate on mechanical waves , which are disturbances that move through a medium such as air or water .
Like simple harmonic motion studied in the preceding chapter , the energy transferred through the medium is proportional to the amplitude squared .
Surface water waves in the ocean are transverse waves in which the energy of the wave travels horizontally while the water oscillates up and down due to some restoring force .
In the picture above , a buoy is used to convert the awesome power of ocean waves into electricity .
The up-and-down motion of the buoy generated as the waves pass is converted into rotational motion that turns a rotor in an electric generator .
The generator charges batteries , which are in turn used to provide a consistent energy source for the end user .
The concepts presented in this chapter will be the foundation for many interesting topics , from the transmission of information to the concepts of quantum mechanics .
We saw in that oscillatory motion is an important type of behavior that can be used to model a wide range of physical phenomena .
Oscillatory motion is also important because oscillations can generate waves , which are of fundamental importance in physics .
Many of the terms and equations we studied in the chapter on oscillations apply equally well to wave motion .
A wave is a disturbance that propagates , or moves from the place it was created .
There are three basic types of waves : mechanical waves , electromagnetic waves , and matter waves .
Basic mechanical waves are governed by Newton ’ s laws and require a medium .
A medium is the substance a mechanical waves propagates through , and the medium produces an elastic restoring force when it is deformed .
Mechanical waves transfer energy and momentum , without transferring mass .
Some examples of mechanical waves are water waves , sound waves , and seismic waves .
The medium for water waves is water ; for sound waves , the medium is usually air .
( Sound waves can travel in other media as well ; we will look at that in more detail in . )
For surface water waves , the disturbance occurs on the surface of the water , perhaps created by a rock thrown into a pond or by a swimmer splashing the surface repeatedly .
For sound waves , the disturbance is a change in air pressure , perhaps created by the oscillating cone inside a speaker or a vibrating tuning fork .
In both cases , the disturbance is the oscillation of the molecules of the fluid .
In mechanical waves , energy and momentum transfer with the motion of the wave , whereas the mass oscillates around an equilibrium point .
( We discuss this in . )
Earthquakes generate seismic waves from several types of disturbances , including the disturbance of Earth ’ s surface and pressure disturbances under the surface .
Seismic waves travel through the solids and liquids that form Earth .
In this chapter , we focus on mechanical waves .
Electromagnetic waves are associated with oscillations in electric and magnetic fields and do not require a medium .
Examples include gamma rays , X-rays , ultraviolet waves , visible light , infrared waves , microwaves , and radio waves .
Electromagnetic waves can travel through a vacuum at the speed of light , For example , light from distant stars travels through the vacuum of space and reaches Earth .
Electromagnetic waves have some characteristics that are similar to mechanical waves ; they are covered in more detail in .
Matter waves are a central part of the branch of physics known as quantum mechanics .
These waves are associated with protons , electrons , neutrons , and other fundamental particles found in nature .
The theory that all types of matter have wavelike properties was first proposed by Louis de Broglie in 1924 .
Matter waves are discussed in .
Mechanical waves exhibit characteristics common to all waves , such as amplitude , wavelength , period , frequency , and energy .
All wave characteristics can be described by a small set of underlying principles .
The simplest mechanical waves repeat themselves for several cycles and are associated with simple harmonic motion .
These simple harmonic waves can be modeled using some combination of sine and cosine functions .
For example , consider the simplified surface water wave that moves across the surface of water as illustrated in .
Unlike complex ocean waves , in surface water waves , the medium , in this case water , moves vertically , oscillating up and down , whereas the disturbance of the wave moves horizontally through the medium .
In , the waves causes a seagull to move up and down in simple harmonic motion as the wave crests and troughs ( peaks and valleys ) pass under the bird .
The crest is the highest point of the wave , and the trough is the lowest part of the wave .
The time for one complete oscillation of the up-and-down motion is the wave ’ s period T .
The wavelength can be measured between any two similar points along the medium that have the same height and the same slope .
In , the wavelength is shown measured between two crests .
As stated above , the period of the wave is equal to the time for one oscillation , but it is also equal to the time for one wavelength to pass through a point along the wave ’ s path .
The amplitude of the wave ( A ) is a measure of the maximum displacement of the medium from its equilibrium position .
In the figure , the equilibrium position is indicated by the dotted line , which is the height of the water if there were no waves moving through it .
In this case , the wave is symmetrical , the crest of the wave is a distance above the equilibrium position , and the trough is a distance below the equilibrium position .
The units for the amplitude can be centimeters or meters , or any convenient unit of distance .
In equation form , this is This fundamental relationship holds for all types of waves .
For water waves , v is the speed of a surface wave ; for sound , v is the speed of sound ; and for visible light , v is the speed of light .
We have seen that a simple mechanical wave consists of a periodic disturbance that propagates from one place to another through a medium .
In ( a ) , the wave propagates in the horizontal direction , whereas the medium is disturbed in the vertical direction .
Such a wave is called a transverse wave .
In a transverse wave , the wave may propagate in any direction , but the disturbance of the medium is perpendicular to the direction of propagation .
In contrast , in a longitudinal wave or compressional wave , the disturbance is parallel to the direction of propagation .
( b ) shows an example of a longitudinal wave .
The size of the disturbance is its amplitude A and is completely independent of the speed of propagation v .
A simple graphical representation of a section of the spring shown in ( b ) is shown in .
( a ) shows the equilibrium position of the spring before any waves move down it .
A point on the spring is marked with a blue dot .
( b ) through ( g ) show snapshots of the spring taken one-quarter of a period apart , sometime after the end of ` the spring is oscillated back and forth in the x -direction at a constant frequency .
The disturbance of the wave is seen as the compressions and the expansions of the spring .
Note that the blue dot oscillates around its equilibrium position a distance A , as the longitudinal wave moves in the positive x -direction with a constant speed .
The distance A is the amplitude of the wave .
The y -position of the dot does not change as the wave moves through the spring .
The wavelength of the wave is measured in part ( d ) .
The wavelength depends on the speed of the wave and the frequency of the driving force .
Waves may be transverse , longitudinal , or a combination of the two .
Examples of transverse waves are the waves on stringed instruments or surface waves on water , such as ripples moving on a pond .
Sound waves in air and water are longitudinal .
With sound waves , the disturbances are periodic variations in pressure that are transmitted in fluids .
Fluids do not have appreciable shear strength , and for this reason , the sound waves in them are longitudinal waves .
Sound in solids can have both longitudinal and transverse components , such as those in a seismic wave .
Earthquakes generate seismic waves under Earth ’ s surface with both longitudinal and transverse components ( called compressional or P-waves and shear or S-waves , respectively ) .
The components of seismic waves have important individual characteristics—they propagate at different speeds , for example .
Earthquakes also have surface waves that are similar to surface waves on water .
Ocean waves also have both transverse and longitudinal components .
A student takes a 30.00-m-long string and attaches one end to the wall in the physics lab .
The student then holds the free end of the rope , keeping the tension constant in the rope .
The student then begins to send waves down the string by moving the end of the string up and down with a frequency of 2.00 Hz .
The maximum displacement of the end of the string is 20.00 cm .
The first wave hits the lab wall 6.00 s after it was created .
( a ) What is the speed of the wave ?
( b ) What is the period of the wave ?
( c ) What is the wavelength of the wave ?
The speed of the wave can be derived by dividing the distance traveled by the time .
The period of the wave is the inverse of the frequency of the driving force .
Check Your Understanding When a guitar string is plucked , the guitar string oscillates as a result of waves moving through the string .
The vibrations of the string cause the air molecules to oscillate , forming sound waves .
The frequency of the sound waves is equal to the frequency of the vibrating string .
Is the wavelength of the sound wave always equal to the wavelength of the waves on the string ?
A transverse mechanical wave propagates in the positive x -direction through a spring ( as shown in ( a ) ) with a constant wave speed , and the medium oscillates between and around an equilibrium position .
The graph in shows the height of the spring ( y ) versus the position ( x ) , where the x -axis points in the direction of propagation .
The figure shows the height of the spring versus the x -position as a solid line .
( a ) Determine the wavelength and at amplitude of the wave .
( b ) Find the propagation velocity of the wave .
( c ) Calculate the period and frequency of the wave .
as a dotted line and the wave at The amplitude and wavelength can be determined from the graph .
Since the velocity is constant , the velocity of the wave can be found by dividing the distance traveled by the wave by the time it took the wave to travel the distance .
The period can be found from and the frequency from Read the wavelength from the graph , looking at the purple arrow in .
Read the amplitude by looking at the green arrow .
The wavelength is and the amplitude is The distance the wave traveled from time to time can be seen in the graph .
You should choose two points that are most convenient .
The displacement can also be found using any convenient point .
Check Your Understanding The propagation velocity of a transverse or longitudinal mechanical wave may be constant as the wave disturbance moves through the medium .
Consider a transverse mechanical wave : Is the velocity of the medium also constant ?
In the previous section , we described periodic waves by their characteristics of wavelength , period , amplitude , and wave speed of the wave .
Waves can also be described by the motion of the particles of the medium through which the waves move .
The position of particles of the medium can be mathematically modeled as wave functions , which can be used to find the position , velocity , and acceleration of the particles of the medium of the wave at any time .
A pulse can be described as wave consisting of a single disturbance that moves through the medium with a constant amplitude .
The pulse moves as a pattern that maintains its shape as it propagates with a constant wave speed .
Because the wave speed is constant , the distance the pulse moves in a time is equal to .
Consider a string kept at a constant tension where one end is fixed and the free end is oscillated between and by a mechanical device at a constant frequency .
shows snapshots of the wave at an interval of an eighth of a period , beginning after one period Notice that each select point on the string ( marked by colored dots ) oscillates up and down in simple harmonic motion , between and with a period T .
The wave on the string is sinusoidal and is translating in the positive x -direction as time progresses .
At this point , it is useful to recall from your study of algebra that if f ( x ) is some function , then is the same function translated in the positive x -direction by a distance d .
The function is the same function translated in the negative x -direction by a distance d .
We want to define a wave function that will give the y -position of each segment of the string for every position x along the string for every time t .
Looking at the first snapshot in , the y -position of the string between and can be modeled as a sine function .
This wave propagates down the string one wavelength in one period , as seen in the last snapshot .
The wave therefore moves with a constant wave speed of Recall that a sine function is a function of the angle , oscillating between and , and repeating every radians .
However , the y -position of the medium , or the wave function , oscillates between and , and repeats every wavelength .
The wave function can now be defined by It is often convenient to rewrite this wave function in a more compact form .
Multiplying through by the ratio the equation leads to The value is defined as the wave number .
The wave function modeling a sinusoidal wave , allowing for an initial phase shift is The value is known as the phase of the wave , where is the initial phase of the wave function .
Whether the temporal term is negative or positive depends on the direction of the wave .
First consider the minus sign for a wave with an initial phase equal to zero The phase of the wave would be Consider following a point on a wave , such as a crest .
A crest will occur when , that is , when for any integral value of n .
For instance , one particular crest occurs at As the wave moves , time increases and x must also increase to keep the phase equal to Therefore , the minus sign is for a wave moving in the positive x -direction .
Using the plus sign , The plus sign is used for waves moving in the negative x -direction .
In summary , models a wave moving in the positive x -direction and is known as a simple harmonic wave function .
A wave function is any function such that Later in this chapter , we will see that it is a solution to the linear wave equation .
Note that As time increases , x must decrease to keep the phase equal to works equally well because it corresponds to a different phase shift models a wave moving in the negative x -direction .
To find the amplitude , wavelength , period , and frequency of a sinusoidal wave , write down the wave function in the form The amplitude can be read straight from the equation and is equal to A .
All these characteristics of the wave can be found from the constants included in the equation or from simple combinations of these constants .
The direction of the wave can be determined by considering the sign of : A negative sign suggests that the wave is moving in the positive x -direction : All of the characteristics of the wave are contained in the wave function .
Note that the wave speed is the speed of the wave in the direction parallel to the motion of the wave .
Plotting the height of the medium y versus the position x for two times and can provide a graphical visualization of the wave .
There is a second velocity to the motion .
In this example , the wave is transverse , moving horizontally as the medium oscillates up and down perpendicular to the direction of motion .
The graph in shows the motion of the medium at point as a function of time .
Notice that the medium of the wave oscillates up and down between and every period of 4.0 seconds .
Check Your Understanding The wave function above is derived using a sine function .
Can a cosine function be used instead ?
As seen in , the wave speed is constant and represents the speed of the wave as it propagates through the medium , not the speed of the particles that make up the medium .
The particles of the medium oscillate around an equilibrium position as the wave propagates through the medium .
In the case of the transverse wave propagating in the x -direction , the particles oscillate up and down in the y -direction , perpendicular to the motion of the wave .
The velocity of the particles of the medium is not constant , which means there is an acceleration .
The velocity of the medium , which is perpendicular to the wave velocity in a transverse wave , can be found by taking the partial derivative of the position equation with respect to time .
The partial derivative is found by taking the derivative of the function , treating all variables as constants , except for the variable in question .
In the case of the partial derivative with respect to time t , the position x is treated as a constant .
Although this may sound strange if you haven ’ t seen it before , the object of this exercise is to find the transverse velocity at a point , so in this sense , the x -position is not changing .
We have The magnitude of the maximum velocity of the medium is .
This may look familiar from the and a mass on a spring .
We have just determined the velocity of the medium at a position x by taking the partial derivative , with respect to time , of the position y .
For a transverse wave , this velocity is perpendicular to the direction of propagation of the wave .
Taking the ratio and using the equation yields the linear wave equation ( also known simply as the wave equation or the equation of a vibrating string ) , is the linear wave equation , which is one of the most important equations in physics and engineering .
We derived it here for a transverse wave , but it is equally important when investigating longitudinal waves .
This relationship was also derived using a sinusoidal wave , but it successfully describes any wave or pulse that has the form These waves result due to a linear restoring force of the medium—thus , the name linear wave equation .
Any wave function that satisfies this equation is a linear wave function .
An interesting aspect of the linear wave equation is that if two wave functions are individually solutions to the linear wave equation , then the sum of the two linear wave functions is also a solution to the wave equation .
Consider two transverse waves that propagate along the x -axis , occupying the same medium .
Assume that the individual waves can be modeled with the wave functions and which are solutions to the linear wave equations and are therefore linear wave functions .
The sum of the wave functions is the wave function Consider the linear wave equation : This has shown that if two linear wave functions are added algebraically , the resulting wave function is also linear .
This wave function models the displacement of the medium of the resulting wave at each position along the x -axis .
If two linear waves occupy the same medium , they are said to interfere .
If these waves can be modeled with a linear wave function , these wave functions add to form the wave equation of the wave resulting from the interference of the individual waves .
The displacement of the medium at every point of the resulting wave is the algebraic sum of the displacements due to the individual waves .
Taking this analysis a step further , if wave functions and are solutions to the linear wave equation , then where A and B are constants , is also a solution to the linear wave equation .
This property is known as the principle of superposition .
Interference and superposition are covered in more detail in .
Consider a very long string held taut by two students , one on each end .
Student A oscillates the end of the string producing a wave modeled with the wave function and student B oscillates the string producing at twice the frequency , moving in the opposite direction .
Both waves move at the same speed The two waves interfere to form a resulting wave whose wave function is Find the velocity of the resulting wave using the linear wave equation First , write the wave function for the wave created by the second student .
Then find the second partial derivative with respect to position and the second partial derivative with respect to time .
Use the linear wave equation to find the velocity of the resulting wave .
For this reason , it is not surprising that the component waves as well as the resultant wave all travel at the same speed .
Check Your Understanding The wave equation works for any wave of the form In the previous section , we stated that a cosine function could also be used to model a simple harmonic mechanical wave .
Check if the wave is a solution to the wave equation .
Any disturbance that complies with the wave equation can propagate as a wave moving along the x -axis with a wave speed v .
It works equally well for waves on a string , sound waves , and electromagnetic waves .
This equation is extremely useful .
For example , it can be used to show that electromagnetic waves move at the speed of light .
The speed of a wave depends on the characteristics of the medium .
For example , in the case of a guitar , the strings vibrate to produce the sound .
The speed of the waves on the strings , and the wavelength , determine the frequency of the sound produced .
The strings on a guitar have different thickness but may be made of similar material .
They have different linear densities , where the linear density is defined as the mass per length , In this chapter , we consider only string with a constant linear density .
The tension of the strings is adjusted by turning spindles , called the tuning pegs , around which the strings are wrapped .
For the guitar , the linear density of the string and the tension in the string determine the speed of the waves in the string and the frequency of the sound produced is proportional to the wave speed .
To see how the speed of a wave on a string depends on the tension and the linear density , consider a pulse sent down a taut string .
When the taut string is at rest at the equilibrium position , the tension in the string is constant .
Consider a small element of the string with a mass equal to The mass element is at rest and in equilibrium and the force of tension of either side of the mass element is equal and opposite .
If you pluck a string under tension , a transverse wave moves in the positive x -direction , as shown in .
The mass element is small but is enlarged in the figure to make it visible .
The small mass element oscillates perpendicular to the wave motion as a result of the restoring force provided by the string and does not move in the x -direction .
The tension in the string , which acts in the positive and negative x -direction , is approximately constant and is independent of position and time .
Assume that the inclination of the displaced string with respect to the horizontal axis is small .
The net force on the element of the string , acting parallel to the string , is the sum of the tension in the string and the restoring force .
The x -components of the force of tension cancel , so the net force is equal to the sum of the y -components of the force .
The magnitude of the x -component of the force is equal to the horizontal force of tension of the string as shown in .
To obtain the y -components of the force , note that The is equal to the slope of a function at a point , which is equal to the partial derivative of y with respect to x at that point .
The speed of a pulse or wave on a string under tension can be found with the equation where is the tension in the string and is the mass per length of the string .
( b ) The linear density of the low E string is approximately 20 times greater than that of the high E string .
For waves to travel through the low E string at the same wave speed as the high E , would the tension need to be larger or smaller than the high E string ?
What would be the approximate tension ?
( c ) Calculate the tension of the low E string needed for the same wave speed .
The speed of the wave can be found from the linear density and the tension From the equation if the linear density is increased by a factor of almost 20 , the tension would need to be increased by a factor of 20 .
Knowing the velocity and the linear density , the velocity equation can be solved for the force of tension Use the velocity equation to find the speed : The tension would need to be increased by a factor of approximately 20 .
The tension would be slightly less than 1128 N. Use the velocity equation to find the actual tension : This solution is within of the approximation .
The standard notes of the six string ( high E , B , G , D , A , low E ) are tuned to vibrate at the fundamental frequencies ( 329.63 Hz , 246.94Hz , 196.00Hz , 146.83Hz , 110.00Hz , and 82.41Hz ) when plucked .
The frequencies depend on the speed of the waves on the string and the wavelength of the waves .
The six strings have different linear densities and are “ tuned ” by changing the tensions in the strings .
We will see in that the wavelength depends on the length of the strings and the boundary conditions .
To play notes other than the fundamental notes , the lengths of the strings are changed by pressing down on the strings .
Check Your Understanding The wave speed of a wave on a string depends on the tension and the linear mass density .
If the tension is doubled , what happens to the speed of the waves on the string ?
The speed of a wave on a string depends on the square root of the tension divided by the mass per length , the linear density .
In general , the speed of a wave through a medium depends on the elastic property of the medium and the inertial property of the medium .
The elastic property describes the tendency of the particles of the medium to return to their initial position when perturbed .
The inertial property describes the tendency of the particle to resist changes in velocity .
For example , sound is a mechanical wave that travels through a fluid or a solid .
The speed of sound in air with an atmospheric pressure of and a temperature of is Because the density depends on temperature , the speed of sound in air depends on the temperature of the air .
This will be discussed in detail in .
All waves carry energy , and sometimes this can be directly observed .
Earthquakes can shake whole cities to the ground , performing the work of thousands of wrecking balls .
Loud sounds can pulverize nerve cells in the inner ear , causing permanent hearing loss .
Ultrasound is used for deep-heat treatment of muscle strains .
A laser beam can burn away a malignancy .
Water waves chew up beaches .
In this section , we examine the quantitative expression of energy in waves .
This will be of fundamental importance in later discussions of waves , from sound to light to quantum mechanics .
The amount of energy in a wave is related to its amplitude and its frequency .
Large-amplitude earthquakes produce large ground displacements .
Loud sounds have high-pressure amplitudes and come from larger-amplitude source vibrations than soft sounds .
Large ocean breakers churn up the shore more than small ones .
Consider the example of the seagull and the water wave earlier in the chapter .
Work is done on the seagull by the wave as the seagull is moved up , changing its potential energy .
The larger the amplitude , the higher the seagull is lifted by the wave and the larger the change in potential energy .
The energy of the wave depends on both the amplitude and the frequency .
If the energy of each wavelength is considered to be a discrete packet of energy , a high-frequency wave will deliver more of these packets per unit time than a low-frequency wave .
We will see that the average rate of energy transfer in mechanical waves is proportional to both the square of the amplitude and the square of the frequency .
Consider a sinusoidal wave on a string that is produced by a string vibrator , as shown in .
The string vibrator is a device that vibrates a rod up and down .
A string of uniform linear mass density is attached to the rod , and the rod oscillates the string , producing a sinusoidal wave .
The rod does work on the string , producing energy that propagates along the string .
Consider a mass element of the string with a mass , as seen in .
As the energy propagates along the string , each mass element of the string is driven up and down at the same frequency as the wave .
Each mass element of the string can be modeled as a simple harmonic oscillator .
Since the string has a constant linear density each mass element of the string has the mass of each mass element of the string of length is The total mechanical energy of the wave is the sum of its kinetic energy and potential energy .
The kinetic energy as the mass element oscillates perpendicular to the direction of the motion of the wave .
To standardize the energy , consider the kinetic energy associated with a wavelength of the wave .
This kinetic energy can be integrated over the wavelength to find the energy associated with each wavelength of the wave : There is also potential energy associated with the wave .
Much like the mass oscillating on a spring , there is a conservative restoring force that , when the mass element is displaced from the equilibrium position , drives the mass element back to the equilibrium position .
Integrating over the wavelength , we can compute the potential energy over a wavelength : This equation can be used to find the energy over a The potential energy associated with a wavelength of the wave is equal to the kinetic energy associated with a wavelength .
If the velocity of the sinusoidal wave is constant , the time for one wavelength to pass by a point is equal to the period of the wave , which is also constant .
For a sinusoidal mechanical wave , the time-averaged power is therefore the energy associated with a wavelength divided by the period of the wave .
Recall that the angular frequency is equal to , so the power of a mechanical wave is equal to the square of the amplitude and the square of the frequency of the wave .
Consider a two-meter-long string with a mass of 70.00 g attached to a string vibrator as illustrated in .
The tension in the string is 90.0 N. When the string vibrator is turned on , it oscillates with a frequency of 60 Hz and produces a sinusoidal wave on the string with an amplitude of 4.00 cm and a constant wave speed .
What is the time-averaged power supplied to the wave by the string vibrator ?
The power supplied to the wave should equal the time-averaged power of the wave on the string .
We know the mass of the string , the length of the string , and the tension in the string .
The speed of the wave on the string can be derived from the linear mass density and the tension .
The string oscillates with the same frequency as the string vibrator , from which we can find the angular frequency .
This is true for most mechanical waves .
If either the angular frequency or the amplitude of the wave were doubled , the power would increase by a factor of four .
The timeaveraged power of the wave on a string is also proportional to the speed of the sinusoidal wave on the string .
If the speed were doubled , by increasing the tension by a factor of four , the power would also be doubled .
Check Your Understanding Is the time-averaged power of a sinusoidal wave on a string proportional to the linear density of the string ?
The equations for the energy of the wave and the time-averaged power were derived for a sinusoidal wave on a string .
In general , the energy of a mechanical wave and the power are proportional to the amplitude squared and to the angular frequency squared ( and therefore the frequency squared ) .
Another important characteristic of waves is the intensity of the waves .
Waves can also be concentrated or spread out .
Waves from an earthquake , for example , spread out over a larger area as they move away from a source , so they do less damage the farther they get from the source .
Changing the area the waves cover has important effects .
All these pertinent factors are included in the definition of intensity ( I ) as power per unit area : where P is the power carried by the wave through area A .
The definition of intensity is valid for any energy in transit , including that carried by waves .
The SI unit for intensity is watts per square meter ( W/m ) .
Many waves are spherical waves that move out from a source as a sphere .
For example , a sound speaker mounted on a post above the ground may produce sound waves that move away from the source as a spherical wave .
Sound waves are discussed in more detail in the next chapter , but in general , the farther you are from the speaker , the less intense the sound you hear .
In the case of the two-dimensional circular wave , the wave moves out , increasing the circumference of the wave as the radius of the circle increases .
If you toss a pebble in a pond , the surface ripple moves out as a circular wave .
As the ripple moves away from the source , the amplitude decreases .
The energy of the wave spreads around a larger circumference and the amplitude decreases proportional to which is also the same in the case of a spherical wave , since intensity is proportional to the amplitude squared .
Up to now , we have been studying mechanical waves that propagate continuously through a medium , but we have not discussed what happens when waves encounter the boundary of the medium or what happens when a wave encounters another wave propagating through the same medium .
Waves do interact with boundaries of the medium , and all or part of the wave can be reflected .
For example , when you stand some distance from a rigid cliff face and yell , you can hear the sound waves reflect off the rigid surface as an echo .
Waves can also interact with other waves propagating in the same medium .
If you throw two rocks into a pond some distance from one another , the circular ripples that result from the two stones seem to pass through one another as they propagate out from where the stones entered the water .
This phenomenon is known as interference .
In this section , we examine what happens to waves encountering a boundary of a medium or another wave propagating in the same medium .
We will see that their behavior is quite different from the behavior of particles and rigid bodies .
Later , when we study modern physics , we will see that only at the scale of atoms do we see similarities in the properties of waves and particles .
When a wave propagates through a medium , it reflects when it encounters the boundary of the medium .
The wave before hitting the boundary is known as the incident wave .
The wave after encountering the boundary is known as the reflected wave .
How the wave is reflected at the boundary of the medium depends on the boundary conditions ; waves will react differently if the boundary of the medium is fixed in place or free to move .
A fixed boundary condition exists when the medium at a boundary is fixed in place so it can not move .
A free boundary condition exists when the medium at the boundary is free to move .
Part ( a ) of the shows a fixed boundary condition .
Here , one end of the string is fixed to a wall so the end of the string is fixed in place and the medium ( the string ) at the boundary can not move .
When the wave is reflected , the amplitude of the reflected way is exactly the same as the amplitude of the incident wave , but the reflected wave is reflected out of phase with respect to the incident wave .
The phase change can be explained using Newton ’ s third law : Recall that Newton ’ s third law states that when object A exerts a force on object B , then object B exerts an equal and opposite force on object A .
As the incident wave encounters the wall , the string exerts an upward force on the wall and the wall reacts by exerting an equal and opposite force on the string .
The reflection at a fixed boundary is inverted .
Note that the figure shows a crest of the incident wave reflected as a trough .
If the incident wave were a trough , the reflected wave would be a crest .
Part ( b ) of the figure shows a free boundary condition .
Here , one end of the string is tied to a solid ring of negligible mass on a frictionless pole , so the end of the string is free to move up and down .
As the incident wave encounters the boundary of the medium , it is also reflected .
In the case of a free boundary condition , the reflected wave is in phase with respect to the incident wave .
In this case , the wave encounters the free boundary applying an upward force on the ring , accelerating the ring up .
The ring travels up to the maximum height equal to the amplitude of the wave and then accelerates down towards the equilibrium position due to the tension in the string .
The figure shows the crest of an incident wave being reflected in phase with respect to the incident wave as a crest .
If the incident wave were a trough , the reflected wave would also be a trough .
The amplitude of the reflected wave would be equal to the amplitude of the incident wave .
In some situations , the boundary of the medium is neither fixed nor free .
Consider ( a ) , where a low-linear mass density string is attached to a string of a higher linear mass density .
In this case , the reflected wave is out of phase with respect to the incident wave .
There is also a transmitted wave that is in phase with respect to the incident wave .
Both the incident and the reflected waves have amplitudes less than the amplitude of the incident wave .
If the tension is the same in both strings , the wave speed is higher in the string with the lower linear mass density .
Part ( b ) of the figure shows a high-linear mass density string is attached to a string of a lower linear density .
In this case , the reflected wave is in phase with respect to the incident wave .
There is also a transmitted wave that is in phase with respect to the incident wave .
Both the incident and the reflected waves have amplitudes less than the amplitude of the incident wave .
Here you may notice that if the tension is the same in both strings , the wave speed is higher in the string with the lower linear mass density .
Most waves do not look very simple .
Complex waves are more interesting , even beautiful , but they look formidable .
Most interesting mechanical waves consist of a combination of two or more traveling waves propagating in the same medium .
The principle of superposition can be used to analyze the combination of waves .
Consider two simple pulses of the same amplitude moving toward one another in the same medium , as shown in .
Eventually , the waves overlap , producing a wave that has twice the amplitude , and then continue on unaffected by the encounter .
The pulses are said to interfere , and this phenomenon is known as interference .
To analyze the interference of two or more waves , we use the principle of superposition .
This property is exhibited by many waves observed , such as waves on a string , sound waves , and surface water waves .
Electromagnetic waves also obey the superposition principle , but the electric and magnetic fields of the combined wave are added instead of the displacement of the medium .
Waves that obey the superposition principle are linear waves ; waves that do not obey the superposition principle are said to be nonlinear waves .
In this chapter , we deal with linear waves , in particular , sinusoidal waves .
The superposition principle can be understood by considering the linear wave equation .
In , we defined a linear wave as a wave whose mathematical representation obeys the linear wave equation .
For a transverse wave on a string with an elastic restoring force , the linear wave equation is Any wave function where the argument of the function is linear is a solution to the linear wave equation and is a linear wave function .
If wave functions and are solutions to the linear wave equation , the sum of the two functions is also a solution to the linear wave equation .
Mechanical waves that obey superposition are normally restricted to waves with amplitudes that are small with respect to their wavelengths .
If the amplitude is too large , the medium is distorted past the region where the restoring force of the medium is linear .
Waves can interfere constructively or destructively .
shows two identical sinusoidal waves that arrive at the same point exactly in phase .
( a ) and ( b ) show the two individual waves , ( c ) shows the resultant wave that results from the algebraic sum of the two linear waves .
The crests of the two waves are precisely aligned , as are the troughs .
This superposition produces constructive interference .
Because the disturbances add , constructive interference produces a wave that has twice the amplitude of the individual waves , but has the same wavelength .
shows two identical waves that arrive exactly out of phase , producing destructive interference .
( a ) and ( b ) show the individual waves , and ( c ) shows the superposition of the two waves .
Because the troughs of one wave add the crest of the other wave , the resulting amplitude is zero for destructive interference—the waves completely cancel .
When linear waves interfere , the resultant wave is just the algebraic sum of the individual waves as stated in the principle of superposition .
shows two waves ( red and blue ) and the resultant wave ( black ) .
The resultant wave is the algebraic sum of the two individual waves .
The superposition of most waves produces a combination of constructive and destructive interference , and can vary from place to place and time to time .
Sound from a stereo , for example , can be loud in one spot and quiet in another .
Varying loudness means the sound waves add partially constructively and partially destructively at different locations .
A stereo has at least two speakers creating sound waves , and waves can reflect from walls .
All these waves interfere , and the resulting wave is the superposition of the waves .
We have shown several examples of the superposition of waves that are similar .
illustrates an example of the superposition of two dissimilar waves .
Here again , the disturbances add , producing a resultant wave .
At times , when two or more mechanical waves interfere , the pattern produced by the resulting wave can be rich in complexity , some without any readily discernable patterns .
For example , plotting the sound wave of your favorite music can look quite complex and is the superposition of the individual sound waves from many instruments ; it is the complexity that makes the music interesting and worth listening to .
At other times , waves can interfere and produce interesting phenomena , which are complex in their appearance and yet beautiful in simplicity of the physical principle of superposition , which formed the resulting wave .
One example is the phenomenon known as standing waves , produced by two identical waves moving in different directions .
We will look more closely at this phenomenon in the next section .
Try this to make waves with a dripping faucet , audio speaker , or laser !
Add a second source or a pair of slits to create an interference pattern .
You can observe one source or two sources .
Using two sources , you can observe the interference patterns that result from varying the frequencies and the amplitudes of the sources .
The resulting wave becomes This equation is usually written as The resultant wave has the same wave number and angular frequency , an amplitude of and a phase shift equal to half the original phase shift .
Examples of waves that differ only in a phase shift are shown in .
The red and blue waves each have the same amplitude , wave number , and angular frequency , and differ only in a phase shift .
They therefore have the same period , wavelength , and frequency .
The green wave is the result of the superposition of the two waves .
When the two waves have a phase difference of zero , the waves are in phase , and the resultant wave has the same wave number and angular frequency , and an amplitude equal to twice the individual amplitudes ( part ( a ) ) .
This is constructive interference .
If the phase difference is the waves interfere in destructive interference ( part ( c ) ) .
The resultant wave has an amplitude of zero .
Any other phase difference results in a wave with the same wave number and angular frequency as the two incident waves but with a phase shift of and an amplitude equal to Examples are shown in parts ( b ) and ( d ) .
Throughout this chapter , we have been studying traveling waves , or waves that transport energy from one place to another .
Under certain conditions , waves can bounce back and forth through a particular region , effectively becoming stationary .
These are called standing waves .
Another related effect is known as resonance .
In , we defined resonance as a phenomenon in which a smallamplitude driving force could produce large-amplitude motion .
Think of a child on a swing , which can be modeled as a physical pendulum .
Relatively small-amplitude pushes by a parent can produce large-amplitude swings .
Sometimes this resonance is good—for example , when producing music with a stringed instrument .
At other times , the effects can be devastating , such as the collapse of a building during an earthquake .
In the case of standing waves , the relatively large amplitude standing waves are produced by the superposition of smaller amplitude component waves .
Sometimes waves do not seem to move ; rather , they just vibrate in place .
You can see unmoving waves on the surface of a glass of milk in a refrigerator , for example .
Vibrations from the refrigerator motor create waves on the milk that oscillate up and down but do not seem to move across the surface .
shows an experiment you can try at home .
Take a bowl of milk and place it on a common box fan .
Vibrations from the fan will produce circular standing waves in the milk .
The waves are visible in the photo due to the reflection from a lamp .
These waves are formed by the superposition of two or more traveling waves , such as illustrated in for two identical waves moving in opposite directions .
The waves move through each other with their disturbances adding as they go by .
If the two waves have the same amplitude and wavelength , then they alternate between constructive and destructive interference .
The resultant looks like a wave standing in place and , thus , is called a standing wave .
Consider two identical waves that move in opposite directions .
The first wave has a wave function of and the second wave has a wave function .
Graphs of y ( x , t ) as a function of x for various times are shown in .
The red wave moves in the negative x -direction , the blue wave moves in the positive x -direction , and the black wave is the sum of the two waves .
As the red and blue waves move through each other , they move in and out of constructive interference and destructive interference .
Initially , at time waves .
This happens at Notice that some x -positions of the resultant wave are always zero no matter what the phase relationship is .
These positions are called nodes .
Where do the nodes occur ?
Consider the solution to the sum of the two waves Finding the positions where the sine function equals zero provides the positions of the nodes .
There are also positions where y oscillates between .
These are the antinodes .
We can find them by considering which values of x result in .
What results is a standing wave as shown in , which shows snapshots of the resulting wave of two identical waves moving in opposite directions .
The resulting wave appears to be a sine wave with nodes at integer multiples of half wavelengths .
The antinodes oscillate between due to the cosine term , , which oscillates between .
The resultant wave appears to be standing still , with no apparent movement in the x -direction , although it is composed of one wave function moving in the positive , whereas the second wave is moving in the negative x -direction .
shows various snapshots of the resulting wave .
The nodes are marked with red dots while the antinodes are marked with blue dots .
A common example of standing waves are the waves produced by stringed musical instruments .
When the string is plucked , pulses travel along the string in opposite directions .
The ends of the strings are fixed in place , so nodes appear at the ends of the strings—the boundary conditions of the system , regulating the resonant frequencies in the strings .
The resonance produced on a string instrument can be modeled in a physics lab using the apparatus shown in .
The lab setup shows a string attached to a string vibrator , which oscillates the string with an adjustable frequency f .
The other end of the string passes over a frictionless pulley and is tied to a hanging mass .
The magnitude of the tension in the string is equal to the weight of the hanging mass .
The string has a constant linear density ( mass per length ) and the speed at which a wave travels down the string equals .
The symmetrical boundary conditions ( a node at each end ) dictate the possible frequencies that can excite standing waves .
Starting from a frequency of zero and slowly increasing the frequency , the first mode appears as shown in .
The first mode , also called the fundamental mode or the first harmonic , shows half of a wavelength has formed , so the wavelength is equal to twice the length between the nodes .
The fundamental frequency , or first harmonic frequency , that drives this mode is where the speed of the wave is Keeping the tension constant and increasing the frequency leads to the second harmonic or the mode .
and driven by The standing wave patterns that are possible for a string , the first four of which are shown in , are known as the normal modes , with frequencies known as the normal frequencies .
In summary , the first frequency to produce a normal mode is called the fundamental frequency ( or first harmonic ) .
Any frequencies above the fundamental frequency are overtones .
The second frequency of the normal mode of the string is the first overtone ( or second harmonic ) .
The frequency of the normal mode is the second overtone ( or third harmonic ) and so on .
The solutions shown as and are for a string with the boundary condition of a node on each end .
When the boundary condition on either side is the same , the system is said to have symmetric boundary conditions .
and are good for any symmetric boundary conditions , that is , nodes at both ends or antinodes at both ends .
Consider a string of attached to an adjustable-frequency string vibrator as shown in .
The waves produced by the vibrator travel down the string and are reflected by the fixed boundary condition at the pulley .
The string , which has a linear mass density of is passed over a frictionless pulley of a negligible mass , and the tension is provided by a 2.00-kg hanging mass .
( a ) What is the velocity of the waves on the string ?
( b ) Draw a sketch of the first three normal modes of the standing waves that can be produced on the string and label each with the wavelength .
( c ) List the frequencies that the string vibrator must be tuned to in order to produce the first three normal modes of the standing waves .
The velocity of the wave can be found using The tension is provided by the weight of the hanging mass .
The standing waves will depend on the boundary conditions .
There must be a node at each end .
The first mode will be one half of a wave .
The second can be found by adding a half wavelength .
That is the shortest length that will result in a node at the boundaries .
For example , adding one quarter of a wavelength will result in an antinode at the boundary and is not a mode which would satisfy the boundary conditions .
This is shown in .
Since the wave speed velocity is the wavelength times the frequency , the frequency is wave speed divided by the wavelength .
Begin with the velocity of a wave on a string .
The tension is equal to the weight of the hanging mass .
The linear mass density and mass of the hanging mass are given : The first normal mode that has a node on each end is a half wavelength .
The next two modes are found by adding a half of a wavelength .
The frequencies of the first three modes are found by using The three standing modes in this example were produced by maintaining the tension in the string and adjusting the driving frequency .
Keeping the tension in the string constant results in a constant velocity .
The same modes could have been produced by keeping the frequency constant and adjusting the speed of the wave in the string ( by changing the hanging mass . )
Visit this to play with a 1D or 2D system of coupled mass-spring oscillators .
Vary the number of masses , set the initial conditions , and watch the system evolve .
See the spectrum of normal modes for arbitrary motion .
See longitudinal or transverse modes in the 1D system .
Check Your Understanding The equations for the wavelengths and the frequencies of the modes of a wave produced on a string : were derived by considering a wave on a string where there were symmetric boundary conditions of a node at each end .
These modes resulted from two sinusoidal waves with identical characteristics except they were moving in opposite directions , confined to a region L with nodes required at both ends .
Will the same equations work if there were symmetric boundary conditions with antinodes at each end ?
What would the normal modes look like for a medium that was free to oscillate on each end ?
Don ’ t worry for now if you can not imagine such a medium , just consider two sinusoidal wave functions in a region of length L , with antinodes on each end .
The free boundary conditions shown in the last Check Your Understanding may seem hard to visualize .
How can there be a system that is free to oscillate on each end ?
In are shown two possible configuration of a metallic rods ( shown in red ) attached to two supports ( shown in blue ) .
In part ( a ) , the rod is supported at the ends , and there are fixed boundary conditions at both ends .
Given the proper frequency , the rod can be driven into resonance with a wavelength equal to length of the rod , with nodes at each end .
In part ( b ) , the rod is supported at positions one quarter of the length from each end of the rod , and there are free boundary conditions at both ends .
Given the proper frequency , this rod can also be driven into resonance with a wavelength equal to the length of the rod , but there are antinodes at each end .
If you are having trouble visualizing the wavelength in this figure , remember that the wavelength may be measured between any two nearest identical points and consider .
Note that the study of standing waves can become quite complex .
In ( a ) , the mode of the standing wave is shown , and it results in a wavelength equal to L .
In this configuration , the mode would also have been possible with a standing wave equal to 2 L .
Is it possible to get the mode for the configuration shown in part ( b ) ?
The answer is no .
In this configuration , there are additional conditions set beyond the boundary conditions .
Since the rod is mounted at a point one quarter of the length from each side , a node must exist there , and this limits the possible modes of standing waves that can be created .
We leave it as an exercise for the reader to consider if other modes of standing waves are possible .
It should be noted that when a system is driven at a frequency that does not cause the system to resonate , vibrations may still occur , but the amplitude of the vibrations will be much smaller than the amplitude at resonance .
A field of mechanical engineering uses the sound produced by the vibrating parts of complex mechanical systems to troubleshoot problems with the systems .
Suppose a part in an automobile is resonating at the frequency of the car ’ s engine , causing unwanted vibrations in the automobile .
This may cause the engine to fail prematurely .
The solution may be as simple as changing the composition of the material used or changing the length of the part in question .
There are other numerous examples of resonance in standing waves in the physical world .
The air in a tube , such as found in a musical instrument like a flute , can be forced into resonance and produce a pleasant sound , as we discuss in .
At other times , resonance can cause serious problems .
A closer look at earthquakes provides evidence for conditions appropriate for resonance , standing waves , and constructive and destructive interference .
A building may vibrate for several seconds with a driving frequency matching that of the natural frequency of vibration of the building—producing a resonance resulting in one building collapsing while neighboring buildings do not .
Often , buildings of a certain height are devastated while other taller buildings remain intact .
The building height matches the condition for setting up a standing wave for that particular height .
The span of the roof is also important .
Often it is seen that gymnasiums , supermarkets , and churches suffer damage when individual homes suffer far less damage .
The roofs with large surface areas supported only at the edges resonate at the frequencies of the earthquakes , causing them to collapse .
As the earthquake waves travel along the surface of Earth and reflect off denser rocks , constructive interference occurs at certain points .
Often areas closer to the epicenter are not damaged , while areas farther away are damaged .
Sound is an example of a mechanical wave , specifically , a pressure wave : Sound waves travel through the air and other media as oscillations of molecules .
Normal human hearing encompasses an impressive range of frequencies from 20 Hz to 20 kHz .
Sounds below 20 Hz are called infrasound , whereas those above 20 kHz are called ultrasound .
Some animals , like the bat shown in , can hear sounds in the ultrasonic range .
Many of the concepts covered in also have applications in the study of sound .
For example , when a sound wave encounters an interface between two media with different wave speeds , reflection and transmission of the wave occur .
Ultrasound has many uses in science , engineering , and medicine .
Ultrasound is used for nondestructive testing in engineering , such as testing the thickness of coating on metal .
In medicine , sound waves are far less destructive than X-rays and can be used to image the fetus in a mother ’ s womb without danger to the fetus or the mother .
Later in this chapter , we discuss the Doppler effect , which can be used to determine the velocity of blood in the arteries or wind speed in weather systems .
The physical phenomenon of sound is a disturbance of matter that is transmitted from its source outward .
Hearing is the perception of sound , just as seeing is the perception of visible light .
On the atomic scale , sound is a disturbance of atoms that is far more ordered than their thermal motions .
In many instances , sound is a periodic wave , and the atoms undergo simple harmonic motion .
Thus , sound waves can induce oscillations and resonance effects .
This shows waves on the surface of a wine glass , being driven by sound waves from a speaker .
As the frequency of the sound wave approaches the resonant frequency of the wine glass , the amplitude and frequency of the waves on the wine glass increase .
When the resonant frequency is reached , the glass shatters .
A speaker produces a sound wave by oscillating a cone , causing vibrations of air molecules .
In , a speaker vibrates at a constant frequency and amplitude , producing vibrations in the surrounding air molecules .
As the speaker oscillates back and forth , it transfers energy to the air , mostly as thermal energy .
But a small part of the speaker ’ s energy goes into compressing and expanding the surrounding air , creating slightly higher and lower local pressures .
These compressions ( high-pressure regions ) and rarefactions ( low-pressure regions ) move out as longitudinal pressure waves having the same frequency as the speaker—they are the disturbance that is a sound wave .
( Sound waves in air and most fluids are longitudinal , because fluids have almost no shear strength .
In solids , sound waves can be both transverse and longitudinal . )
( a ) shows the compressions and rarefactions , and also shows a graph of gauge pressure versus distance from a speaker .
As the speaker moves in the positive x -direction , it pushes air molecules , displacing them from their equilibrium positions .
As the speaker moves in the negative x -direction , the air molecules move back toward their equilibrium positions due to a restoring force .
The air molecules oscillate in simple harmonic motion about their equilibrium positions , as shown in part ( b ) .
Note that sound waves in air are longitudinal , and in the figure , the wave propagates in the positive x -direction and the molecules oscillate parallel to the direction in which the wave propagates .
The wave speed can be determined from Sound waves can also be modeled in terms of the displacement of the air molecules .
The displacement of the air molecules can be modeled using a cosine function : is the wave number , In this equation , s is the displacement and is the maximum displacement .
Not shown in the figure is the amplitude of a sound wave as it decreases with distance from its source , because the energy of the wave is spread over a larger and larger area .
The intensity decreases as it moves away from the speaker , as discussed in .
The energy is also absorbed by objects and converted into thermal energy by the viscosity of the air .
In addition , during each compression , a little heat transfers to the air ; during each rarefaction , even less heat transfers from the air , and these heat transfers reduce the organized disturbance into random thermal motions .
Whether the heat transfer from compression to rarefaction is significant depends on how far apart they are—that is , it depends on wavelength .
Wavelength , frequency , amplitude , and speed of propagation are important characteristics for sound , as they are for all waves .
Sound , like all waves , travels at a certain speed and has the properties of frequency and wavelength .
You can observe direct evidence of the speed of sound while watching a fireworks display .
You see the flash of an explosion well before you hear its sound and possibly feel the pressure wave , implying both that sound travels at a finite speed and that it is much slower than light .
The difference between the speed of light and the speed of sound can also be experienced during an electrical storm .
The flash of lighting is often seen before the clap of thunder .
You may have heard that if you count the number of seconds between the flash and the sound , you can estimate the distance to the source .
Every five seconds converts to about one mile .
The velocity of any wave is related to its frequency and wavelength by where v is the speed of the wave , f is its frequency , and is its wavelength .
Recall from that the wavelength is the length of the wave as measured between sequential identical points .
For example , for a surface water wave or sinusoidal wave on a string , the wavelength can be measured between any two convenient sequential points with the same height and slope , such as between two sequential crests or two sequential troughs .
Similarly , the wavelength of a sound wave is the distance between sequential identical parts of a wave—for example , between sequential compressions .
The frequency is the same as that of the source and is the number of waves that pass a point per unit time .
shows that the speed of sound varies greatly in different media .
The speed of sound in a medium depends on how quickly vibrational energy can be transferred through the medium .
For this reason , the derivation of the speed of sound in a medium depends on the medium and on the state of the medium .
In general , the more rigid ( or less compressible ) the medium , the faster the speed of sound .
This observation is analogous to the fact that the frequency of simple harmonic motion is directly proportional to the stiffness of the oscillating object as measured by k , the spring constant .
The greater the density of a medium , the slower the speed of sound .
This observation is analogous to the fact that the frequency of a simple harmonic motion is inversely proportional to m , the mass of the oscillating object .
The speed of sound in air is low , because air is easily compressible .
Because liquids and solids are relatively rigid and very difficult to compress , the speed of sound in such media is generally greater than in gases .
Because the speed of sound depends on the density of the material , and the density depends on the temperature , there is a relationship between the temperature in a given medium and the speed of sound in the medium .
For air at sea level , the speed of sound is given by where the temperature in the first equation ( denoted as ) is in degrees Celsius and the temperature in the second equation ( denoted as ) is in kelvins .
The speed of sound in gases is related to the average speed of particles in the gas , where is the Boltzmann constant and m is the mass of each ( identical ) particle in the gas .
Note that v refers to the speed of the coherent propagation of a disturbance ( the wave ) , whereas describes the speeds of particles in random directions .
Thus , it is reasonable that the speed of sound in air and other gases should depend on the square root of temperature .
While not negligible , this is not a strong dependence .
At , the speed of sound is 331 m/s , whereas at , it is 343 m/s , less than a increase .
shows how a bat uses the speed of sound to sense distances .
As stated earlier , the speed of sound in a medium depends on the medium and the state of the medium .
The derivation of the equation for the speed of sound in air starts with the mass flow rate and continuity equation discussed in .
Consider fluid flow through a pipe with cross-sectional area A .
A parcel of air is a small volume of air with imaginary boundaries .
During the process of compression and expansion of the gas , no heat is added or removed from the system .
A process where heat is not added or removed from the system is known as an adiabatic system .
Adiabatic processes are covered in detail in , but for now it is sufficient to say that for an adiabatic process , where p is the pressure , V is the volume , and gamma is a constant that depends on the gas .
For air , .
This independence is certainly true in open air for sounds in the audible range .
If this independence were not true , you would certainly notice it for music played by a marching band in a football stadium , for example .
Suppose that high-frequency sounds traveled faster—then the farther you were from the band , the more the sound from the low-pitch instruments would lag that from the high-pitch ones .
But the music from all instruments arrives in cadence independent of distance , so all frequencies must travel at nearly the same speed .
Recall that In a given medium under fixed conditions , v is constant , so there is a relationship between f and the higher the frequency , the smaller the wavelength .
Calculate the wavelengths of sounds at the extremes of the audible range , 20 and 20,000 Hz , in air .
( Assume that the frequency values are accurate to two significant figures . )
To find wavelength from frequency , we can use Identify knowns .
The speed of sound can change when sound travels from one medium to another , but the frequency usually remains the same .
This is similar to the frequency of a wave on a string being equal to the frequency of the force oscillating the string .
If v changes and f remains the same , then the wavelength must change .
That is , because , the higher the speed of a sound , the greater its wavelength for a given frequency .
Check Your Understanding Imagine you observe two firework shells explode .
You hear the explosion of one as soon as you see it .
However , you see the other shell for several milliseconds before you hear the explosion .
Explain why this is so .
Although sound waves in a fluid are longitudinal , sound waves in a solid travel both as longitudinal waves and transverse waves .
Seismic waves , which are essentially sound waves in Earth ’ s crust produced by earthquakes , are an interesting example of how the speed of sound depends on the rigidity of the medium .
Earthquakes produce both longitudinal and transverse waves , and these travel at different speeds .
The bulk modulus of granite is greater than its shear modulus .
For that reason , the speed of longitudinal or pressure waves ( P-waves ) in earthquakes in granite is significantly higher than the speed of transverse or shear waves ( S-waves ) .
Both types of earthquake waves travel slower in less rigid material , such as sediments .
P-waves have speeds of 4 to 7 km/s , and S-waves range in speed from 2 to 5 km/s , both being faster in more rigid material .
The P-wave gets progressively farther ahead of the S-wave as they travel through Earth ’ s crust .
The time between the Pand S-waves is routinely used to determine the distance to their source , the epicenter of the earthquake .
Because Swaves do not pass through the liquid core , two shadow regions are produced .
As sound waves move away from a speaker , or away from the epicenter of an earthquake , their power per unit area decreases .
This is why the sound is very loud near a speaker and becomes less loud as you move away from the speaker .
This also explains why there can be an extreme amount of damage at the epicenter of an earthquake but only tremors are felt in areas far from the epicenter .
The power per unit area is known as the intensity , and in the next section , we will discuss how the intensity depends on the distance from the source .
In a quiet forest , you can sometimes hear a single leaf fall to the ground .
But when a passing motorist has his stereo turned up , you can not even hear what the person next to you in your car is saying .
We are all very familiar with the loudness of sounds and are aware that loudness is related to how energetically the source is vibrating .
High noise exposure is hazardous to hearing , which is why it is important for people working in industrial settings to wear ear protection .
The relevant physical quantity is sound intensity , a concept that is valid for all sounds whether or not they are in the audible range .
In , we defined intensity as the power per unit area carried by a wave .
Power is the rate at which energy is transferred by the wave .
In equation form , intensity I is where P is the power through an area A .
The SI unit for I is If we assume that the sound wave is spherical , and that no energy is lost to thermal processes , the energy of the sound wave is spread over a larger area as distance increases , so the intensity decreases .
The area of a sphere is As the wave spreads out from to the energy also spreads out over a larger area : The intensity decreases as the wave moves out from the source .
Consider a parcel of a medium initially undisturbed and then influenced by a sound wave at time t , as shown in .
As the sound wave moves through the parcel , the parcel is displaced and may expand or contract .
If , the volume has increased and the pressure decreases .
If the volume has decreased and the pressure increases .
( We use lowercase p for pressure to distinguish it from power , denoted by P . )
The energy ( as kinetic energy ) of an oscillating element of air due to a traveling sound wave is proportional to its amplitude squared .
In this equation , is the density of the material in which the sound wave travels , in units of and v is the speed of sound in the medium , in units of m/s .
As stated earlier in this chapter , hearing is the perception of sound .
The hearing mechanism involves some interesting physics .
The sound wave that impinges upon our ear is a pressure wave .
The ear is a transducer that converts sound waves into electrical nerve impulses in a manner much more sophisticated than , but analogous to , a microphone .
shows the anatomy of the ear .
The outer ear , or ear canal , carries sound to the recessed , protected eardrum .
The air column in the ear canal resonates and is partially responsible for the sensitivity of the ear to sounds in the 2000–5000-Hz range .
The middle ear converts sound into mechanical vibrations and applies these vibrations to the cochlea .
Watch this for a more detailed discussion of the workings of the human ear .
The range of intensities that the human ear can hear depends on the frequency of the sound , but , in general , the range is quite large .
The minimum threshold intensity that can be heard is Pain is experienced at intensities of Measurements of sound intensity ( in units of ) are very cumbersome due to this large range in values .
For this reason , as well as for other reasons , the concept of sound intensity level was proposed .
It is more common to consider sound intensity levels in dB than in How human ears perceive sound can be more accurately described by the logarithm of the intensity rather than directly by the intensity .
Because is defined in terms of a ratio , it is a unitless quantity , telling you the level of the sound relative to a fixed standard .
The units of decibels ( dB ) are used to indicate this ratio is multiplied by 10 in its definition .
The bel , upon which the decibel is based , is named for Alexander Graham Bell , the inventor of the telephone .
The decibel level of a sound having the threshold intensity of is because gives levels in decibels and intensities in watts per meter squared for some familiar sounds .
The ear is sensitive to as little as a trillionth of a watt per meter squared—even more impressive when you realize that the area of the eardrum is only so that only falls on it at the threshold of hearing .
For example , a 90-dB sound compared with a 60-dB sound is 30 dB greater , or three factors of 10 ( that is , times ) as intense .
Another example is that if one sound is as intense as another , it is 70 dB higher .
So a factor of five in intensity corresponds to a difference of 7 dB in sound intensity level .
This value is true for any intensities differing by a factor of five .
Show that if one sound is twice as intense as another , it has a sound level about 3 dB higher .
We are given that the ratio of two intensities is 2 to 1 , and are then asked to find the difference in their sound levels in decibels .
We can solve this problem by using of the properties of logarithms .
Identify knowns : The ratio of the two intensities is 2 to 1 , or We wish to show that the difference in sound levels is about 3 dB .
That is , we want to show : Note that Use the definition of to obtain Thus , This means that the two sound intensity levels differ by 3.01 dB , or about 3 dB , as advertised .
Note that because only the ratio is given ( and not the actual intensities ) , this result is true for any intensities that differ by a factor of two .
For example , a 56.0-dB sound is twice as intense as a 53.0-dB sound , a 97.0-dB sound is half as intense as a 100-dB sound , and so on .
Check Your Understanding Identify common sounds at the levels of 10 dB , 50 dB , and 100 dB .
Another decibel scale is also in use , called the sound pressure level , based on the ratio of the pressure amplitude to a reference pressure .
This scale is used particularly in applications where sound travels in water .
It is beyond the scope of this text to treat this scale because it is not commonly used for sounds in air , but it is important to note that very different decibel levels may be encountered when sound pressure levels are quoted .
The human ear has a tremendous range and sensitivity .
It can give us a wealth of simple information—such as pitch , loudness , and direction .
The perception of frequency is called pitch .
Typically , humans have excellent relative pitch and can discriminate between two sounds if their frequencies differ by 0.3 % or more .
For example , 500.0 and 501.5 Hz are noticeably different .
Musical notes are sounds of a particular frequency that can be produced by most instruments and in Western music have particular names , such as A-sharp , C , or E-flat .
The perception of intensity is called loudness .
At a given frequency , it is possible to discern differences of about 1 dB , and a change of 3 dB is easily noticed .
But loudness is not related to intensity alone .
Frequency has a major effect on how loud a sound seems .
Sounds near the highand low-frequency extremes of the hearing range seem even less loud , because the ear is less sensitive at those frequencies .
When a violin plays middle C , there is no mistaking it for a piano playing the same note .
The reason is that each instrument produces a distinctive set of frequencies and intensities .
We call our perception of these combinations of frequencies and intensities tone quality or , more commonly , the timbre of the sound .
Timbre is the shape of the wave that arises from the many reflections , resonances , and superposition in an instrument .
A unit called a phon is used to express loudness numerically .
Phons differ from decibels because the phon is a unit of loudness perception , whereas the decibel is a unit of physical intensity .
shows the relationship of loudness to intensity ( or intensity level ) and frequency for persons with normal hearing .
The curved lines are equal-loudness curves .
Each curve is labeled with its loudness in phons .
Any sound along a given curve is perceived as equally loud by the average person .
The curves were determined by having large numbers of people compare the loudness of sounds at different frequencies and sound intensity levels .
At a frequency of 1000 Hz , phons are taken to be numerically equal to decibels .
( a ) What is the loudness in phons of a 100-Hz sound that has an intensity level of 80 dB ?
( b ) What is the intensity level in decibels of a 4000-Hz sound having a loudness of 70 phons ?
( c ) At what intensity level will an 8000-Hz sound have the same loudness as a 200-Hz sound at 60 dB ?
The graph in should be referenced to solve this example .
To find the loudness of a given sound , you must know its frequency and intensity level , locate that point on the square grid , and then interpolate between loudness curves to get the loudness in phons .
Once that point is located , the intensity level can be determined from the vertical axis .
Identify knowns : The square grid of the graph relating phons and decibels is a plot of intensity level versus frequency—both physical quantities : 100 Hz at 80 dB lies halfway between the curves marked 70 and 80 phons .
Find the loudness : 75 phons .
Identify knowns : Values are given to be 4000 Hz at 70 phons .
Follow the 70-phon curve until it reaches 4000 Hz .
At that point , it is below the 70 dB line at about 67 dB .
Find the intensity level : 67 dB .
Locate the point for a 200 Hz and 60 dB sound .
Find the loudness : This point lies just slightly above the 50-phon curve , and so its loudness is 51 phons .
Look for the 51-phon level is at 8000 Hz : 63 dB .
These answers , like all information extracted from , have uncertainties of several phons or several decibels , partly due to difficulties in interpolation , but mostly related to uncertainties in the equal-loudness curves .
Check Your Understanding Describe how amplitude is related to the loudness of a sound .
In this section , we discussed the characteristics of sound and how we hear , but how are the sounds we hear produced ?
Interesting sources of sound are musical instruments and the human voice , and we will discuss these sources .
But before we can understand how musical instruments produce sound , we need to look at the basic mechanisms behind these instruments .
The theories behind the mechanisms used by musical instruments involve interference , superposition , and standing waves , which we discuss in the next section .
Interference is the hallmark of waves , all of which exhibit constructive and destructive interference exactly analogous to that seen for water waves .
In fact , one way to prove something “ is a wave ” is to observe interference effects .
Since sound is a wave , we expect it to exhibit interference .
In , we discussed the interference of wave functions that differ only in a phase shift .
Sound waves provide an excellent example of a phase shift due to a path difference .
As we have discussed , sound waves can basically be modeled as longitudinal waves , where the molecules of the medium oscillate around an equilibrium position , or as pressure waves .
When the waves leave the speakers , they move out as spherical waves .
The waves interfere ; constructive inference is produced by the combination of two crests or two troughs , as shown .
Destructive interference is produced by the combination of a trough and a crest .
The phase difference at each point is due to the different path lengths traveled by each wave .
When the difference in the path lengths is an integer multiple of a wavelength , the waves are in phase and there is constructive interference .
When the difference in path lengths is an odd multiple of a half wavelength , the waves are out of phase and the result is destructive interference .
These points can be located with a soundlevel intensity meter .
Two speakers are separated by 5.00 m and are being driven by a signal generator at an unknown frequency .
A student with a sound-level meter walks out 6.00 m and down 2.00 m , and finds the first minimum intensity , as shown below .
What is the frequency supplied by the signal generator ?
Assume the wave speed of sound is The wave velocity is equal to A minimum intensity indicates destructive interference and the first such point occurs where there is path difference of which can be found from the geometry .
The frequency is then Find the path length to the minimum point from each speaker .
Use the difference in the path length to find the wavelength .
Find the frequency .
If point P were a point of maximum intensity , then the path length would be an integer multiple of the wavelength .
Check Your Understanding If you walk around two speakers playing music , how come you do not notice places where the music is very loud or very soft , that is , where there is constructive and destructive interference ?
The concept of a phase shift due to a difference in path length is very important .
You will use this concept again in and , where we discuss how Thomas Young used this method in his famous double-slit experiment to provide evidence that light has wavelike properties .
shows a clever use of sound interference to cancel noise .
Larger-scale applications of active noise reduction by destructive interference have been proposed for entire passenger compartments in commercial aircraft .
To obtain destructive interference , a fast electronic analysis is performed , and a second sound is introduced out of phase with the original sound , with its maxima and minima exactly reversed from the incoming noise .
Sound waves in fluids are pressure waves and are consistent with Pascal ’ s principle ; that is , pressures from two different sources add and subtract like simple numbers .
Therefore , positive and negative gauge pressures add to a much smaller pressure , producing a lowerintensity sound .
Although completely destructive interference is possible only under the simplest conditions , it is possible to reduce noise levels by 30 dB or more using this technique .
headphones used to block outside sounds .
Check Your Understanding Describe how noise-canceling headphones differ from standard Where else can we observe sound interference ?
All sound resonances , such as in musical instruments , are due to constructive and destructive interference .
Only the resonant frequencies interfere constructively to form standing waves , whereas others interfere destructively and are absent .
As we discussed in , standing waves are formed by two waves moving in opposite directions .
When two identical sinusoidal waves move in opposite directions , the waves may be modeled as When these two waves interfere , the resultant wave is a standing wave : Resonance can be produced due to the boundary conditions imposed on a wave .
In , we showed that resonance could be produced in a string under tension that had symmetrical boundary conditions , specifically , a node at each end .
We defined a node as a fixed point where the string did not move .
We found that the symmetrical boundary conditions resulted in some frequencies resonating and producing standing waves , while other frequencies interfere destructively .
Sound waves can resonate in a hollow tube , and the frequencies of the sound waves that resonate depend on the boundary conditions .
Suppose we have a tube that is closed at one end and open at the other .
If we hold a vibrating tuning fork near the open end of the tube , an incident sound wave travels through the tube and reflects off the closed end .
The reflected sound has the same frequency and wavelength as the incident sound wave , but is traveling in the opposite direction .
At the closed end of the tube , the molecules of air have very little freedom to oscillate , and a node arises .
At the open end , the molecules are free to move , and at the right frequency , an antinode occurs .
Unlike the symmetrical boundary conditions for the standing waves on the string , the boundary conditions for a tube open at one end and closed at the other end are anti-symmetrical : a node at the closed end and an antinode at the open end .
If the tuning fork has just the right frequency , the air column in the tube resonates loudly , but at most frequencies it vibrates very little .
This observation just means that the air column has only certain natural frequencies .
Consider the lowest frequency that will cause the tube to resonate , producing a loud sound .
There will be a node at the closed end and an antinode at the open end , as shown in .
The standing wave formed in the tube has an antinode at the open end and a node at the closed end .
The distance from a node to an antinode is one-fourth of a wavelength , and this equals the length of the tube ; thus , This same resonance can be produced by a vibration introduced at or near the closed end of the tube .
It is best to consider this a natural vibration of the air column , independently of how it is induced .
so that Given that maximum air displacements are possible at the open end and none at the closed end , other shorter wavelengths can resonate in the tube , such as the one shown in .
Here the standing wave has three-fourths of its wavelength in the tube , or Continuing this process reveals a whole series of shorter-wavelength and higher-frequency sounds that resonate in the tube .
We use specific terms for the resonances in any system .
The lowest resonant frequency is called the fundamental , while all higher resonant frequencies are called overtones .
The resonant frequencies that are integral multiples of the fundamental are collectively called harmonics .
The fundamental is the first harmonic , the second harmonic is twice the frequency of the first harmonic , and so on .
Some of these harmonics may not exist for a given scenario .
shows the fundamental and the first three overtones ( or the first , third , fifth , and seventh harmonics ) in a tube closed at one end .
The relationship for the resonant wavelengths of a tube closed at one end is Now let us look for a pattern in the resonant frequencies for a simple tube that is closed at one end .
The fundamental has and frequency is related to wavelength and the speed of sound as given by Solving for f in this equation gives where v is the speed of sound in air .
Similarly , the first overtone has ( see ) , so that Because we call the first overtone the third harmonic .
Continuing this process , we see a pattern that can be generalized in a single expression .
The resonant frequencies of a tube closed at one end are where is the fundamental , is the first overtone , and so on .
It is interesting that the resonant frequencies depend on the speed of sound and , hence , on temperature .
This dependence poses a noticeable problem for organs in old unheated cathedrals , and it is also the reason why musicians commonly bring their wind instruments to room temperature before playing them .
Another source of standing waves is a tube that is open at both ends .
In this case , the boundary conditions are symmetrical : an antinode at each end .
The resonances of tubes open at both ends can be analyzed in a very similar fashion to those for tubes closed at one end .
The air columns in tubes open at both ends have maximum air displacements at both ends .
Standing waves form as shown .
Note that a tube open at both ends has a fundamental frequency twice what it would have if closed at one end .
It also has a different spectrum of overtones than a tube closed at one end .
Note that a tube open at both ends has symmetrical boundary conditions , similar to the string fixed at both ends discussed in .
The relationships for the wavelengths and frequencies of a stringed instrument are the same as given in and .
The speed of the wave on the string ( from ) is The air around the string vibrates at the same frequency as the string , producing sound of the same frequency .
The sound wave moves at the speed of sound and the wavelength can be found using Check Your Understanding How is it possible to use a standing wave ’ s node and antinode to determine the length of a closed-end tube ?
This lets you visualize sound waves .
Check Your Understanding You observe two musical instruments that you can not identify .
One plays high-pitched sounds and the other plays low-pitched sounds .
How could you determine which is which without hearing either of them play ?
Some musical instruments , such as woodwinds , brass , and pipe organs , can be modeled as tubes with symmetrical boundary conditions , that is , either open at both ends or closed at both ends .
Other instruments can be modeled as tubes with anti-symmetrical boundary conditions , such as a tube with one end open and the other end closed .
Resonant frequencies are produced by longitudinal waves that travel down the tubes and interfere with the reflected waves traveling in the opposite direction .
A pipe organ is manufactured with various tubes of fixed lengths to produce different frequencies .
The waves are the result of compressed air allowed to expand in the tubes .
Even in open tubes , some reflection occurs due to the constraints of the sides of the tubes and the atmospheric pressure outside the open tube .
The antinodes do not occur at the opening of the tube , but rather depend on the radius of the tube .
The waves do not fully expand until they are outside the open end of a tube , and for a thin-walled tube , an end correction should be added .
This end correction is approximately 0.6 times the radius of the tube and should be added to the length of the tube .
Players of instruments such as the flute or oboe vary the length of the tube by opening and closing finger holes .
On a trombone , you change the tube length by using a sliding tube .
Bugles have a fixed length and can produce only a limited range of frequencies .
The fundamental and overtones can be present simultaneously in a variety of combinations .
For example , middle C on a trumpet sounds distinctively different from middle C on a clarinet , although both instruments are modified versions of a tube closed at one end .
The fundamental frequency is the same ( and usually the most intense ) , but the overtones and their mix of intensities are different and subject to shading by the musician .
This mix is what gives various musical instruments ( and human voices ) their distinctive characteristics , whether they have air columns , strings , sounding boxes , or drumheads .
In fact , much of our speech is determined by shaping the cavity formed by the throat and mouth , and positioning the tongue to adjust the fundamental and combination of overtones .
For example , simple resonant cavities can be made to resonate with the sound of the vowels .
In boys at puberty , the larynx grows and the shape of the resonant cavity changes , giving rise to the difference in predominant frequencies in speech between men and women .
( a ) What length should a tube closed at one end have on a day when the air temperature is if its fundamental frequency is to be 128 Hz ( C below middle C ) ?
( b ) What is the frequency of its fourth overtone ?
The length L can be found from the relationship , but we first need to find the speed of sound v .
Identify knowns : The fundamental frequency is 128 Hz , and the air temperature is .
Use to find the fundamental frequency , Solve this equation for length , Find the speed of sound using , Enter the values of the speed of sound and frequency into the expression for L .
Identify knowns : The first overtone has , the second overtone has , the third overtone has , and the fourth overtone has .
Enter the value for the fourth overtone into Many wind instruments are modified tubes that have finger holes , valves , and other devices for changing the length of the resonating air column and hence , the frequency of the note played .
Horns producing very low frequencies require tubes so long that they are coiled into loops .
An example is the tuba .
Whether an overtone occurs in a simple tube or a musical instrument depends on how it is stimulated to vibrate and the details of its shape .
The trombone , for example , does not produce its fundamental frequency and only makes overtones .
If you have two tubes with the same fundamental frequency , but one is open at both ends and the other is closed at one end , they would sound different when played because they have different overtones .
Middle C , for example , would sound richer played on an open tube , because it has even multiples of the fundamental as well as odd .
A closed tube has only odd multiples .
Resonance occurs in many different systems , including strings , air columns , and atoms .
As we discussed in earlier chapters , resonance is the driven or forced oscillation of a system at its natural frequency .
At resonance , energy is transferred rapidly to the oscillating system , and the amplitude of its oscillations grows until the system can no longer be described by Hooke ’ s law .
An example of this is the distorted sound intentionally produced in certain types of rock music .
Wind instruments use resonance in air columns to amplify tones made by lips or vibrating reeds .
Other instruments also use air resonance in clever ways to amplify sound .
shows a violin and a guitar , both of which have sounding boxes but with different shapes , resulting in different overtone structures .
The vibrating string creates a sound that resonates in the sounding box , greatly amplifying the sound and creating overtones that give the instrument its characteristic timbre .
The more complex the shape of the sounding box , the greater its ability to resonate over a wide range of frequencies .
The marimba , like the one shown in , uses pots or gourds below the wooden slats to amplify their tones .
The resonance of the pot can be adjusted by adding water .
We have emphasized sound applications in our discussions of resonance and standing waves , but these ideas apply to any system that has wave characteristics .
Vibrating strings , for example , are actually resonating and have fundamentals and overtones similar to those for air columns .
More subtle are the resonances in atoms due to the wave character of their electrons .
Their orbitals can be viewed as standing waves , which have a fundamental ( ground state ) and overtones ( excited states ) .
It is fascinating that wave characteristics apply to such a wide range of physical systems .
The study of music provides many examples of the superposition of waves and the constructive and destructive interference that occurs .
Very few examples of music being performed consist of a single source playing a single frequency for an extended period of time .
You will probably agree that a single frequency of sound for an extended period might be boring to the point of irritation , similar to the unwanted drone of an aircraft engine or a loud fan .
Music is pleasant and interesting due to mixing the changing frequencies of various instruments and voices .
An interesting phenomenon that occurs due to the constructive and destructive interference of two or more frequencies of sound is the phenomenon of beats .
A tuning fork is struck and a note is played on the piano .
As the piano tuner tunes the string , the beats have a lower frequency as the frequency of the note played approaches the frequency of the tuning fork .
What is the beat frequency produced when a tuning fork of a frequency of 256 Hz and a tuning fork of a frequency of 512 Hz are struck simultaneously ?
The beat frequency is the difference of the two frequencies .
We use The beat frequency is the absolute value of the difference between the two frequencies .
A negative frequency would not make sense .
Check Your Understanding What would happen if more than two frequencies interacted ?
Consider three frequencies .
The study of the superposition of various waves has many interesting applications beyond the study of sound .
In later chapters , we will discuss the wave properties of particles .
The particles can be modeled as a “ wave packet ” that results from the superposition of various waves , where the particle moves at the “ group velocity ” of the wave packet .
The characteristic sound of a motorcycle buzzing by is an example of the Doppler effect .
Specifically , if you are standing on a street corner and observe an ambulance with a siren sounding passing at a constant speed , you notice two characteristic changes in the sound of the siren .
First , the sound increases in loudness as the ambulance approaches and decreases in loudness as it moves away , which is expected .
But in addition , the high-pitched siren shifts dramatically to a lower-pitched sound .
As the ambulance passes , the frequency of the sound heard by a stationary observer changes from a constant high frequency to a constant lower frequency , even though the siren is producing a constant source frequency .
The closer the ambulance brushes by , the more abrupt the shift .
Also , the faster the ambulance moves , the greater the shift .
We also hear this characteristic shift in frequency for passing cars , airplanes , and trains .
The Doppler effect is an alteration in the observed frequency of a sound due to motion of either the source or the observer .
Although less familiar , this effect is easily noticed for a stationary source and moving observer .
For example , if you ride a train past a stationary warning horn , you will hear the horn ’ s frequency shift from high to low as you pass by .
The actual change in frequency due to relative motion of source and observer is called a Doppler shift .
The Doppler effect and Doppler shift are named for the Austrian physicist and mathematician Christian Johann Doppler ( 1803–1853 ) , who did experiments with both moving sources and moving observers .
Doppler , for example , had musicians play on a moving open train car and also play standing next to the train tracks as a train passed by .
Their music was observed both on and off the train , and changes in frequency were measured .
What causes the Doppler shift ?
illustrates sound waves emitted by stationary and moving sources in a stationary air mass .
Each disturbance spreads out spherically from the point at which the sound is emitted .
If the source is stationary , then all of the spheres representing the air compressions in the sound wave are centered on the same point , and the stationary observers on either side hear the same wavelength and frequency as emitted by the source ( case a ) .
If the source is moving , the situation is different .
Each compression of the air moves out in a sphere from the point at which it was emitted , but the point of emission moves .
This moving emission point causes the air compressions to be closer together on one side and farther apart on the other .
Thus , the wavelength is shorter in the direction the source is moving ( on the right in case b ) , and longer in the opposite direction ( on the left in case b ) .
Finally , if the observers move , as in case ( c ) , the frequency at which they receive the compressions changes .
The observer moving toward the source receives them at a higher frequency , and the person moving away from the source receives them at a lower frequency .
We know that wavelength and frequency are related by where v is the fixed speed of sound .
The sound moves in a medium and has the same speed v in that medium whether the source is moving or not .
Thus , f multiplied by is a constant .
Because the observer on the right in case ( b ) receives a shorter wavelength , the frequency she receives must be higher .
Similarly , the observer on the left receives a longer wavelength , and hence he hears a lower frequency .
The same thing happens in case ( c ) .
A higher frequency is received by the observer moving toward the source , and a lower frequency is received by an observer moving away from the source .
In general , then , relative motion of source and observer toward one another increases the received frequency .
Relative motion apart decreases frequency .
The greater the relative speed , the greater the effect .
The Doppler effect occurs not only for sound , but for any wave when there is relative motion between the observer and the source .
Doppler shifts occur in the frequency of sound , light , and water waves , for example .
Doppler shifts can be used to determine velocity , such as when ultrasound is reflected from blood in a medical diagnostic .
The relative velocities of stars and galaxies is determined by the shift in the frequencies of light received from them and has implied much about the origins of the universe .
Modern physics has been profoundly affected by observations of Doppler shifts .
Consider two stationary observers X and Y in , located on either side of a stationary source .
Each observer hears the same frequency , and that frequency is the frequency produced by the stationary source .
Now consider a stationary observer X with a source moving away from the observer with a constant speed .
At time , the source sends out a sound wave , indicated in black .
This wave moves out at the speed of sound v .
The position of the sound wave at each time interval of period is shown as dotted lines .
After one period , the source has moved and emits a second sound wave , which moves out at the speed of sound .
The source continues to move and produce sound waves , as indicated by the circles numbered 3 and 4 .
Notice that as the waves move out , they remained centered at their respective point of origin .
Now consider a source moving at a constant velocity moving toward a stationary observer Y , also shown in .
What happens if the observer is moving and the source is stationary ?
If the observer moves toward the stationary source , the observed frequency is higher than the source frequency .
If the observer is moving away from the stationary source , the observed frequency is lower than the source frequency .
Consider observer X in as the observer moves toward a stationary source with a speed .
The source emits a tone with a constant frequency and constant period The observer hears the first wave emitted by the source .
is the source frequency , is the speed of sound , is the speed of the observer , The Doppler effect involves motion and a will help visualize the effects of a moving observer or source .
This video shows a moving source and a stationary observer , and a moving observer and a stationary source .
It also discusses the Doppler effect and its application to light .
Suppose a train that has a 150-Hz horn is moving at 35.0 m/s in still air on a day when the speed of sound is 340 m/s .
( a ) What frequencies are observed by a stationary person at the side of the tracks as the train approaches and after it passes ?
( b ) What frequency is observed by the train ’ s engineer traveling on the train ?
To find the observed frequency in ( a ) , we must use because the source is moving .
The minus sign is used for the approaching train , and the plus sign for the receding train .
In ( b ) , there are two Doppler shifts—one for a moving source and the other for a moving observer .
Relative to the medium ( air ) , the speeds are The first Doppler shift is for the moving observer ; the second is for the moving source .
Use the following equation : The quantity in the square brackets is the Doppler-shifted frequency due to a moving observer .
The factor on the right is the effect of the moving source .
In both cases , the shift is significant and easily noticed .
Note that the shift is 17.0 Hz for motion toward and 14.0 Hz for motion away .
The shifts are not symmetric .
For the engineer riding in the train , we may expect that there is no change in frequency because the source and observer move together .
This matches your experience .
For example , there is no Doppler shift in the frequency of conversations between driver and passenger on a motorcycle .
People talking when a wind moves the air between them also observe no Doppler shift in their conversation .
The crucial point is that source and observer are not moving relative to each other .
Check Your Understanding Describe a situation in your life when you might rely on the Doppler shift to help you either while driving a car or walking near traffic .
The Doppler effect and the Doppler shift have many important applications in science and engineering .
For example , the Doppler shift in ultrasound can be used to measure blood velocity , and police use the Doppler shift in radar ( a microwave ) to measure car velocities .
In meteorology , the Doppler shift is used to track the motion of storm clouds ; such “ Doppler Radar ” can give the velocity and direction of rain or snow in weather fronts .
In astronomy , we can examine the light emitted from distant galaxies and determine their speed relative to ours .
As galaxies move away from us , their light is shifted to a lower frequency , and so to a longer wavelength—the so-called red shift .
Such information from galaxies far , far away has allowed us to estimate the age of the universe ( from the Big Bang ) as about 14 billion years .
When discussing the Doppler effect of a moving source and a stationary observer , the only cases we considered were cases where the source was moving at speeds that were less than the speed of sound .
Recall that the observed frequency for a As the source approaches the speed of sound , the moving source approaching a stationary observer is observed frequency increases .
According to the equation , if the source moves at the speed of sound , the denominator is equal to zero , implying the observed frequency is infinite .
If the source moves at speeds greater than the speed of sound , the observed frequency is negative .
What could this mean ?
What happens when a source approaches the speed of sound ?
But now planes routinely fly faster than the speed of sound .
On July 28 , 1976 , Captain Eldon W. Joersz and Major George T. Morgan flew a Lockheed SR-71 Blackbird # 61-7958 at 3529.60 km/h ( 2193.20 mi/h ) , which is Mach 2.85 .
The Mach number is the speed of the source divided by the speed of sound : You will see that interesting phenomena occur when a source approaches and exceeds the speed of sound .
What happens to the sound produced by a moving source , such as a jet airplane , that approaches or even exceeds the speed of sound ?
The answer to this question applies not only to sound but to all other waves as well .
Suppose a jet plane is coming nearly straight at you , emitting a sound of frequency The greater the plane ’ s speed the greater the Doppler shift and the greater the value observed for .
approaches infinity , because the denominator in Now , as approaches the speed of sound , approaches zero .
At the speed of sound , this result means that in front of the source , each successive wave interferes with the previous one because the source moves forward at the speed of sound .
The observer gets them all at the same instant , so the frequency is infinite [ part ( c ) of the figure ] .
If the source exceeds the speed of sound , no sound is received by the observer until the source has passed , so that the sounds from the approaching source are mixed with those from it when receding .
This mixing appears messy , but something interesting happens—a shock wave is created .
Constructive interference along the lines shown ( a cone in three dimensions ) from similar sound waves arriving there simultaneously .
This superposition forms a disturbance called a shock wave , a constructive interference of sound created by an object moving faster than sound .
Inside the cone , the interference is mostly destructive , so the sound intensity there is much less than on the shock wave .
The angle of the shock wave can be found from the geometry .
Actually , the sonic boom occurs as the shock wave sweeps along the ground .
An aircraft creates two shock waves , one from its nose and one from its tail .
During television coverage of space shuttle landings , two distinct booms could often be heard .
These were separated by exactly the time it would take the shuttle to pass by a point .
Observers on the ground often do not see the aircraft creating the sonic boom , because it has passed by before the shock wave reaches them , as seen in the figure .
If the aircraft flies close by at low altitude , pressures in the sonic boom can be destructive and break windows as well as rattle nerves .
Because of how destructive sonic booms can be , supersonic flights are banned over populated areas .
Shock waves are one example of a broader phenomenon called bow wakes .
A bow wake , such as the one in , is created when the wave source moves faster than the wave propagation speed .
Water waves spread out in circles from the point where created , and the bow wake is the familiar V-shaped wake , trailing the source .
A more exotic bow wake is created when a subatomic particle travels through a medium faster than the speed of light travels in that medium .
( In a vacuum , the maximum speed of light is in the medium of water , the speed of light is closer to 0.75 c . )
If the particle creates light in its passage , that light spreads on a cone with an angle indicative of the speed of the particle , as illustrated in .
Such a bow wake is called Cerenkov radiation and is commonly observed in particle physics .
