An understanding of anatomy and physiology is not only fundamental to any career in the health professions , but it can also benefit your own health .
Familiarity with the human body can help you make healthful choices and prompt you to take appropriate action when signs of illness arise .
Your knowledge in this field will help you understand news about nutrition , medications , medical devices , and procedures and help you understand genetic or infectious diseases .
At some point , everyone will have a problem with some aspect of his or her body and your knowledge can help you to be a better parent , spouse , partner , friend , colleague , or caregiver .
This chapter begins with an overview of anatomy and physiology and a preview of the body regions and functions .
It then covers the characteristics of life and how the body works to maintain stable conditions .
It introduces a set of standard terms for body structures and for planes and positions in the body that will serve as a foundation for more comprehensive information covered later in the text .
It ends with examples of medical imaging used to see inside the living body .
By the end of this section , you will be able to : Compare and contrast anatomy and physiology , including their specializations and methods of study Discuss the fundamental relationship between anatomy and physiology Human anatomy is the scientific study of the body ’ s structures .
Some of these structures are very small and can only be observed and analyzed with the assistance of a microscope .
Other larger structures can readily be seen , manipulated , measured , and weighed .
The word “ anatomy ” comes from a Greek root that means “ to cut apart. ” Human anatomy was first studied by observing the exterior of the body and observing the wounds of soldiers and other injuries .
Later , physicians were allowed to dissect bodies of the dead to augment their knowledge .
When a body is dissected , its structures are cut apart in order to observe their physical attributes and their relationships to one another .
Dissection is still used in medical schools , anatomy courses , and in pathology labs .
In order to observe structures in living people , however , a number of imaging techniques have been developed .
These techniques allow clinicians to visualize structures inside the living body such as a cancerous tumor or a fractured bone .
Like most scientific disciplines , anatomy has areas of specialization .
Gross anatomy is the study of the larger structures of the body , those visible without the aid of magnification ( Figure 1.2a ) .
Macromeans “ large , ” thus , gross anatomy is also referred to as macroscopic anatomy .
In contrast , micromeans “ small , ” and microscopic anatomy is the study of structures that can be observed only with the use of a microscope or other magnification devices ( Figure 1.2b ) .
Microscopic anatomy includes cytology , the study of cells and histology , the study of tissues .
As the technology of microscopes has advanced , anatomists have been able to observe smaller and smaller structures of the body , from slices of large structures like the heart , to the three-dimensional structures of large molecules in the body .
Anatomists take two general approaches to the study of the body ’ s structures : regional and systemic .
Regional anatomy is the study of the interrelationships of all of the structures in a specific body region , such as the abdomen .
Studying regional anatomy helps us appreciate the interrelationships of body structures , such as how muscles , nerves , blood vessels , and other structures work together to serve a particular body region .
In contrast , systemic anatomy is the study of the structures that make up a discrete body system—that is , a group of structures that work together to perform a unique body function .
For example , a systemic anatomical study of the muscular system would consider all of the skeletal muscles of the body .
Whereas anatomy is about structure , physiology is about function .
Human physiology is the scientific study of the chemistry and physics of the structures of the body and the ways in which they work together to support the functions of life .
Much of the study of physiology centers on the body ’ s tendency toward homeostasis .
Homeostasis is the state of steady internal conditions maintained by living things .
The study of physiology certainly includes observation , both with the naked eye and with microscopes , as well as manipulations and measurements .
However , current advances in physiology usually depend on carefully designed laboratory experiments that reveal the functions of the many structures and chemical compounds that make up the human body .
Like anatomists , physiologists typically specialize in a particular branch of physiology .
For example , neurophysiology is the study of the brain , spinal cord , and nerves and how these work together to perform functions as complex and diverse as vision , movement , and thinking .
Physiologists may work from the organ level ( exploring , for example , what different parts of the brain do ) to the molecular level ( such as exploring how an electrochemical signal travels along nerves ) .
Form is closely related to function in all living things .
For example , the thin flap of your eyelid can snap down to clear away dust particles and almost instantaneously slide back up to allow you to see again .
At the microscopic level , the arrangement and function of the nerves and muscles that serve the eyelid allow for its quick action and retreat .
At a smaller level of analysis , the function of these nerves and muscles likewise relies on the interactions of specific molecules and ions .
Even the three-dimensional structure of certain molecules is essential to their function .
Your study of anatomy and physiology will make more sense if you continually relate the form of the structures you are studying to their function .
In fact , it can be somewhat frustrating to attempt to study anatomy without an understanding of the physiology that a body structure supports .
Imagine , for example , trying to appreciate the unique arrangement of the bones of the human hand if you had no conception of the function of the hand .
Fortunately , your understanding of how the human hand manipulates tools—from pens to cell phones—helps you appreciate the unique alignment of the thumb in opposition to the four fingers , making your hand a structure that allows you to pinch and grasp objects and type text messages .
It is convenient to consider the structures of the body in terms of fundamental levels of organization that increase in complexity : subatomic particles , atoms , molecules , organelles , cells , tissues , organs , organ systems , organisms and biosphere ( Figure 1.3 ) .
To study the chemical level of organization , scientists consider the simplest building blocks of matter : subatomic particles , atoms and molecules .
All matter in the universe is composed of one or more unique pure substances called elements , familiar examples of which are hydrogen , oxygen , carbon , nitrogen , calcium , and iron .
The smallest unit of any of these pure substances ( elements ) is an atom .
Atoms are made up of subatomic particles such as the proton , electron and neutron .
Two or more atoms combine to form a molecule , such as the water molecules , proteins , and sugars found in living things .
Molecules are the chemical building blocks of all body structures .
A cell is the smallest independently functioning unit of a living organism .
Even bacteria , which are extremely small , independently-living organisms , have a cellular structure .
Each bacterium is a single cell .
All living structures of human anatomy contain cells , and almost all functions of human physiology are performed in cells or are initiated by cells .
A human cell typically consists of flexible membranes that enclose cytoplasm , a water-based cellular fluid together with a variety of tiny functioning units called organelles .
In humans , as in all organisms , cells perform all functions of life .
A tissue is a group of many similar cells ( though sometimes composed of a few related types ) that work together to perform a specific function .
An organ is an anatomically distinct structure of the body composed of two or more tissue types .
Each organ performs one or more specific physiological functions .
An organ system is a group of organs that work together to perform major functions or meet physiological needs of the body .
This book covers eleven distinct organ systems in the human body ( Figure 1.4 and Figure 1.5 ) .
Assigning organs to organ systems can be imprecise since organs that “ belong ” to one system can also have functions integral to another system .
In fact , most organs contribute to more than one system .
The organism level is the highest level of organization .
An organism is a living being that has a cellular structure and that can independently perform all physiologic functions necessary for life .
In multicellular organisms , including humans , all cells , tissues , organs , and organ systems of the body work together to maintain the life and health of the organism .
These many functions can be summarized in terms of a few that we might consider definitive of human life : organization , metabolism , responsiveness , movement , development , and reproduction .
A human body consists of trillions of cells organized in a way that maintains distinct internal compartments .
These compartments keep body cells separated from external environmental threats and keep the cells moist and nourished .
They also separate internal body fluids from the countless microorganisms that grow on body surfaces , including the lining of certain tracts , or passageways .
The intestinal tract , for example , is home to even more bacteria cells than the total of all human cells in the body , yet these bacteria are outside the body and can not be allowed to circulate freely inside the body .
Cells , for example , have a cell membrane ( also referred to as the plasma membrane ) that keeps the intracellular environment—the fluids and organelles—separate from the extracellular environment .
Blood vessels keep blood inside a closed circulatory system , and nerves and muscles are wrapped in connective tissue sheaths that separate them from surrounding structures .
In the chest and abdomen , a variety of internal membranes keep major organs such as the lungs , heart , and kidneys separate from others .
The body ’ s largest organ system is the integumentary system , which includes the skin and its associated structures , such as hair and nails .
The surface tissue of skin is a barrier that protects internal structures and fluids from potentially harmful microorganisms and other toxins .
The first law of thermodynamics holds that energy can neither be created nor destroyed—it can only change form .
Your basic function as an organism is to consume ( ingest ) energy and molecules in the foods you eat , convert some of it into fuel for movement , sustain your body functions , and build and maintain your body structures .
There are two types of reactions that accomplish this : anabolism and catabolism .
Anabolism is the process whereby smaller , simpler molecules are combined into larger , more complex substances .
Your body can assemble , by utilizing energy , the complex chemicals it needs by combining small molecules derived from the foods you eat Catabolism is the process by which larger more complex substances are broken down into smaller simpler molecules .
Catabolism releases energy .
The complex molecules found in foods are broken down so the body can use their parts to assemble the structures and substances needed for life .
Taken together , these two processes are called metabolism .
Metabolism is the sum of all anabolic and catabolic reactions that take place in the body ( Figure 1.6 ) .
Both anabolism and catabolism occur simultaneously and continuously to keep you alive .
Every cell in your body makes use of a chemical compound , adenosine triphosphate ( ATP ) , to store and release energy .
The cell stores energy in the synthesis ( anabolism ) of ATP , then moves the ATP molecules to the location where energy is needed to fuel cellular activities .
Then the ATP is broken down ( catabolism ) and a controlled amount of energy is released , which is used by the cell to perform a particular job .
View this animation ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/metabolic ) to learn more about metabolic processes .
What kind of catabolism occurs in the heart ?
Responsiveness is the ability of an organism to adjust to changes in its internal and external environments .
An example of responsiveness to external stimuli could include moving toward sources of food and water and away from perceived dangers .
Changes in an organism ’ s internal environment , such as increased body temperature , can cause the responses of sweating and the dilation of blood vessels in the skin in order to decrease body temperature , as shown by the runners in Figure 1.7 .
Human movement includes not only actions at the joints of the body , but also the motion of individual organs and even individual cells .
As you read these words , red and white blood cells are moving throughout your body , muscle cells are contracting and relaxing to maintain your posture and to focus your vision , and glands are secreting chemicals to regulate body functions .
Your body is coordinating the action of entire muscle groups to enable you to move air into and out of your lungs , to push blood throughout your body , and to propel the food you have eaten through your digestive tract .
Consciously , of course , you contract your skeletal muscles to move the bones of your skeleton to get from one place to another ( as the runners are doing in Figure 1.7 ) , and to carry out all of the activities of your daily life .
Development is all of the changes the body goes through in life .
Development includes the process of differentiation , in which unspecialized cells become specialized in structure and function to perform certain tasks in the body .
Development also includes the processes of growth and repair , both of which involve cell differentiation .
Growth is the increase in body size .
Humans , like all multicellular organisms , grow by increasing the number of existing cells , increasing the amount of non-cellular material around cells ( such as mineral deposits in bone ) , and , within very narrow limits , increasing the size of existing cells .
Reproduction is the formation of a new organism from parent organisms .
In humans , reproduction is carried out by the male and female reproductive systems .
Because death will come to all complex organisms , without reproduction , the line of organisms would end .
Earth and its atmosphere have provided us with air to breathe , water to drink , and food to eat , but these are not the only requirements for survival .
Although you may rarely think about it , you also can not live outside of a certain range of temperature and pressure that the surface of our planet and its atmosphere provides .
The next sections explore these four requirements of life .
Atmospheric air is only about 20 percent oxygen , but that oxygen is a key component of the chemical reactions that keep the body alive , including the reactions that produce ATP .
Brain cells are especially sensitive to lack of oxygen because of their requirement for a high-and-steady production of ATP .
Brain damage is likely within five minutes without oxygen , and death is likely within ten minutes .
A nutrient is a substance in foods and beverages that is essential to human survival .
The three basic classes of nutrients are water , the energy-yielding and body-building nutrients , and the micronutrients ( vitamins and minerals ) .
The most critical nutrient is water .
Depending on the environmental temperature and our state of health , we may be able to survive for only a few days without water .
The body ’ s functional chemicals are dissolved and transported in water , and the chemical reactions of life take place in water .
Moreover , water is the largest component of cells , blood , and the fluid between cells , and water makes up about 70 percent of an adult ’ s body mass .
Water also helps regulate our internal temperature and cushions , protects , and lubricates joints and many other body structures .
The energy-yielding nutrients are primarily carbohydrates and lipids , while proteins mainly supply the amino acids that are the building blocks of the body itself .
You ingest these in plant and animal foods and beverages , and the digestive system breaks them down into molecules small enough to be absorbed .
The breakdown products of carbohydrates and lipids can then be used in the metabolic processes that convert them to ATP .
Although you might feel as if you are starving after missing a single meal , you can survive without consuming the energy-yielding nutrients for at least several weeks .
Water and the energy-yielding nutrients are also referred to as macronutrients because the body needs them in large amounts .
In contrast , micronutrients are vitamins and minerals .
These elements and compounds participate in many essential chemical reactions and processes , such as nerve impulses , and some , such as calcium , also contribute to the body ’ s structure .
Your body can store some of the micronutrients in its tissues , and draw on those reserves if you fail to consume them in your diet for a few days or weeks .
Some others micronutrients , such as vitamin C and most of the B vitamins , are water-soluble and can not be stored , so you need to consume them every day or two .
You have probably seen news stories about athletes who died of heat stroke , or hikers who died of exposure to cold .
Such deaths occur because the chemical reactions upon which the body depends can only take place within a narrow range of body temperature , from just below to just above 37°C ( 98.6°F ) .
When body temperature rises well above or drops well below normal , certain proteins ( enzymes ) that facilitate chemical reactions lose their normal structure and their ability to function and the chemical reactions of metabolism can not proceed .
That said , the body can respond effectively to short-term exposure to heat ( Figure 1.8 ) or cold .
One of the body ’ s responses to heat is , of course , sweating .
As sweat evaporates from skin , it removes some thermal energy from the body , cooling it .
Adequate water ( from the extracellular fluid in the body ) is necessary to produce sweat , so adequate fluid intake is essential to balance that loss during the sweat response .
Not surprisingly , the sweat response is much less effective in a humid environment because the air is already saturated with water .
Thus , the sweat on the skin ’ s surface is not able to evaporate , and internal body temperature can get dangerously high .
The body can also respond effectively to short-term exposure to cold .
One response to cold is shivering , which is random muscle movement that generates heat .
Another response is increased breakdown of stored energy to generate heat .
When that energy reserve is depleted , however , and the core temperature begins to drop significantly , red blood cells will lose their ability to give up oxygen , denying the brain of this critical component of ATP production .
This lack of oxygen can cause confusion , lethargy , and eventually loss of consciousness and death .
The body responds to cold by reducing blood circulation to the extremities , the hands and feet , in order to prevent blood from cooling there and so that the body ’ s core can stay warm .
Even when core body temperature remains stable , however , tissues exposed to severe cold , especially the fingers and toes , can develop frostbite when blood flow to the extremities has been much reduced .
This form of tissue damage can be permanent and lead to gangrene , requiring amputation of the affected region .
As you have learned , the body continuously engages in coordinated physiological processes to maintain a stable temperature .
In some cases , however , overriding this system can be useful , or even life-saving .
Hypothermia is the clinical term for an abnormally low body temperature ( hypo= “ below ” or “ under ” ) .
Controlled hypothermia is clinically induced hypothermia performed in order to reduce the metabolic rate of an organ or of a person ’ s entire body .
Controlled hypothermia often is used , for example , during open-heart surgery because it decreases the metabolic needs of the brain , heart , and other organs , reducing the risk of damage to them .
When controlled hypothermia is used clinically , the patient is given medication to prevent shivering .
The body is then cooled to 25–32°C ( 79–89°F ) .
The heart is stopped and an external heart-lung pump maintains circulation to the patient ’ s body .
The heart is cooled further and is maintained at a temperature below 15°C ( 60°F ) for the duration of the surgery .
This very cold temperature helps the heart muscle to tolerate its lack of blood supply during the surgery .
Some emergency department physicians use controlled hypothermia to reduce damage to the heart in patients who have suffered a cardiac arrest .
In the emergency department , the physician induces coma and lowers the patient ’ s body temperature to approximately 91 degrees .
This condition , which is maintained for 24 hours , slows the patient ’ s metabolic rate .
Because the patient ’ s organs require less blood to function , the heart ’ s workload is reduced .
Pressure is a force exerted by a substance that is in contact with another substance .
Atmospheric pressure is pressure exerted by the mixture of gases ( primarily nitrogen and oxygen ) in the Earth ’ s atmosphere .
Although you may not perceive it , atmospheric pressure is constantly pressing down on your body .
This pressure keeps gases within your body , such as the gaseous nitrogen in body fluids , dissolved .
If you were suddenly ejected from a space ship above Earth ’ s atmosphere , you would go from a situation of normal pressure to one of very low pressure .
The pressure of the nitrogen gas in your blood would be much higher than the pressure of nitrogen in the space surrounding your body .
As a result , the nitrogen gas in your blood would expand , forming bubbles that could block blood vessels and even cause cells to break apart .
Atmospheric pressure does more than just keep blood gases dissolved .
Your ability to breathe—that is , to take in oxygen and release carbon dioxide—also depends upon a precise atmospheric pressure .
Altitude sickness occurs in part because the atmosphere at high altitudes exerts less pressure , reducing the exchange of these gases , and causing shortness of breath , confusion , headache , lethargy , and nausea .
Mountain climbers carry oxygen to reduce the effects of both low oxygen levels and low barometric pressure at higher altitudes ( Figure 1.9 ) .
Decompression sickness ( DCS ) is a condition in which gases dissolved in the blood or in other body tissues are no longer dissolved following a reduction in pressure on the body .
This condition affects underwater divers who surface from a deep dive too quickly , and it can affect pilots flying at high altitudes in planes with unpressurized cabins .
Divers often call this condition “ the bends , ” a reference to joint pain that is a symptom of DCS .
In all cases , DCS is brought about by a reduction in barometric pressure .
At high altitude , barometric pressure is much less than on Earth ’ s surface because pressure is produced by the weight of the column of air above the body pressing down on the body .
The very great pressures on divers in deep water are likewise from the weight of a column of water pressing down on the body .
Not surprisingly , diving in deep mountain lakes , where barometric pressure at the surface of the lake is less than that at sea level is more likely to result in DCS than diving in water at sea level .
In DCS , gases dissolved in the blood ( primarily nitrogen ) come rapidly out of solution , forming bubbles in the blood and in other body tissues .
This occurs because when pressure of a gas over a liquid is decreased , the amount of gas that can remain dissolved in the liquid also is decreased .
It is air pressure that keeps your normal blood gases dissolved in the blood .
When pressure is reduced , less gas remains dissolved .
You have seen this in effect when you open a carbonated drink .
Removing the seal of the bottle reduces the pressure of the gas over the liquid .
This in turn causes bubbles as dissolved gases ( in this case , carbon dioxide ) come out of solution in the liquid .
The most common symptoms of DCS are pain in the joints , with headache and disturbances of vision occurring in 10 percent to 15 percent of cases .
Left untreated , very severe DCS can result in death .
Immediate treatment is with pure oxygen .
The affected person is then moved into a hyperbaric chamber .
A hyperbaric chamber is a reinforced , closed chamber that is pressurized to greater than atmospheric pressure .
It treats DCS by repressurizing the body so that pressure can then be removed much more gradually .
Because the hyperbaric chamber introduces oxygen to the body at high pressure , it increases the concentration of oxygen in the blood .
This has the effect of replacing some of the nitrogen in the blood with oxygen , which is easier to tolerate out of solution .
The dynamic pressure of body fluids is also important to human survival .
By the end of this section , you will be able to : Discuss the role of homeostasis in healthy functioning Contrast negative and positive feedback , giving one physiologic example of each mechanism Maintaining homeostasis requires that the body continuously monitor its internal conditions .
From body temperature to blood pressure to levels of certain nutrients , each physiological condition has a particular set point .
A set point is the physiological value around which the normal range fluctuates .
A normal range is the restricted set of values that is optimally healthful and stable .
For example , the set point for normal human body temperature is approximately 37°C ( 98.6°F ) Physiological parameters , such as body temperature and blood pressure , tend to fluctuate within a normal range a few degrees above and below that point .
Control centers in the brain and other parts of the body monitor and react to deviations from homeostasis using negative feedback .
Negative feedback is a mechanism that reverses a deviation from the set point .
Therefore , negative feedback maintains body parameters within their normal range .
The maintenance of homeostasis by negative feedback goes on throughout the body at all times , and an understanding of negative feedback is thus fundamental to an understanding of human physiology .
A negative feedback system has three basic components ( Figure 1.10a ) .
A sensor , also referred to a receptor , is a component of a feedback system that monitors a physiological value .
This value is reported to the control center .
The control center is the component in a feedback system that compares the value to the normal range .
If the value deviates too much from the set point , then the control center activates an effector .
An effector is the component in a feedback system that causes a change to reverse the situation and return the value to the normal range .
In order to set the system in motion , a stimulus must drive a physiological parameter beyond its normal range ( that is , beyond homeostasis ) .
This stimulus is “ heard ” by a specific sensor .
For example , in the control of blood glucose , specific endocrine cells in the pancreas detect excess glucose ( the stimulus ) in the bloodstream .
These pancreatic beta cells respond to the increased level of blood glucose by releasing the hormone insulin into the bloodstream .
The insulin signals skeletal muscle fibers , fat cells ( adipocytes ) , and liver cells to take up the excess glucose , removing it from the bloodstream .
As glucose concentration in the bloodstream drops , the decrease in concentration—the actual negative feedback—is detected by pancreatic alpha cells , and insulin release stops .
This prevents blood sugar levels from continuing to drop below the normal range .
Humans have a similar temperature regulation feedback system that works by promoting either heat loss or heat gain ( Figure 1.10b ) .
As blood flow to the skin increases , sweat glands are activated to increase their output .
As the sweat evaporates from the skin surface into the surrounding air , it takes heat with it .
The depth of respiration increases , and a person may breathe through an open mouth instead of through the nasal passageways .
This further increases heat loss from the lungs .
In contrast , activation of the brain ’ s heat-gain center by exposure to cold reduces blood flow to the skin , and blood returning from the limbs is diverted into a network of deep veins .
This arrangement traps heat closer to the body core and restricts heat loss .
If heat loss is severe , the brain triggers an increase in random signals to skeletal muscles , causing them to contract and producing shivering .
The muscle contractions of shivering release heat while using up ATP .
The brain triggers the thyroid gland in the endocrine system to release thyroid hormone , which increases metabolic activity and heat production in cells throughout the body .
The brain also signals the adrenal glands to release epinephrine ( adrenaline ) , a hormone that causes the breakdown of glycogen into glucose , which can be used as an energy source .
The breakdown of glycogen into glucose also results in increased metabolism and heat production .
Water concentration in the body is critical for proper functioning .
A person ’ s body retains very tight control on water levels without conscious control by the person .
Watch this video ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/H2Ocon ) to learn more about water concentration in the body .
Which organ has primary control over the amount of water in the body ?
Positive feedback intensifies a change in the body ’ s physiological condition rather than reversing it .
A deviation from the normal range results in more change , and the system moves farther away from the normal range .
Positive feedback in the body is normal only when there is a definite end point .
Childbirth and the body ’ s response to blood loss are two examples of positive feedback loops that are normal but are activated only when needed .
Childbirth at full term is an example of a situation in which the maintenance of the existing body state is not desired .
Enormous changes in the mother ’ s body are required to expel the baby at the end of pregnancy .
And the events of childbirth , once begun , must progress rapidly to a conclusion or the life of the mother and the baby are at risk .
The extreme muscular work of labor and delivery are the result of a positive feedback system ( Figure 1.11 ) .
The first contractions of labor ( the stimulus ) push the baby toward the cervix ( the lowest part of the uterus ) .
The cervix contains stretch-sensitive nerve cells that monitor the degree of stretching ( the sensors ) .
These nerve cells send messages to the brain , which in turn causes the pituitary gland at the base of the brain to release the hormone oxytocin into the bloodstream .
Oxytocin causes stronger contractions of the smooth muscles in of the uterus ( the effectors ) , pushing the baby further down the birth canal .
This causes even greater stretching of the cervix .
The cycle of stretching , oxytocin release , and increasingly more forceful contractions stops only when the baby is born .
At this point , the stretching of the cervix halts , stopping the release of oxytocin .
A second example of positive feedback centers on reversing extreme damage to the body .
Following a penetrating wound , the most immediate threat is excessive blood loss .
Less blood circulating means reduced blood pressure and reduced perfusion ( penetration of blood ) to the brain and other vital organs .
If perfusion is severely reduced , vital organs will shut down and the person will die .
The body responds to this potential catastrophe by releasing substances in the injured blood vessel wall that begin the process of blood clotting .
As each step of clotting occurs , it stimulates the release of more clotting substances .
This accelerates the processes of clotting and sealing off the damaged area .
Clotting is contained in a local area based on the tightly controlled availability of clotting proteins .
This is an adaptive , life-saving cascade of events .
However , the purpose of this language is not to confuse , but rather to increase precision and reduce medical errors .
For example , is a scar “ above the wrist ” located on the forearm two or three inches away from the hand ?
Or is it at the base of the hand ?
Is it on the palmside or back-side ?
By using precise anatomical terminology , we eliminate ambiguity .
Anatomical terms derive from ancient Greek and Latin words .
Because these languages are no longer used in everyday conversation , the meaning of their words does not change .
Anatomical terms are made up of roots , prefixes , and suffixes .
The root of a term often refers to an organ , tissue , or condition , whereas the prefix or suffix often describes the root .
For example , in the disorder hypertension , the prefix “ hyper ” means “ high ” or “ over , ” and the root word “ tension ” refers to pressure , so the word “ hypertension ” refers to abnormally high blood pressure .
To further increase precision , anatomists standardize the way in which they view the body .
Just as maps are normally oriented with north at the top , the standard body “ map , ” or anatomical position , is that of the body standing upright , with the feet at shoulder width and parallel , toes forward .
The upper limbs are held out to each side , and the palms of the hands face forward as illustrated in Figure 1.12 .
Using this standard position reduces confusion .
It does not matter how the body being described is oriented , the terms are used as if it is in anatomical position .
For example , a scar in the “ anterior ( front ) carpal ( wrist ) region ” would be present on the palm side of the wrist .
The term “ anterior ” would be used even if the hand were palm down on a table .
A body that is lying down is described as either prone or supine .
Prone describes a face-down orientation , and supine describes a face up orientation .
These terms are sometimes used in describing the position of the body during specific physical examinations or surgical procedures .
The human body ’ s numerous regions have specific terms to help increase precision ( see Figure 1.12 ) .
You will be able to describe the body ’ s regions using the terms from the figure .
Certain directional anatomical terms appear throughout this and any other anatomy textbook ( Figure 1.13 ) .
These terms are essential for describing the relative locations of different body structures .
For instance , an anatomist might describe one band of tissue as “ inferior to ” another or a physician might describe a tumor as “ superficial to ” a deeper body structure .
Commit these terms to memory to avoid confusion when you are studying or describing the locations of particular body parts .
Anterior ( or ventral ) Describes the front or direction toward the front of the body .
The toes are anterior to the foot .
Posterior ( or dorsal ) Describes the back or direction toward the back of the body .
The popliteus is posterior to the patella .
Superior ( or cranial ) describes a position above or higher than another part of the body proper .
The orbits are superior to the oris .
Inferior ( or caudal ) describes a position below or lower than another part of the body proper ; near or toward the tail ( in humans , the coccyx , or lowest part of the spinal column ) .
The pelvis is inferior to the abdomen .
Lateral describes the side or direction toward the side of the body .
The thumb ( pollex ) is lateral to the digits .
Medial describes the middle or direction toward the middle of the body .
The hallux is the medial toe .
Proximal describes a position in a limb that is nearer to the point of attachment or the trunk of the body .
The brachium is proximal to the antebrachium .
Distal describes a position in a limb that is farther from the point of attachment or the trunk of the body .
The crus is distal to the femur .
Superficial describes a position closer to the surface of the body .
The skin is superficial to the bones .
Deep describes a position farther from the surface of the body .
The brain is deep to the skull .
A section is a two-dimensional surface of a three-dimensional structure that has been cut .
Modern medical imaging devices enable clinicians to obtain “ virtual sections ” of living bodies .
We call these scans .
Body sections and scans can be correctly interpreted , however , only if the viewer understands the plane along which the section was made .
A plane is an imaginary two-dimensional surface that passes through the body .
There are three planes commonly referred to in anatomy and medicine , as illustrated in Figure 1.14 .
The sagittal plane is the plane that divides the body or an organ vertically into right and left sides .
If this vertical plane runs directly down the middle of the body , it is called the midsagittal or median plane .
If it divides the body into unequal right and left sides , it is called a parasagittal plane or less commonly a longitudinal section .
The frontal plane is the plane that divides the body or an organ into an anterior ( front ) portion and a posterior ( rear ) portion .
The frontal plane is often referred to as a coronal plane .
( “ Corona ” is Latin for “ crown. ” ) The transverse plane is the plane that divides the body or organ horizontally into upper and lower portions .
Transverse planes produce images referred to as cross sections .
The body maintains its internal organization by means of membranes , sheaths , and other structures that separate compartments .
The dorsal ( posterior ) cavity and the ventral ( anterior ) cavity are the largest body compartments ( Figure 1.15 ) .
These cavities contain and protect delicate internal organs , and the ventral cavity allows for significant changes in the size and shape of the organs as they perform their functions .
The lungs , heart , stomach , and intestines , for example , can expand and contract without distorting other tissues or disrupting the activity of nearby organs .
The posterior ( dorsal ) and anterior ( ventral ) cavities are each subdivided into smaller cavities .
In the posterior ( dorsal ) cavity , the cranial cavity houses the brain , and the spinal cavity ( or vertebral cavity ) encloses the spinal cord .
Just as the brain and spinal cord make up a continuous , uninterrupted structure , the cranial and spinal cavities that house them are also continuous .
The brain and spinal cord are protected by the bones of the skull and vertebral column and by cerebrospinal fluid , a colorless fluid produced by the brain , which cushions the brain and spinal cord within the posterior ( dorsal ) cavity .
The anterior ( ventral ) cavity has two main subdivisions : the thoracic cavity and the abdominopelvic cavity ( see Figure 1.15 ) .
The thoracic cavity is the more superior subdivision of the anterior cavity , and it is enclosed by the rib cage .
The thoracic cavity contains the lungs and the heart , which is located in the mediastinum .
The diaphragm forms the floor of the thoracic cavity and separates it from the more inferior abdominopelvic cavity .
The abdominopelvic cavity is the largest cavity in the body .
Although no membrane physically divides the abdominopelvic cavity , it can be useful to distinguish between the abdominal cavity , the division that houses the digestive organs , and the pelvic cavity , the division that houses the organs of reproduction .
To promote clear communication , for instance about the location of a patient ’ s abdominal pain or a suspicious mass , health care providers typically divide up the cavity into either nine regions or four quadrants ( Figure 1.16 ) .
The more detailed regional approach subdivides the cavity with one horizontal line immediately inferior to the ribs and one immediately superior to the pelvis , and two vertical lines drawn as if dropped from the midpoint of each clavicle ( collarbone ) .
There are nine resulting regions .
The simpler quadrants approach , which is more commonly used in medicine , subdivides the cavity with one horizontal and one vertical line that intersect at the patient ’ s umbilicus ( navel ) .
A serous membrane ( also referred to a serosa ) is one of the thin membranes that cover the walls and organs in the thoracic and abdominopelvic cavities .
The parietal layers of the membranes line the walls of the body cavity ( parietrefers to a cavity wall ) .
The visceral layer of the membrane covers the organs ( the viscera ) .
Between the parietal and visceral layers is a very thin , fluid-filled serous space , or cavity ( Figure 1.17 ) .
There are three serous cavities and their associated membranes .
Both the parietal and visceral serosa secrete the thin , slippery serous fluid located within the serous cavities .
The pleural cavity reduces friction between the lungs and the body wall .
Likewise , the pericardial cavity reduces friction between the heart and the wall of the pericardium .
The peritoneal cavity reduces friction between the abdominal and pelvic organs and the body wall .
Therefore , serous membranes provide additional protection to the viscera they enclose by reducing friction that could lead to inflammation of the organs .
An inability to control bleeding , infection , and pain made surgeries infrequent , and those that were performed—such as wound suturing , amputations , tooth and tumor removals , skull drilling , and cesarean births—did not greatly advance knowledge about internal anatomy .
Theories about the function of the body and about disease were therefore largely based on external observations and imagination .
During the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries , however , the detailed anatomical drawings of Italian artist and anatomist Leonardo da Vinci and Flemish anatomist Andreas Vesalius were published , and interest in human anatomy began to increase .
Medical schools began to teach anatomy using human dissection ; although some resorted to grave robbing to obtain corpses .
Laws were eventually passed that enabled students to dissect the corpses of criminals and those who donated their bodies for research .
Still , it was not until the late nineteenth century that medical researchers discovered non-surgical methods to look inside the living body .
German physicist Wilhelm Röntgen ( 1845–1923 ) was experimenting with electrical current when he discovered that a mysterious and invisible “ ray ” would pass through his flesh but leave an outline of his bones on a screen coated with a metal compound .
In 1895 , Röntgen made the first durable record of the internal parts of a living human : an “ X-ray ” image ( as it came to be called ) of his wife ’ s hand .
Scientists around the world quickly began their own experiments with X-rays , and by 1900 , X-rays were widely used to detect a variety of injuries and diseases .
In 1901 , Röntgen was awarded the first Nobel Prize for physics for his work in this field .
The X-ray is a form of high energy electromagnetic radiation with a short wavelength capable of penetrating solids and ionizing gases .
As they are used in medicine , X-rays are emitted from an X-ray machine and directed toward a specially treated metallic plate placed behind the patient ’ s body .
The beam of radiation results in darkening of the X-ray plate .
Like many forms of high energy radiation , however , X-rays are capable of damaging cells and initiating changes that can lead to cancer .
This danger of excessive exposure to X-rays was not fully appreciated for many years after their widespread use .
Refinements and enhancements of X-ray techniques have continued throughout the twentieth and twenty-first centuries .
Although often supplanted by more sophisticated imaging techniques , the X-ray remains a “ workhorse ” in medical imaging , especially for viewing fractures and for dentistry .
The disadvantage of irradiation to the patient and the operator is now attenuated by proper shielding and by limiting exposure .
X-rays can depict a two-dimensional image of a body region , and only from a single angle .
In contrast , more recent medical imaging technologies produce data that is integrated and analyzed by computers to produce three-dimensional images or images that reveal aspects of body functioning .
Tomography refers to imaging by sections .
Computed tomography ( CT ) is a noninvasive imaging technique that uses computers to analyze several cross-sectional X-rays in order to reveal minute details about structures in the body ( Figure 1.19a ) .
The technique was invented in the 1970s and is based on the principle that , as X-rays pass through the body , they are absorbed or reflected at different levels .
In the technique , a patient lies on a motorized platform while a computerized axial tomography ( CAT ) scanner rotates 360 degrees around the patient , taking X-ray images .
A computer combines these images into a two-dimensional view of the scanned area , or “ slice. ” Since 1970 , the development of more powerful computers and more sophisticated software has made CT scanning routine for many types of diagnostic evaluations .
It is especially useful for soft tissue scanning , such as of the brain and the thoracic and abdominal viscera .
Its level of detail is so precise that it can allow physicians to measure the size of a mass down to a millimeter .
The main disadvantage of CT scanning is that it exposes patients to a dose of radiation many times higher than that of X-rays .
In fact , children who undergo CT scans are at increased risk of developing cancer , as are adults who have multiple CT scans .
A CT or CAT scan relies on a circling scanner that revolves around the patient ’ s body .
Watch this video ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/CATscan ) to learn more about CT and CAT scans .
What type of radiation does a CT scanner use ?
Magnetic resonance imaging ( MRI ) is a noninvasive medical imaging technique based on a phenomenon of nuclear physics discovered in the 1930s , in which matter exposed to magnetic fields and radio waves was found to emit radio signals .
In 1970 , a physician and researcher named Raymond Damadian noticed that malignant ( cancerous ) tissue gave off different signals than normal body tissue .
He applied for a patent for the first MRI scanning device , which was in use clinically by the early 1980s .
The early MRI scanners were crude , but advances in digital computing and electronics led to their advancement over any other technique for precise imaging , especially to discover tumors .
MRI also has the major advantage of not exposing patients to radiation .
Drawbacks of MRI scans include their much higher cost , and patient discomfort with the procedure .
The MRI scanner subjects the patient to such powerful electromagnets that the scan room must be shielded .
The patient must be enclosed in a metal tube-like device for the duration of the scan ( see Figure 1.19b ) , sometimes as long as thirty minutes , which can be uncomfortable and impractical for ill patients .
The device is also so noisy that , even with earplugs , patients can become anxious or even fearful .
These problems have been overcome somewhat with the development of “ open ” MRI scanning , which does not require the patient to be entirely enclosed in the metal tube .
Patients with iron-containing metallic implants ( internal sutures , some prosthetic devices , and so on ) can not undergo MRI scanning because it can dislodge these implants .
Functional MRIs ( fMRIs ) , which detect the concentration of blood flow in certain parts of the body , are increasingly being used to study the activity in parts of the brain during various body activities .
This has helped scientists learn more about the locations of different brain functions and more about brain abnormalities and diseases .
A patient undergoing an MRI is surrounded by a tube-shaped scanner .
Watch this video ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/ l/MRI ) to learn more about MRIs .
What is the function of magnets in an MRI ?
Positron emission tomography ( PET ) is a medical imaging technique involving the use of so-called radiopharmaceuticals , substances that emit radiation that is short-lived and therefore relatively safe to administer to the body .
Although the first PET scanner was introduced in 1961 , it took 15 more years before radiopharmaceuticals were combined with the technique and revolutionized its potential .
The main advantage is that PET ( see Figure 1.19c ) can illustrate physiologic activity—including nutrient metabolism and blood flow—of the organ or organs being targeted , whereas CT and MRI scans can only show static images .
PET is widely used to diagnose a multitude of conditions , such as heart disease , the spread of cancer , certain forms of infection , brain abnormalities , bone disease , and thyroid disease .
PET relies on radioactive substances administered several minutes before the scan .
Watch this video ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/PET ) to learn more about PET .
How is PET used in chemotherapy ?
Ultrasonography is an imaging technique that uses the transmission of high-frequency sound waves into the body to generate an echo signal that is converted by a computer into a real-time image of anatomy and physiology ( see Figure 1.19d ) .
Ultrasonography is the least invasive of all imaging techniques , and it is therefore used more freely in sensitive situations such as pregnancy .
The technology was first developed in the 1940s and 1950s .
Ultrasonography is used to study heart function , blood flow in the neck or extremities , certain conditions such as gallbladder disease , and fetal growth and development .
The main disadvantages of ultrasonography are that the image quality is heavily operator-dependent and that it is unable to penetrate bone and gas .
In fact , chemicals called nucleotide bases are the foundation of the genetic code with the instructions on how to build and maintain the human body from conception through old age .
There are about three billion of these base pairs in human DNA .
Human chemistry includes organic molecules ( carbon-based ) and biochemicals ( those produced by the body ) .
Human chemistry also includes elements .
In fact , life can not exist without many of the elements that are part of the earth .
All of the elements that contribute to chemical reactions , to the transformation of energy , and to electrical activity and muscle contraction—elements that include phosphorus , carbon , sodium , and calcium , to name a few—originated in stars .
These elements , in turn , can form both the inorganic and organic chemical compounds important to life , including , for example , water , glucose , and proteins .
This chapter begins by examining elements and how the structures of atoms , the basic units of matter , determine the characteristics of elements by the number of protons , neutrons , and electrons in the atoms .
The chapter then builds the framework of life from there .
Scientists define matter as anything that occupies space and has mass .
An object ’ s mass and its weight are related concepts , but not quite the same .
An object ’ s mass is the amount of matter contained in the object , and the object ’ s mass is the same whether that object is on Earth or in the zero-gravity environment of outer space .
An object ’ s weight , on the other hand , is its mass as affected by the pull of gravity .
Where gravity strongly pulls on an object ’ s mass its weight is greater than it is where gravity is less strong .
An object of a certain mass weighs less on the moon , for example , than it does on Earth because the gravity of the moon is less than that of Earth .
In other words , weight is variable , and is influenced by gravity .
A piece of cheese that weighs a pound on Earth weighs only a few ounces on the moon .
All matter in the natural world is composed of one or more of the 92 fundamental substances called elements .
An element is a pure substance that is distinguished from all other matter by the fact that it can not be created or broken down by ordinary chemical means .
While your body can assemble many of the chemical compounds needed for life from their constituent elements , it can not make elements .
They must come from the environment .
A familiar example of an element that you must take in is calcium ( Ca ) .
Calcium is essential to the human body ; it is absorbed and used for a number of processes , including strengthening bones .
When you consume dairy products your digestive system breaks down the food into components small enough to cross into the bloodstream .
Among these is calcium , which , because it is an element , can not be broken down further .
The elemental calcium in cheese , therefore , is the same as the calcium that forms your bones .
Some other elements you might be familiar with are oxygen , sodium , and iron .
The elements in the human body are shown in Figure 2.2 , beginning with the most abundant : oxygen ( O ) , carbon ( C ) , hydrogen ( H ) , and nitrogen ( N ) .
Each element ’ s name can be replaced by a oneor two-letter symbol ; you will become familiar with some of these during this course .
All the elements in your body are derived from the foods you eat and the air you breathe .
In nature , elements rarely occur alone .
Instead , they combine to form compounds .
A compound is a substance composed of two or more elements joined by chemical bonds .
For example , the compound glucose is an important body fuel .
It is always composed of the same three elements : carbon , hydrogen , and oxygen .
Moreover , the elements that make up any given compound always occur in the same relative amounts .
In glucose , there are always six carbon and six oxygen units for every twelve hydrogen units .
But what , exactly , are these “ units ” of elements ?
An atom is the smallest quantity of an element that retains the unique properties of that element .
In other words , an atom of hydrogen is a unit of hydrogen—the smallest amount of hydrogen that can exist .
As you might guess , atoms are almost unfathomably small .
The period at the end of this sentence is millions of atoms wide .
Atoms are made up of even smaller subatomic particles , three types of which are important : the proton , neutron , and electron .
The number of positively-charged protons and non-charged ( “ neutral ” ) neutrons , gives mass to the atom , and the number of each in the nucleus of the atom determine the element .
The number of negatively-charged electrons that “ spin ” around the nucleus at close to the speed of light equals the number of protons .
An electron has about 1/2000th the mass of a proton or neutron .
Figure 2.3 shows two models that can help you imagine the structure of an atom—in this case , helium ( He ) .
In the planetary model , helium ’ s two electrons are shown circling the nucleus in a fixed orbit depicted as a ring .
Although this model is helpful in visualizing atomic structure , in reality , electrons do not travel in fixed orbits , but whiz around the nucleus erratically in a so-called electron cloud .
An atom ’ s protons and electrons carry electrical charges .
Protons , with their positive charge , are designated p .
Electrons , which have a negative charge , are designated e .
An atom ’ s neutrons have no charge : they are electrically neutral .
Just as a magnet sticks to a steel refrigerator because their opposite charges attract , the positively charged protons attract the negatively charged electrons .
This mutual attraction gives the atom some structural stability .
The attraction by the positively charged nucleus helps keep electrons from straying far .
The number of protons and electrons within a neutral atom are equal , thus , the atom ’ s overall charge is balanced .
An atom of carbon is unique to carbon , but a proton of carbon is not .
One proton is the same as another , whether it is found in an atom of carbon , sodium ( Na ) , or iron ( Fe ) .
The same is true for neutrons and electrons .
So , what gives an element its distinctive properties—what makes carbon so different from sodium or iron ?
The answer is the unique quantity of protons each contains .
Carbon by definition is an element whose atoms contain six protons .
No other element has exactly six protons in its atoms .
Moreover , all atoms of carbon , whether found in your liver or in a lump of coal , contain six protons .
Thus , the atomic number , which is the number of protons in the nucleus of the atom , identifies the element .
Because an atom usually has the same number of electrons as protons , the atomic number identifies the usual number of electrons as well .
In their most common form , many elements also contain the same number of neutrons as protons .
The most common form of carbon , for example , has six neutrons as well as six protons , for a total of 12 subatomic particles in its nucleus .
An element ’ s mass number is the sum of the number of protons and neutrons in its nucleus .
So the most common form of carbon ’ s mass number is 12 .
( Electrons have so little mass that they do not appreciably contribute to the mass of an atom . )
Carbon is a relatively light element .
Uranium ( U ) , in contrast , has a mass number of 238 and is referred to as a heavy metal .
Its atomic number is 92 ( it has 92 protons ) but it contains 146 neutrons ; it has the most mass of all the naturally occurring elements .
The periodic table of the elements , shown in Figure 2.4 , is a chart identifying the 92 elements found in nature , as well as several larger , unstable elements discovered experimentally .
The elements are arranged in order of their atomic number , with hydrogen and helium at the top of the table , and the more massive elements below .
The periodic table is a useful device because for each element , it identifies the chemical symbol , the atomic number , and the mass number , while organizing elements according to their propensity to react with other elements .
The number of protons and electrons in an element are equal .
The number of protons and neutrons may be equal for some elements , but are not equal for all .
Visit this website ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/ptable ) to view the periodic table .
In the periodic table of the elements , elements in a single column have the same number of electrons that can participate in a chemical reaction .
These electrons are known as “ valence electrons. ” For example , the elements in the first column all have a single valence electron , an electron that can be “ donated ” in a chemical reaction with another atom .
What is the meaning of a mass number shown in parentheses ?
Although each element has a unique number of protons , it can exist as different isotopes .
An isotope is one of the different forms of an element , distinguished from one another by different numbers of neutrons .
The standard isotope of carbon is C , commonly called carbon twelve .
C has six protons and six neutrons , for a mass number of twelve .
All of the isotopes of carbon have the same number of protons ; therefore , C has seven neutrons , and C has eight neutrons .
The different isotopes of an element can also be indicated with the mass number hyphenated ( for example , C-12 instead of C ) .
Hydrogen has three common isotopes , shown in Figure 2.5 .
An isotope that contains more than the usual number of neutrons is referred to as a heavy isotope .
An example is C. Heavy isotopes tend to be unstable , and unstable isotopes are radioactive .
A radioactive isotope is an isotope whose nucleus readily decays , giving off subatomic particles and electromagnetic energy .
Different radioactive isotopes ( also called radioisotopes ) differ in their half-life , the time it takes for half of any size sample of an isotope to decay .
For example , the half-life of tritium—a radioisotope of hydrogen—is about 12 years , indicating it takes 12 years for half of the tritium nuclei in a sample to decay .
Excessive exposure to radioactive isotopes can damage human cells and even cause cancer and birth defects , but when exposure is controlled , some radioactive isotopes can be useful in medicine .
For more information , see the Career Connections .
The controlled use of radioisotopes has advanced medical diagnosis and treatment of disease .
Interventional radiologists are physicians who treat disease by using minimally invasive techniques involving radiation .
Many conditions that could once only be treated with a lengthy and traumatic operation can now be treated non-surgically , reducing the cost , pain , length of hospital stay , and recovery time for patients .
For example , in the past , the only options for a patient with one or more tumors in the liver were surgery and chemotherapy ( the administration of drugs to treat cancer ) .
Some liver tumors , however , are difficult to access surgically , and others could require the surgeon to remove too much of the liver .
Moreover , chemotherapy is highly toxic to the liver , and certain tumors do not respond well to it anyway .
In some such cases , an interventional radiologist can treat the tumors by disrupting their blood supply , which they need if they are to continue to grow .
In this procedure , called radioembolization , the radiologist accesses the liver with a fine needle , threaded through one of the patient ’ s blood vessels .
The radiologist then inserts tiny radioactive “ seeds ” into the blood vessels that supply the tumors .
In the days and weeks following the procedure , the radiation emitted from the seeds destroys the vessels and directly kills the tumor cells in the vicinity of the treatment .
Radioisotopes emit subatomic particles that can be detected and tracked by imaging technologies .
One of the most advanced uses of radioisotopes in medicine is the positron emission tomography ( PET ) scanner , which detects the activity in the body of a very small injection of radioactive glucose , the simple sugar that cells use for energy .
The PET camera reveals to the medical team which of the patient ’ s tissues are taking up the most glucose .
Thus , the most metabolically active tissues show up as bright “ hot spots ” on the images ( Figure 2.6 ) .
PET can reveal some cancerous masses because cancer cells consume glucose at a high rate to fuel their rapid reproduction .
In the human body , atoms do not exist as independent entities .
Rather , they are constantly reacting with other atoms to form and to break down more complex substances .
To fully understand anatomy and physiology you must grasp how atoms participate in such reactions .
The key is understanding the behavior of electrons .
Although electrons do not follow rigid orbits a set distance away from the atom ’ s nucleus , they do tend to stay within certain regions of space called electron shells .
An electron shell is a layer of electrons that encircle the nucleus at a distinct energy level .
The atoms of the elements found in the human body have from one to five electron shells , and all electron shells hold eight electrons except the first shell , which can only hold two .
This configuration of electron shells is the same for all atoms .
The precise number of shells depends on the number of electrons in the atom .
Hydrogen and helium have just one and two electrons , respectively .
If you take a look at the periodic table of the elements , you will notice that hydrogen and helium are placed alone on either sides of the top row ; they are the only elements that have just one electron shell ( Figure 2.7 ) .
A second shell is necessary to hold the electrons in all elements larger than hydrogen and helium .
Lithium ( Li ) , whose atomic number is 3 , has three electrons .
Two of these fill the first electron shell , and the third spills over into a second shell .
The second electron shell can accommodate as many as eight electrons .
Carbon , with its six electrons , entirely fills its first shell , and half-fills its second .
With ten electrons , neon ( Ne ) entirely fills its two electron shells .
Again , a look at the periodic table reveals that all of the elements in the second row , from lithium to neon , have just two electron shells .
Atoms with more than ten electrons require more than two shells .
These elements occupy the third and subsequent rows of the periodic table .
The factor that most strongly governs the tendency of an atom to participate in chemical reactions is the number of electrons in its valence shell .
A valence shell is an atom ’ s outermost electron shell .
If the valence shell is full , the atom is stable ; meaning its electrons are unlikely to be pulled away from the nucleus by the electrical charge of other atoms .
If the valence shell is not full , the atom is reactive ; meaning it will tend to react with other atoms in ways that make the valence shell full .
Consider hydrogen , with its one electron only half-filling its valence shell .
This single electron is likely to be drawn into relationships with the atoms of other elements , so that hydrogen ’ s single valence shell can be stabilized .
All atoms ( except hydrogen and helium with their single electron shells ) are most stable when there are exactly eight electrons in their valence shell .
This principle is referred to as the octet rule , and it states that an atom will give up , gain , or share electrons with another atom so that it ends up with eight electrons in its own valence shell .
For example , oxygen , with six electrons in its valence shell , is likely to react with other atoms in a way that results in the addition of two electrons to oxygen ’ s valence shell , bringing the number to eight .
When two hydrogen atoms each share their single electron with oxygen , covalent bonds are formed , resulting in a molecule of water , H O .
In nature , atoms of one element tend to join with atoms of other elements in characteristic ways .
For example , carbon commonly fills its valence shell by linking up with four atoms of hydrogen .
In so doing , the two elements form the simplest of organic molecules , methane , which also is one of the most abundant and stable carbon-containing compounds on Earth .
As stated above , another example is water ; oxygen needs two electrons to fill its valence shell .
It commonly interacts with two atoms of hydrogen , forming H O. Incidentally , the name “ hydrogen ” reflects its contribution to water ( hydro= “ water ” ; -gen = “ maker ” ) .
But do atoms ever actually touch one another ?
Most physicists would say no , because the negatively charged electrons in their valence shells repel one another .
No force within the human body—or anywhere in the natural world—is strong enough to overcome this electrical repulsion .
So when you read about atoms linking together or colliding , bear in mind that the atoms are not merging in a physical sense .
Instead , atoms link by forming a chemical bond .
A bond is a weak or strong electrical attraction that holds atoms in the same vicinity .
The new grouping is typically more stable—less likely to react again—than its component atoms were when they were separate .
A more or less stable grouping of two or more atoms held together by chemical bonds is called a molecule .
The bonded atoms may be of the same element , as in the case of H , which is called molecular hydrogen or hydrogen gas .
When a molecule is made up of two or more atoms of different elements , it is called a chemical compound .
Thus , a unit of water , or H O , is a compound , as is a single molecule of the gas methane , or CH .
Three types of chemical bonds are important in human physiology , because they hold together substances that are used by the body for critical aspects of homeostasis , signaling , and energy production , to name just a few important processes .
These are ionic bonds , covalent bonds , and hydrogen bonds .
Recall that an atom typically has the same number of positively charged protons and negatively charged electrons .
As long as this situation remains , the atom is electrically neutral .
But when an atom participates in a chemical reaction that results in the donation or acceptance of one or more electrons , the atom will then become positively or negatively charged .
This happens frequently for most atoms in order to have a full valence shell , as described previously .
This can happen either by gaining electrons to fill a shell that is more than half-full , or by giving away electrons to empty a shell than is less than half-full , thereby leaving the next smaller electron shell as the new , full , valence shell .
An atom that has an electrical charge—whether positive or negative—is an ion .
Visit this website ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/electenergy ) to learn about electrical energy and the attraction/ repulsion of charges .
What happens to the charged electroscope when a conductor is moved between its plastic sheets , and why ?
Potassium ( K ) , for instance , is an important element in all body cells .
Its atomic number is 19 .
It has just one electron in its valence shell .
This characteristic makes potassium highly likely to participate in chemical reactions in which it donates one electron .
( It is easier for potassium to donate one electron than to gain seven electrons . )
The loss will cause the positive charge of potassium ’ s protons to be more influential than the negative charge of potassium ’ s electrons .
In other words , the resulting potassium ion will be slightly positive .
A potassium ion is written K , indicating that it has lost a single electron .
A positively charged ion is known as a cation .
Now consider fluorine ( F ) , a component of bones and teeth .
Its atomic number is nine , and it has seven electrons in its valence shell .
Thus , it is highly likely to bond with other atoms in such a way that fluorine accepts one electron ( it is easier for fluorine to gain one electron than to donate seven electrons ) .
When it does , its electrons will outnumber its protons by one , and it will have an overall negative charge .
The ionized form of fluorine is called fluoride , and is written as F .
A negatively charged ion is known as an anion .
Atoms that have more than one electron to donate or accept will end up with stronger positive or negative charges .
A cation that has donated two electrons has a net charge of +2 .
Using magnesium ( Mg ) as an example , this can be written Mg or Mg .
An anion that has accepted two electrons has a net charge of –2 .
The ionic form of selenium ( Se ) , for example , is typically written Se .
The opposite charges of cations and anions exert a moderately strong mutual attraction that keeps the atoms in close proximity forming an ionic bond .
An ionic bond is an ongoing , close association between ions of opposite charge .
The table salt you sprinkle on your food owes its existence to ionic bonding .
As shown in Figure 2.8 , sodium commonly donates an electron to chlorine , becoming the cation Na .
When chlorine accepts the electron , it becomes the chloride anion , Cl .
With their opposing charges , these two ions strongly attract each other .
Water is an essential component of life because it is able to break the ionic bonds in salts to free the ions .
In fact , in biological fluids , most individual atoms exist as ions .
These dissolved ions produce electrical charges within the body .
The behavior of these ions produces the tracings of heart and brain function observed as waves on an electrocardiogram ( EKG or ECG ) or an electroencephalogram ( EEG ) .
The electrical activity that derives from the interactions of the charged ions is why they are also called electrolytes .
Unlike ionic bonds formed by the attraction between a cation ’ s positive charge and an anion ’ s negative charge , molecules formed by a covalent bond share electrons in a mutually stabilizing relationship .
Like next-door neighbors whose kids hang out first at one home and then at the other , the atoms do not lose or gain electrons permanently .
Instead , the electrons move back and forth between the elements .
Because of the close sharing of pairs of electrons ( one electron from each of two atoms ) , covalent bonds are stronger than ionic bonds .
Figure 2.9 shows several common types of covalent bonds .
Notice that the two covalently bonded atoms typically share just one or two electron pairs , though larger sharings are possible .
The important concept to take from this is that in covalent bonds , electrons in the outermost valence shell are shared to fill the valence shells of both atoms , ultimately stabilizing both of the atoms involved .
In a single covalent bond , a single electron is shared between two atoms , while in a double covalent bond , two pairs of electrons are shared between two atoms .
There even are triple covalent bonds , where three atoms are shared .
You can see that the covalent bonds shown in Figure 2.9 are balanced .
The sharing of the negative electrons is relatively equal , as is the electrical pull of the positive protons in the nucleus of the atoms involved .
This is why covalently bonded molecules that are electrically balanced in this way are described as nonpolar ; that is , no region of the molecule is either more positive or more negative than any other .
Groups of legislators with completely opposite views on a particular issue are often described as “ polarized ” by news writers .
In chemistry , a polar molecule is a molecule that contains regions that have opposite electrical charges .
Polar molecules occur when atoms share electrons unequally , in polar covalent bonds .
The most familiar example of a polar molecule is water ( Figure 2.10 ) .
The molecule has three parts : one atom of oxygen , the nucleus of which contains eight protons , and two hydrogen atoms , whose nuclei each contain only one proton .
Because every proton exerts an identical positive charge , a nucleus that contains eight protons exerts a charge eight times greater than a nucleus that contains one proton .
This means that the negatively charged electrons present in the water molecule are more strongly attracted to the oxygen nucleus than to the hydrogen nuclei .
Each hydrogen atom ’ s single negative electron therefore migrates toward the oxygen atom , making the oxygen end of their bond slightly more negative than the hydrogen end of their bond .
What is true for the bonds is true for the water molecule as a whole ; that is , the oxygen region has a slightly negative charge and the regions of the hydrogen atoms have a slightly positive charge .
These charges are often referred to as “ partial charges ” because the strength of the charge is less than one full electron , as would occur in an ionic bond .
As shown in Figure 2.10 , regions of weak polarity are indicated with the Greek letter delta ( δ ) and a plus ( + ) or minus ( – ) sign .
Even though a single water molecule is unimaginably tiny , it has mass , and the opposing electrical charges on the molecule pull that mass in such a way that it creates a shape somewhat like a triangular tent ( see Figure 2.10b ) .
For human physiology , the resulting bond is one of the most important formed by water—the hydrogen bond .
A hydrogen bond is formed when a weakly positive hydrogen atom already bonded to one electronegative atom ( for example , the oxygen in the water molecule ) is attracted to another electronegative atom from another molecule .
In other words , hydrogen bonds always include hydrogen that is already part of a polar molecule .
The most common example of hydrogen bonding in the natural world occurs between molecules of water .
It happens before your eyes whenever two raindrops merge into a larger bead , or a creek spills into a river .
Hydrogen bonding occurs because the weakly negative oxygen atom in one water molecule is attracted to the weakly positive hydrogen atoms of two other water molecules ( Figure 2.11 ) .
Water molecules also strongly attract other types of charged molecules as well as ions .
Water molecules also repel molecules with nonpolar covalent bonds , like fats , lipids , and oils .
You can demonstrate this with a simple kitchen experiment : pour a teaspoon of vegetable oil , a compound formed by nonpolar covalent bonds , into a glass of water .
Instead of instantly dissolving in the water , the oil forms a distinct bead because the polar water molecules repel the nonpolar oil .
The bonding processes you have learned thus far are anabolic chemical reactions ; that is , they form larger molecules from smaller molecules or atoms .
But recall that metabolism can proceed in another direction : in catabolic chemical reactions , bonds between components of larger molecules break , releasing smaller molecules or atoms .
Both types of reaction involve exchanges not only of matter , but of energy .
Chemical reactions require a sufficient amount of energy to cause the matter to collide with enough precision and force that old chemical bonds can be broken and new ones formed .
In general , kinetic energy is the form of energy powering any type of matter in motion .
Imagine you are building a brick wall .
The energy it takes to lift and place one brick atop another is kinetic energy—the energy matter possesses because of its motion .
Once the wall is in place , it stores potential energy .
Potential energy is the energy of position , or the energy matter possesses because of the positioning or structure of its components .
If the brick wall collapses , the stored potential energy is released as kinetic energy as the bricks fall .
In the human body , potential energy is stored in the bonds between atoms and molecules .
Chemical energy is the form of potential energy in which energy is stored in chemical bonds .
When those bonds are formed , chemical energy is invested , and when they break , chemical energy is released .
Notice that chemical energy , like all energy , is neither created nor destroyed ; rather , it is converted from one form to another .
When you eat an energy bar before heading out the door for a hike , the honey , nuts , and other foods the bar contains are broken down and rearranged by your body into molecules that your muscle cells convert to kinetic energy .
Chemical reactions that release more energy than they absorb are characterized as exergonic .
The catabolism of the foods in your energy bar is an example .
Some of the chemical energy stored in the bar is absorbed into molecules your body uses for fuel , but some of it is released—for example , as heat .
In contrast , chemical reactions that absorb more energy than they release are endergonic .
These reactions require energy input , and the resulting molecule stores not only the chemical energy in the original components , but also the energy that fueled the reaction .
Because energy is neither created nor destroyed , where does the energy needed for endergonic reactions come from ?
In many cases , it comes from exergonic reactions .
You have already learned that chemical energy is absorbed , stored , and released by chemical bonds .
In addition to chemical energy , mechanical , radiant , and electrical energy are important in human functioning .
Mechanical energy , which is stored in physical systems such as machines , engines , or the human body , directly powers the movement of matter .
When you lift a brick into place on a wall , your muscles provide the mechanical energy that moves the brick .
Radiant energy is energy emitted and transmitted as waves rather than matter .
These waves vary in length from long radio waves and microwaves to short gamma waves emitted from decaying atomic nuclei .
The full spectrum of radiant energy is referred to as the electromagnetic spectrum .
The body uses the ultraviolet energy of sunlight to convert a compound in skin cells to vitamin D , which is essential to human functioning .
All chemical reactions begin with a reactant , the general term for the one or more substances that enter into the reaction .
Sodium and chloride ions , for example , are the reactants in the production of table salt .
The one or more substances produced by a chemical reaction are called the product .
In chemical reactions , the components of the reactants—the elements involved and the number of atoms of each—are all present in the product ( s ) .
Similarly , there is nothing present in the products that are not present in the reactants .
This is because chemical reactions are governed by the law of conservation of mass , which states that matter can not be created or destroyed in a chemical reaction .
Just as you can express mathematical calculations in equations such as 2 + 7 = 9 , you can use chemical equations to show how reactants become products .
As in math , chemical equations proceed from left to right , but instead of an equal sign , they employ an arrow or arrows indicating the direction in which the chemical reaction proceeds .
For example , the chemical reaction in which one atom of nitrogen and three atoms of hydrogen produce ammonia would be written as .
Correspondingly , the breakdown of ammonia into its components would be written as Notice that , in the first example , a nitrogen ( N ) atom and three hydrogen ( H ) atoms bond to form a compound .
This anabolic reaction requires energy , which is then stored within the compound ’ s bonds .
Such reactions are referred to as synthesis reactions .
A synthesis reaction is a chemical reaction that results in the synthesis ( joining ) of components that were formerly separate ( Figure 2.12a ) .
Again , nitrogen and hydrogen are reactants in a synthesis reaction that yields ammonia as the product .
The general equation for a synthesis reaction is In the second example , ammonia is catabolized into its smaller components , and the potential energy that had been stored in its bonds is released .
Such reactions are referred to as decomposition reactions .
A decomposition reaction is a chemical reaction that breaks down or “ de-composes ” something larger into its constituent parts ( see Figure 2.12b ) .
The general equation for a decomposition reaction is : .
An exchange reaction is a chemical reaction in which both synthesis and decomposition occur , chemical bonds are both formed and broken , and chemical energy is absorbed , stored , and released ( see Figure 2.12c ) .
The simplest form of an exchange reaction might be : .
Notice that , to produce these products , B and C had to break apart in a decomposition reaction , whereas A and B had to bond in a synthesis reaction .
A more complex exchange reaction might be : .
Another example might be : .
In theory , any chemical reaction can proceed in either direction under the right conditions .
Reactants may synthesize into a product that is later decomposed .
Reversibility is also a quality of exchange reactions .
For instance , could then reverse to .
This reversibility of a chemical reaction is indicated with a double arrow : .
Still , in the human body , many chemical reactions do proceed in a predictable direction , either one way or the other .
You can think of this more predictable path as the path of least resistance because , typically , the alternate direction requires more energy .
If you pour vinegar into baking soda , the reaction is instantaneous ; the concoction will bubble and fizz .
But many chemical reactions take time .
A variety of factors influence the rate of chemical reactions .
This section , however , will consider only the most important in human functioning .
If chemical reactions are to occur quickly , the atoms in the reactants have to have easy access to one another .
Thus , the greater the surface area of the reactants , the more readily they will interact .
When you pop a cube of cheese into your mouth , you chew it before you swallow it .
Among other things , chewing increases the surface area of the food so that digestive chemicals can more easily get at it .
As a general rule , gases tend to react faster than liquids or solids , again because it takes energy to separate particles of a substance , and gases by definition already have space between their particles .
Similarly , the larger the molecule , the greater the number of total bonds , so reactions involving smaller molecules , with fewer total bonds , would be expected to proceed faster .
In addition , recall that some elements are more reactive than others .
Reactions that involve highly reactive elements like hydrogen proceed more quickly than reactions that involve less reactive elements .
Reactions involving stable elements like helium are not likely to happen at all .
Nearly all chemical reactions occur at a faster rate at higher temperatures .
Recall that kinetic energy is the energy of matter in motion .
The kinetic energy of subatomic particles increases in response to increases in thermal energy .
The higher the temperature , the faster the particles move , and the more likely they are to come in contact and react .
If just a few people are dancing at a club , they are unlikely to step on each other ’ s toes .
But as more and more people get up to dance—especially if the music is fast—collisions are likely to occur .
It is the same with chemical reactions : the more particles present within a given space , the more likely those particles are to bump into one another .
This means that chemists can speed up chemical reactions not only by increasing the concentration of particles—the number of particles in the space—but also by decreasing the volume of the space , which would correspondingly increase the pressure .
If there were 100 dancers in that club , and the manager abruptly moved the party to a room half the size , the concentration of the dancers would double in the new space , and the likelihood of collisions would increase accordingly .
For two chemicals in nature to react with each other they first have to come into contact , and this occurs through random collisions .
Because heat helps increase the kinetic energy of atoms , ions , and molecules , it promotes their collision .
But in the body , extremely high heat—such as a very high fever—can damage body cells and be life-threatening .
On the other hand , normal body temperature is not high enough to promote the chemical reactions that sustain life .
That is where catalysts come in .
In chemistry , a catalyst is a substance that increases the rate of a chemical reaction without itself undergoing any change .
You can think of a catalyst as a chemical change agent .
They help increase the rate and force at which atoms , ions , and molecules collide , thereby increasing the probability that their valence shell electrons will interact .
The most important catalysts in the human body are enzymes .
An enzyme is a catalyst composed of protein or ribonucleic acid ( RNA ) , both of which will be discussed later in this chapter .
Like all catalysts , enzymes work by lowering the level of energy that needs to be invested in a chemical reaction .
A chemical reaction ’ s activation energy is the “ threshold ” level of energy needed to break the bonds in the reactants .
Once those bonds are broken , new arrangements can form .
Without an enzyme to act as a catalyst , a much larger investment of energy is needed to ignite a chemical reaction ( Figure 2.13 ) .
Enzymes are critical to the body ’ s healthy functioning .
They assist , for example , with the breakdown of food and its conversion to energy .
In fact , most of the chemical reactions in the body are facilitated by enzymes .
This section of the chapter narrows the focus to the chemistry of human life ; that is , the compounds important for the body ’ s structure and function .
In general , these compounds are either inorganic or organic .
An inorganic compound is a substance that does not contain both carbon and hydrogen .
A great many inorganic compounds do contain hydrogen atoms , such as water ( H O ) and the hydrochloric acid ( HCl ) produced by your stomach .
In contrast , only a handful of inorganic compounds contain carbon atoms .
Carbon dioxide ( CO ) is one of the few examples .
An organic compound , then , is a substance that contains both carbon and hydrogen .
Organic compounds are synthesized via covalent bonds within living organisms , including the human body .
Recall that carbon and hydrogen are the second and third most abundant elements in your body .
You will soon discover how these two elements combine in the foods you eat , in the compounds that make up your body structure , and in the chemicals that fuel your functioning .
The following section examines the three groups of inorganic compounds essential to life : water , salts , acids , and bases .
Organic compounds are covered later in the chapter .
As much as 70 percent of an adult ’ s body weight is water .
This water is contained both within the cells and between the cells that make up tissues and organs .
Its several roles make water indispensable to human functioning .
Water is a major component of many of the body ’ s lubricating fluids .
Just as oil lubricates the hinge on a door , water in synovial fluid lubricates the actions of body joints , and water in pleural fluid helps the lungs expand and recoil with breathing .
Watery fluids help keep food flowing through the digestive tract , and ensure that the movement of adjacent abdominal organs is friction free .
Water also protects cells and organs from physical trauma , cushioning the brain within the skull , for example , and protecting the delicate nerve tissue of the eyes .
Water cushions a developing fetus in the mother ’ s womb as well .
A heat sink is a substance or object that absorbs and dissipates heat but does not experience a corresponding increase in temperature .
In the body , water absorbs the heat generated by chemical reactions without greatly increasing in temperature .
Moreover , when the environmental temperature soars , the water stored in the body helps keep the body cool .
This cooling effect happens as warm blood from the body ’ s core flows to the blood vessels just under the skin and is transferred to the environment .
At the same time , sweat glands release warm water in sweat .
As the water evaporates into the air , it carries away heat , and then the cooler blood from the periphery circulates back to the body core .
A mixture is a combination of two or more substances , each of which maintains its own chemical identity .
In other words , the constituent substances are not chemically bonded into a new , larger chemical compound .
The concept is easy to imagine if you think of powdery substances such as flour and sugar ; when you stir them together in a bowl , they obviously do not bond to form a new compound .
The room air you breathe is a gaseous mixture , containing three discrete elements—nitrogen , oxygen , and argon—and one compound , carbon dioxide .
There are three types of liquid mixtures , all of which contain water as a key component .
These are solutions , colloids , and suspensions .
For cells in the body to survive , they must be kept moist in a water-based liquid called a solution .
In chemistry , a liquid solution consists of a solvent that dissolves a substance called a solute .
An important characteristic of solutions is that they are homogeneous ; that is , the solute molecules are distributed evenly throughout the solution .
If you were to stir a teaspoon of sugar into a glass of water , the sugar would dissolve into sugar molecules separated by water molecules .
The ratio of sugar to water in the left side of the glass would be the same as the ratio of sugar to water in the right side of the glass .
If you were to add more sugar , the ratio of sugar to water would change , but the distribution—provided you had stirred well—would still be even .
Water is considered the “ universal solvent ” and it is believed that life can not exist without water because of this .
Water is certainly the most abundant solvent in the body ; essentially all of the body ’ s chemical reactions occur among compounds dissolved in water .
Because water molecules are polar , with regions of positive and negative electrical charge , water readily dissolves ionic compounds and polar covalent compounds .
Such compounds are referred to as hydrophilic , or “ water-loving. ” As mentioned above , sugar dissolves well in water .
This is because sugar molecules contain regions of hydrogen-oxygen polar bonds , making it hydrophilic .
Nonpolar molecules , which do not readily dissolve in water , are called hydrophobic , or “ water-fearing. ” Various mixtures of solutes and water are described in chemistry .
The concentration of a given solute is the number of particles of that solute in a given space ( oxygen makes up about 21 percent of atmospheric air ) .
In the bloodstream of humans , glucose concentration is usually measured in milligram ( mg ) per deciliter ( dL ) , and in a healthy adult averages about 100 mg/dL .
Another method of measuring the concentration of a solute is by its molarilty—which is moles ( M ) of the molecules per liter ( L ) .
The mole of an element is its atomic weight , while a mole of a compound is the sum of the atomic weights of its components , called the molecular weight .
An often-used example is calculating a mole of glucose , with the chemical formula C H O .
When water is added to make one liter of solution , you have one mole ( 1M ) of glucose .
This is particularly useful in chemistry because of the relationship of moles to “ Avogadro ’ s number. ” A mole of any solution has the same number of particles in it : 6.02 × 10 .
Many substances in the bloodstream and other tissue of the body are measured in thousandths of a mole , or millimoles ( mM ) .
A colloid is a mixture that is somewhat like a heavy solution .
The solute particles consist of tiny clumps of molecules large enough to make the liquid mixture opaque ( because the particles are large enough to scatter light ) .
Familiar examples of colloids are milk and cream .
In the thyroid glands , the thyroid hormone is stored as a thick protein mixture also called a colloid .
A suspension is a liquid mixture in which a heavier substance is suspended temporarily in a liquid , but over time , settles out .
This separation of particles from a suspension is called sedimentation .
An example of sedimentation occurs in the blood test that establishes sedimentation rate , or sed rate .
The test measures how quickly red blood cells in a test tube settle out of the watery portion of blood ( known as plasma ) over a set period of time .
Two types of chemical reactions involve the creation or the consumption of water : dehydration synthesis and hydrolysis .
In dehydration synthesis , one reactant gives up an atom of hydrogen and another reactant gives up a hydroxyl group ( OH ) in the synthesis of a new product .
In the formation of their covalent bond , a molecule of water is released as a byproduct ( Figure 2.14 ) .
This is also sometimes referred to as a condensation reaction .
In hydrolysis , a molecule of water disrupts a compound , breaking its bonds .
The water is itself split into H and OH .
One portion of the severed compound then bonds with the hydrogen atom , and the other portion bonds with the hydroxyl group .
These reactions are reversible , and play an important role in the chemistry of organic compounds ( which will be discussed shortly ) .
Recall that salts are formed when ions form ionic bonds .
In these reactions , one atom gives up one or more electrons , and thus becomes positively charged , whereas the other accepts one or more electrons and becomes negatively charged .
You can now define a salt as a substance that , when dissolved in water , dissociates into ions other than H or OH .
This fact is important in distinguishing salts from acids and bases , discussed next .
A typical salt , NaCl , dissociates completely in water ( Figure 2.15 ) .
The positive and negative regions on the water molecule ( the hydrogen and oxygen ends respectively ) attract the negative chloride and positive sodium ions , pulling them away from each other .
Again , whereas nonpolar and polar covalently bonded compounds break apart into molecules in solution , salts dissociate into ions .
These ions are electrolytes ; they are capable of conducting an electrical current in solution .
This property is critical to the function of ions in transmitting nerve impulses and prompting muscle contraction .
Many other salts are important in the body .
For example , bile salts produced by the liver help break apart dietary fats , and calcium phosphate salts form the mineral portion of teeth and bones .
Acids and bases , like salts , dissociate in water into electrolytes .
Acids and bases can very much change the properties of the solutions in which they are dissolved .
An acid is a substance that releases hydrogen ions ( H ) in solution ( Figure 2.16a ) .
Because an atom of hydrogen has just one proton and one electron , a positively charged hydrogen ion is simply a proton .
This solitary proton is highly likely to participate in chemical reactions .
Strong acids are compounds that release all of their H in solution ; that is , they ionize completely .
Hydrochloric acid ( HCl ) , which is released from cells in the lining of the stomach , is a strong acid because it releases all of its H in the stomach ’ s watery environment .
This strong acid aids in digestion and kills ingested microbes .
Weak acids do not ionize completely ; that is , some of their hydrogen ions remain bonded within a compound in solution .
An example of a weak acid is vinegar , or acetic acid ; it is called acetate after it gives up a proton .
A base is a substance that releases hydroxyl ions ( OH ) in solution , or one that accepts H already present in solution ( see Figure 2.16b ) .
The hydroxyl ions ( also known as hydroxide ions ) or other basic substances combine with H present to form a water molecule , thereby removing H and reducing the solution ’ s acidity .
Strong bases release most or all of their hydroxyl ions ; weak bases release only some hydroxyl ions or absorb only a few H .
Food mixed with hydrochloric acid from the stomach would burn the small intestine , the next portion of the digestive tract after the stomach , if it were not ) , a weak base that attracts H .
Bicarbonate accepts some of the H protons , thereby for the release of bicarbonate ( HCO reducing the acidity of the solution .
The relative acidity or alkalinity of a solution can be indicated by its pH .
A solution ’ s pH is the negative , base-10 logarithm of the hydrogen ion ( H ) concentration of the solution .
As an example , a pH 4 solution has an H concentration that is ten times greater than that of a pH 5 solution .
That is , a solution with a pH of 4 is ten times more acidic than a solution with a pH of 5 .
The concept of pH will begin to make more sense when you study the pH scale , like that shown in Figure 2.17 .
The scale consists of a series of increments ranging from 0 to 14 .
A solution with a pH of 7 is considered neutral—neither acidic nor basic .
Pure water has a pH of 7 .
The lower the number below 7 , the more acidic the solution , or the greater the concentration of H .
The concentration of hydrogen ions at each pH value is 10 times different than the next pH .
For instance , a pH value of 4 corresponds to a proton concentration of 10 M , or 0.0001M , while a pH value of 5 corresponds to a proton concentration of 10 M , or 0.00001M .
The higher the number above 7 , the more basic ( alkaline ) the solution , or the lower the concentration of H .
Human urine , for example , is ten times more acidic than pure water , and HCl is 10,000,000 times more acidic than water .
The pH of human blood normally ranges from 7.35 to 7.45 , although it is typically identified as pH 7.4 .
At this slightly basic pH , blood can reduce the acidity resulting from the carbon dioxide ( CO ) constantly being released into the bloodstream by the trillions of cells in the body .
Homeostatic mechanisms ( along with exhaling CO while breathing ) normally keep the pH of blood within this narrow range .
This is critical , because fluctuations—either too acidic or too alkaline—can lead to life-threatening disorders .
All cells of the body depend on homeostatic regulation of acid–base balance at a pH of approximately 7.4 .
The body therefore has several mechanisms for this regulation , involving breathing , the excretion of chemicals in urine , and the internal release of chemicals collectively called buffers into body fluids .
A buffer is a solution of a weak acid and its conjugate base .
A buffer can neutralize small amounts of acids or bases in body fluids .
For example , if there is even a slight decrease below 7.35 in the pH of a bodily fluid , the buffer in the fluid—in this case , acting as a weak base—will bind the excess hydrogen ions .
In contrast , if pH rises above 7.45 , the buffer will act as a weak acid and contribute hydrogen ions .
Excessive acidity of the blood and other body fluids is known as acidosis .
Common causes of acidosis are situations and disorders that reduce the effectiveness of breathing , especially the person ’ s ability to exhale fully , which causes a buildup of CO ( and H ) in the bloodstream .
Acidosis can also be caused by metabolic problems that reduce the level or function of buffers that act as bases , or that promote the production of acids .
For instance , with severe diarrhea , too much bicarbonate can be lost from the body , allowing acids to build up in body fluids .
In people with poorly managed diabetes ( ineffective regulation of blood sugar ) , acids called ketones are produced as a form of body fuel .
These can build up in the blood , causing a serious condition called diabetic ketoacidosis .
Kidney failure , liver failure , heart failure , cancer , and other disorders also can prompt metabolic acidosis .
In contrast , alkalosis is a condition in which the blood and other body fluids are too alkaline ( basic ) .
As with acidosis , respiratory disorders are a major cause ; however , in respiratory alkalosis , carbon dioxide levels fall too low .
Lung disease , aspirin overdose , shock , and ordinary anxiety can cause respiratory alkalosis , which reduces the normal concentration of H .
Metabolic alkalosis often results from prolonged , severe vomiting , which causes a loss of hydrogen and chloride ions ( as components of HCl ) .
Medications also can prompt alkalosis .
These include diuretics that cause the body to lose potassium ions , as well as antacids when taken in excessive amounts , for instance by someone with persistent heartburn or an ulcer .
Created by living things , they are found throughout the world , in soils and seas , commercial products , and every cell of the human body .
The four types most important to human structure and function are carbohydrates , lipids , proteins , and nucleotides .
Before exploring these compounds , you need to first understand the chemistry of carbon .
What makes organic compounds ubiquitous is the chemistry of their carbon core .
Recall that carbon atoms have four electrons in their valence shell , and that the octet rule dictates that atoms tend to react in such a way as to complete their valence shell with eight electrons .
Carbon atoms do not complete their valence shells by donating or accepting four electrons .
Instead , they readily share electrons via covalent bonds .
Commonly , carbon atoms share with other carbon atoms , often forming a long carbon chain referred to as a carbon skeleton .
When they do share , however , they do not share all their electrons exclusively with each other .
Rather , carbon atoms tend to share electrons with a variety of other elements , one of which is always hydrogen .
Carbon and hydrogen groupings are called hydrocarbons .
If you study the figures of organic compounds in the remainder of this chapter , you will see several with chains of hydrocarbons in one region of the compound .
Many combinations are possible to fill carbon ’ s four “ vacancies. ” Carbon may share electrons with oxygen or nitrogen or other atoms in a particular region of an organic compound .
Moreover , the atoms to which carbon atoms bond may also be part of a functional group .
A functional group is a group of atoms linked by strong covalent bonds and tending to function in chemical reactions as a single unit .
You can think of functional groups as tightly knit “ cliques ” whose members are unlikely to be parted .
Five functional groups are important in human physiology ; these are the hydroxyl , carboxyl , amino , methyl and phosphate groups ( Table 2.1 ) .
Carbon ’ s affinity for covalent bonding means that many distinct and relatively stable organic molecules nevertheless readily form larger , more complex molecules .
Any large molecule is referred to as macromolecule ( macro= “ large ” ) , and the organic compounds in this section all fit this description .
However , some macromolecules are made up of several “ copies ” of single units called monomer ( mono= “ one ” ; -mer = “ part ” ) .
Like beads in a long necklace , these monomers link by covalent bonds to form long polymers ( poly= “ many ” ) .
There are many examples of monomers and polymers among the organic compounds .
Monomers form polymers by engaging in dehydration synthesis ( see Figure 2.14 ) .
As was noted earlier , this reaction results in the release of a molecule of water .
Each monomer contributes : One gives up a hydrogen atom and the other gives up a hydroxyl group .
Polymers are split into monomers by hydrolysis ( -lysis = “ rupture ” ) .
The bonds between their monomers are broken , via the donation of a molecule of water , which contributes a hydrogen atom to one monomer and a hydroxyl group to the other .
The term carbohydrate means “ hydrated carbon. ” Recall that the root hydroindicates water .
A carbohydrate is a molecule composed of carbon , hydrogen , and oxygen ; in most carbohydrates , hydrogen and oxygen are found in the same two-to-one relative proportions they have in water .
In fact , the chemical formula for a “ generic ” molecule of carbohydrate is ( CH O ) .
Carbohydrates are referred to as saccharides , a word meaning “ sugars. ” Three forms are important in the body .
Monosaccharides are the monomers of carbohydrates .
Disaccharides ( di= “ two ” ) are made up of two monomers .
Polysaccharides are the polymers , and can consist of hundreds to thousands of monomers .
A monosaccharide is a monomer of carbohydrates .
Five monosaccharides are important in the body .
Three of these are the hexose sugars , so called because they each contain six atoms of carbon .
These are glucose , fructose , and galactose , shown in Figure 2.18a .
The remaining monosaccharides are the two pentose sugars , each of which contains five atoms of carbon .
They are ribose and deoxyribose , shown in Figure 2.18b .
A disaccharide is a pair of monosaccharides .
Disaccharides are formed via dehydration synthesis , and the bond linking them is referred to as a glycosidic bond ( glyco= “ sugar ” ) .
Three disaccharides ( shown in Figure 2.19 ) are important to humans .
These are sucrose , commonly referred to as table sugar ; lactose , or milk sugar ; and maltose , or malt sugar .
As you can tell from their common names , you consume these in your diet ; however , your body can not use them directly .
Instead , in the digestive tract , they are split into their component monosaccharides via hydrolysis .
Watch this video ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/disaccharide ) to observe the formation of a disaccharide .
What happens when water encounters a glycosidic bond ?
Polysaccharides can contain a few to a thousand or more monosaccharides .
Three are important to the body ( Figure 2.20 ) : Starches are polymers of glucose .
They occur in long chains called amylose or branched chains called amylopectin , both of which are stored in plant-based foods and are relatively easy to digest .
Glycogen is also a polymer of glucose , but it is stored in the tissues of animals , especially in the muscles and liver .
It is not considered a dietary carbohydrate because very little glycogen remains in animal tissues after slaughter ; however , the human body stores excess glucose as glycogen , again , in the muscles and liver .
Cellulose , a polysaccharide that is the primary component of the cell wall of green plants , is the component of plant food referred to as “ fiber ” .
In humans , cellulose/fiber is not digestible ; however , dietary fiber has many health benefits .
It helps you feel full so you eat less , it promotes a healthy digestive tract , and a diet high in fiber is thought to reduce the risk of heart disease and possibly some forms of cancer .
The body obtains carbohydrates from plant-based foods .
Grains , fruits , and legumes and other vegetables provide most of the carbohydrate in the human diet , although lactose is found in dairy products .
Although most body cells can break down other organic compounds for fuel , all body cells can use glucose .
Moreover , nerve cells ( neurons ) in the brain , spinal cord , and through the peripheral nervous system , as well as red blood cells , can use only glucose for fuel .
In the breakdown of glucose for energy , molecules of adenosine triphosphate , better known as ATP , are produced .
Adenosine triphosphate ( ATP ) is composed of a ribose sugar , an adenine base , and three phosphate groups .
ATP releases free energy when its phosphate bonds are broken , and thus supplies ready energy to the cell .
More ATP is produced in the presence of oxygen ( O ) than in pathways that do not use oxygen .
The overall reaction for the conversion of the energy in glucose to energy stored in ATP can be written : In addition to being a critical fuel source , carbohydrates are present in very small amounts in cells ’ structure .
For instance , some carbohydrate molecules bind with proteins to produce glycoproteins , and others combine with lipids to produce glycolipids , both of which are found in the membrane that encloses the contents of body cells .
A lipid is one of a highly diverse group of compounds made up mostly of hydrocarbons .
The few oxygen atoms they contain are often at the periphery of the molecule .
Their nonpolar hydrocarbons make all lipids hydrophobic .
In water , lipids do not form a true solution , but they may form an emulsion , which is the term for a mixture of solutions that do not mix well .
A triglyceride is one of the most common dietary lipid groups , and the type found most abundantly in body tissues .
This compound , which is commonly referred to as a fat , is formed from the synthesis of two types of molecules ( Figure 2.21 ) : A glycerol backbone at the core of triglycerides , consists of three carbon atoms .
Three fatty acids , long chains of hydrocarbons with a carboxyl group and a methyl group at opposite ends , extend from each of the carbons of the glycerol .
Triglycerides form via dehydration synthesis .
Glycerol gives up hydrogen atoms from its hydroxyl groups at each bond , and the carboxyl group on each fatty acid chain gives up a hydroxyl group .
A total of three water molecules are thereby released .
Fatty acid chains that have no double carbon bonds anywhere along their length and therefore contain the maximum number of hydrogen atoms are called saturated fatty acids .
These straight , rigid chains pack tightly together and are solid or semisolid at room temperature ( Figure 2.22a ) .
Butter and lard are examples , as is the fat found on a steak or in your own body .
In contrast , fatty acids with one double carbon bond are kinked at that bond ( Figure 2.22b ) .
These monounsaturated fatty acids are therefore unable to pack together tightly , and are liquid at room temperature .
Polyunsaturated fatty acids contain two or more double carbon bonds , and are also liquid at room temperature .
Plant oils such as olive oil typically contain both monoand polyunsaturated fatty acids .
Whereas a diet high in saturated fatty acids increases the risk of heart disease , a diet high in unsaturated fatty acids is thought to reduce the risk .
This is especially true for the omega-3 unsaturated fatty acids found in cold-water fish such as salmon .
These fatty acids have their first double carbon bond at the third hydrocarbon from the methyl group ( referred to as the omega end of the molecule ) .
Finally , trans fatty acids found in some processed foods , including some stick and tub margarines , are thought to be even more harmful to the heart and blood vessels than saturated fatty acids .
Trans fats are created from unsaturated fatty acids ( such as corn oil ) when chemically treated to produce partially hydrogenated fats .
As a group , triglycerides are a major fuel source for the body .
When you are resting or asleep , a majority of the energy used to keep you alive is derived from triglycerides stored in your fat ( adipose ) tissues .
Triglycerides also fuel long , slow physical activity such as gardening or hiking , and contribute a modest percentage of energy for vigorous physical activity .
Dietary fat also assists the absorption and transport of the nonpolar fat-soluble vitamins A , D , E , and K. Additionally , stored body fat protects and cushions the body ’ s bones and internal organs , and acts as insulation to retain body heat .
Fatty acids are also components of glycolipids , which are sugar-fat compounds found in the cell membrane .
Lipoproteins are compounds in which the hydrophobic triglycerides are packaged in protein envelopes for transport in body fluids .
As its name suggests , a phospholipid is a bond between the glycerol component of a lipid and a phosphorous molecule .
In fact , phospholipids are similar in structure to triglycerides .
However , instead of having three fatty acids , a phospholipid is generated from a diglyceride , a glycerol with just two fatty acid chains ( Figure 2.23 ) .
The third binding site on the glycerol is taken up by the phosphate group , which in turn is attached to a polar “ head ” region of the molecule .
Recall that triglycerides are nonpolar and hydrophobic .
This still holds for the fatty acid portion of a phospholipid compound .
However , the head of a phospholipid contains charges on the phosphate groups , as well as on the nitrogen atom .
These charges make the phospholipid head hydrophilic .
Therefore , phospholipids are said to have hydrophobic tails , containing the neutral fatty acids , and hydrophilic heads , containing the charged phosphate groups and nitrogen atom .
A steroid compound ( referred to as a sterol ) has as its foundation a set of four hydrocarbon rings bonded to a variety of other atoms and molecules ( see Figure 2.23b ) .
Although both plants and animals synthesize sterols , the type that makes the most important contribution to human structure and function is cholesterol , which is synthesized by the liver in humans and animals and is also present in most animal-based foods .
Like other lipids , cholesterol ’ s hydrocarbons make it hydrophobic ; however , it has a polar hydroxyl head that is hydrophilic .
Cholesterol is an important component of bile acids , compounds that help emulsify dietary fats .
In fact , the word root cholerefers to bile .
Cholesterol is also a building block of many hormones , signaling molecules that the body releases to regulate processes at distant sites .
Finally , like phospholipids , cholesterol molecules are found in the cell membrane , where their hydrophobic and hydrophilic regions help regulate the flow of substances into and out of the cell .
Like a hormone , a prostaglandin is one of a group of signaling molecules , but prostaglandins are derived from unsaturated fatty acids ( see Figure 2.23c ) .
One reason that the omega-3 fatty acids found in fish are beneficial is that they stimulate the production of certain prostaglandins that help regulate aspects of blood pressure and inflammation , and thereby reduce the risk for heart disease .
Prostaglandins also sensitize nerves to pain .
One class of pain-relieving medications called nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs ( NSAIDs ) works by reducing the effects of prostaglandins .
You might associate proteins with muscle tissue , but in fact , proteins are critical components of all tissues and organs .
A protein is an organic molecule composed of amino acids linked by peptide bonds .
Proteins include the keratin in the epidermis of skin that protects underlying tissues , the collagen found in the dermis of skin , in bones , and in the meninges that cover the brain and spinal cord .
While carbohydrates and lipids are composed of hydrocarbons and oxygen , all proteins also contain nitrogen ( N ) , and many contain sulfur ( S ) , in addition to carbon , hydrogen , and oxygen .
Proteins are polymers made up of nitrogen-containing monomers called amino acids .
An amino acid is a molecule composed of an amino group and a carboxyl group , together with a variable side chain .
Just 20 different amino acids contribute to nearly all of the thousands of different proteins important in human structure and function .
Body proteins contain a unique combination of a few dozen to a few hundred of these 20 amino acid monomers .
All 20 of these amino acids share a similar structure ( Figure 2.24 ) .
For this reason , they make excellent buffers , helping the body regulate acid–base balance .
What distinguishes the 20 amino acids from one another is their variable group , which is referred to as a side chain or an R-group .
This group can vary in size and can be polar or nonpolar , giving each amino acid its unique characteristics .
For example , the side chains of two amino acids—cysteine and methionine—contain sulfur .
Sulfur does not readily participate in hydrogen bonds , whereas all other amino acids do .
This variation influences the way that proteins containing cysteine and methionine are assembled .
Amino acids join via dehydration synthesis to form protein polymers ( Figure 2.25 ) .
The unique bond holding amino acids together is called a peptide bond .
A peptide bond is a covalent bond between two amino acids that forms by dehydration synthesis .
A peptide , in fact , is a very short chain of amino acids .
Strands containing fewer than about 100 amino acids are generally referred to as polypeptides rather than proteins .
The body is able to synthesize most of the amino acids from components of other molecules ; however , nine can not be synthesized and have to be consumed in the diet .
These are known as the essential amino acids .
Free amino acids available for protein construction are said to reside in the amino acid pool within cells .
Structures within cells use these amino acids when assembling proteins .
If a particular essential amino acid is not available in sufficient quantities in the amino acid pool , however , synthesis of proteins containing it can slow or even cease .
Just as a fork can not be used to eat soup and a spoon can not be used to spear meat , a protein ’ s shape is essential to its function .
A protein ’ s shape is determined , most fundamentally , by the sequence of amino acids of which it is made ( Figure 2.26a ) .
The sequence is called the primary structure of the protein .
Although some polypeptides exist as linear chains , most are twisted or folded into more complex secondary structures that form when bonding occurs between amino acids with different properties at different regions of the polypeptide .
The most common secondary structure is a spiral called an alpha-helix .
If you were to take a length of string and simply twist it into a spiral , it would not hold the shape .
Similarly , a strand of amino acids could not maintain a stable spiral shape without the help of hydrogen bonds , which create bridges between different regions of the same strand ( see Figure 2.26b ) .
Less commonly , a polypeptide chain can form a beta-pleated sheet , in which hydrogen bonds form bridges between different regions of a single polypeptide that has folded back upon itself , or between two or more adjacent polypeptide chains .
The secondary structure of proteins further folds into a compact three-dimensional shape , referred to as the protein ’ s tertiary structure ( see Figure 2.26c ) .
In this configuration , amino acids that had been very distant in the primary chain can be brought quite close via hydrogen bonds or , in proteins containing cysteine , via disulfide bonds .
A disulfide bond is a covalent bond between sulfur atoms in a polypeptide .
Often , two or more separate polypeptides bond to form an even larger protein with a quaternary structure ( see Figure 2.26d ) .
The polypeptide subunits forming a quaternary structure can be identical or different .
For instance , hemoglobin , the protein found in red blood cells is composed of four tertiary polypeptides , two of which are called alpha chains and two of which are called beta chains .
When they are exposed to extreme heat , acids , bases , and certain other substances , proteins will denature .
Denaturation is a change in the structure of a molecule through physical or chemical means .
Denatured proteins lose their functional shape and are no longer able to carry out their jobs .
An everyday example of protein denaturation is the curdling of milk when acidic lemon juice is added .
The contribution of the shape of a protein to its function can hardly be exaggerated .
For example , the long , slender shape of protein strands that make up muscle tissue is essential to their ability to contract ( shorten ) and relax ( lengthen ) .
As another example , bones contain long threads of a protein called collagen that acts as scaffolding upon which bone minerals are deposited .
These elongated proteins , called fibrous proteins , are strong and durable and typically hydrophobic .
In contrast , globular proteins are globes or spheres that tend to be highly reactive and are hydrophilic .
The hemoglobin proteins packed into red blood cells are an example ( see Figure 2.26d ) ; however , globular proteins are abundant throughout the body , playing critical roles in most body functions .
Enzymes , introduced earlier as protein catalysts , are examples of this .
The next section takes a closer look at the action of enzymes .
If you were trying to type a paper , and every time you hit a key on your laptop there was a delay of six or seven minutes before you got a response , you would probably get a new laptop .
In a similar way , without enzymes to catalyze chemical reactions , the human body would be nonfunctional .
It functions only because enzymes function .
Enzymatic reactions—chemical reactions catalyzed by enzymes—begin when substrates bind to the enzyme .
A substrate is a reactant in an enzymatic reaction .
This occurs on regions of the enzyme known as active sites ( Figure 2.27 ) .
Any given enzyme catalyzes just one type of chemical reaction .
This characteristic , called specificity , is due to the fact that a substrate with a particular shape and electrical charge can bind only to an active site corresponding to that substrate .
Due to this jigsaw puzzle-like match between an enzyme and its substrates , enzymes are known for their specificity .
This active-site modification in the presence of substrate , along with the simultaneous formation of the transition state , is called induced fit .
Overall , there is a specifically matched enzyme for each substrate and , thus , for each chemical reaction ; however , there is some flexibility as well .
Some enzymes have the ability to act on several different structurally related substrates .
Binding of a substrate produces an enzyme–substrate complex .
It is likely that enzymes speed up chemical reactions in part because the enzyme–substrate complex undergoes a set of temporary and reversible changes that cause the substrates to be oriented toward each other in an optimal position to facilitate their interaction .
This promotes increased reaction speed .
The enzyme then releases the product ( s ) , and resumes its original shape .
The enzyme is then free to engage in the process again , and will do so as long as substrate remains .
Advertisements for protein bars , powders , and shakes all say that protein is important in building , repairing , and maintaining muscle tissue , but the truth is that proteins contribute to all body tissues , from the skin to the brain cells .
Also , certain proteins act as hormones , chemical messengers that help regulate body functions , For example , growth hormone is important for skeletal growth , among other roles .
As was noted earlier , the basic and acidic components enable proteins to function as buffers in maintaining acid–base balance , but they also help regulate fluid–electrolyte balance .
Like lipids , proteins can bind with carbohydrates .
They can thereby produce glycoproteins or proteoglycans , both of which have many functions in the body .
The body can use proteins for energy when carbohydrate and fat intake is inadequate , and stores of glycogen and adipose tissue become depleted .
However , since there is no storage site for protein except functional tissues , using protein for energy causes tissue breakdown , and results in body wasting .
The fourth type of organic compound important to human structure and function are the nucleotides ( Figure 2.28 ) .
The nucleic acids differ in their type of pentose sugar .
Deoxyribonucleic acid ( DNA ) is nucleotide that stores genetic information .
DNA contains deoxyribose ( so-called because it has one less atom of oxygen than ribose ) plus one phosphate group and one nitrogen-containing base .
The “ choices ” of base for DNA are adenine , cytosine , guanine , and thymine .
Ribonucleic acid ( RNA ) is a ribose-containing nucleotide that helps manifest the genetic code as protein .
RNA contains ribose , one phosphate group , and one nitrogen-containing base , but the “ choices ” of base for RNA are adenine , cytosine , guanine , and uracil .
The nitrogen-containing bases adenine and guanine are classified as purines .
A purine is a nitrogen-containing molecule with a double ring structure , which accommodates several nitrogen atoms .
The bases cytosine , thymine ( found in DNA only ) and uracil ( found in RNA only ) are pyramidines .
A pyramidine is a nitrogen-containing base with a single ring structure Bonds formed by dehydration synthesis between the pentose sugar of one nucleic acid monomer and the phosphate group of another form a “ backbone , ” from which the components ’ nitrogen-containing bases protrude .
In DNA , two such backbones attach at their protruding bases via hydrogen bonds .
These twist to form a shape known as a double helix ( Figure 2.29 ) .
The sequence of nitrogen-containing bases within a strand of DNA form the genes that act as a molecular code instructing cells in the assembly of amino acids into proteins .
Humans have almost 22,000 genes in their DNA , locked up in the 46 chromosomes inside the nucleus of each cell ( except red blood cells which lose their nuclei during development ) .
These genes carry the genetic code to build one ’ s body , and are unique for each individual except identical twins .
In contrast , RNA consists of a single strand of sugar-phosphate backbone studded with bases .
Messenger RNA ( mRNA ) is created during protein synthesis to carry the genetic instructions from the DNA to the cell ’ s protein manufacturing plants in the cytoplasm , the ribosomes .
The nucleotide adenosine triphosphate ( ATP ) , is composed of a ribose sugar , an adenine base , and three phosphate groups ( Figure 2.30 ) .
ATP is classified as a high energy compound because the two covalent bonds linking its three phosphates store a significant amount of potential energy .
In the body , the energy released from these high energy bonds helps fuel the body ’ s activities , from muscle contraction to the transport of substances in and out of cells to anabolic chemical reactions .
When a phosphate group is cleaved from ATP , the products are adenosine diphosphate ( ADP ) and inorganic phosphate ( P ) .
This hydrolysis reaction can be written : Removal of a second phosphate leaves adenosine monophosphate ( AMP ) and two phosphate groups .
Again , these reactions also liberate the energy that had been stored in the phosphate-phosphate bonds .
They are reversible , too , as when ADP undergoes phosphorylation .
Phosphorylation is the addition of a phosphate group to an organic compound , in this case , resulting in ATP .
In such cases , the same level of energy that had been released during hydrolysis must be reinvested to power dehydration synthesis .
Cells can also transfer a phosphate group from ATP to another organic compound .
For example , when glucose first enters a cell , a phosphate group is transferred from ATP , forming glucose phosphate ( C H O —P ) and ADP .
Once glucose is phosphorylated in this way , it can be stored as glycogen or metabolized for immediate energy .
During this developmental process , early , undifferentiated cells differentiate and become specialized in their structure and function .
These different cell types form specialized tissues that work in concert to perform all of the functions necessary for the living organism .
Cellular and developmental biologists study how the continued division of a single cell leads to such complexity and differentiation .
Consider the difference between a structural cell in the skin and a nerve cell .
A structural skin cell may be shaped like a flat plate ( squamous ) and live only for a short time before it is shed and replaced .
Packed tightly into rows and sheets , the squamous skin cells provide a protective barrier for the cells and tissues that lie beneath .
A nerve cell , on the other hand , may be shaped something like a star , sending out long processes up to a meter in length and may live for the entire lifetime of the organism .
With their long winding appendages , nerve cells can communicate with one another and with other types of body cells and send rapid signals that inform the organism about its environment and allow it to interact with that environment .
These differences illustrate one very important theme that is consistent at all organizational levels of biology : the form of a structure is optimally suited to perform particular functions assigned to that structure .
Keep this theme in mind as you tour the inside of a cell and are introduced to the various types of cells in the body .
A primary responsibility of each cell is to contribute to homeostasis .
Homeostasis is a term used in biology that refers to a dynamic state of balance within parameters that are compatible with life .
For example , living cells require a water-based environment to survive in , and there are various physical ( anatomical ) and physiological mechanisms that keep all of the trillions of living cells in the human body moist .
This is one aspect of homeostasis .
When a particular parameter , such as blood pressure or blood oxygen content , moves far enough out of homeostasis ( generally becoming too high or too low ) , illness or disease—and sometimes death—inevitably results .
The concept of a cell started with microscopic observations of dead cork tissue by scientist Robert Hooke in 1665 .
Without realizing their function or importance , Hook coined the term “ cell ” based on the resemblance of the small subdivisions in the cork to the rooms that monks inhabited , called cells .
About ten years later , Antonie van Leeuwenhoek became the first person to observe living and moving cells under a microscope .
In the century that followed , the theory that cells represented the basic unit of life would develop .
These tiny fluid-filled sacs house components responsible for the thousands of biochemical reactions necessary for an organism to grow and survive .
In this chapter , you will learn about the major components and functions of a prototypical , generalized cell and discover some of the different types of cells in the human body .
As the outer layer of your skin separates your body from its environment , the cell membrane ( also known as the plasma membrane ) separates the inner contents of a cell from its exterior environment .
This cell membrane provides a protective barrier around the cell and regulates which materials can pass in or out .
The cell membrane is an extremely pliable structure composed primarily of back-to-back phospholipids ( a “ bilayer ” ) .
Cholesterol is also present , which contributes to the fluidity of the membrane , and there are various proteins embedded within the membrane that have a variety of functions .
A single phospholipid molecule has a phosphate group on one end , called the “ head , ” and two side-by-side chains of fatty acids that make up the lipid tails ( Figure 3.2 ) .
The phosphate group is negatively charged , making the head polar and hydrophilic—or “ water loving. ” A hydrophilic molecule ( or region of a molecule ) is one that is attracted to water .
The phosphate heads are thus attracted to the water molecules of both the extracellular and intracellular environments .
The lipid tails , on the other hand , are uncharged , or nonpolar , and are hydrophobic—or “ water fearing. ” A hydrophobic molecule ( or region of a molecule ) repels and is repelled by water .
Some lipid tails consist of saturated fatty acids and some contain unsaturated fatty acids .
This combination adds to the fluidity of the tails that are constantly in motion .
Phospholipids are thus amphipathic molecules .
An amphipathic molecule is one that contains both a hydrophilic and a hydrophobic region .
In fact , soap works to remove oil and grease stains because it has amphipathic properties .
The hydrophilic portion can dissolve in water while the hydrophobic portion can trap grease in micelles that then can be washed away .
The cell membrane consists of two adjacent layers of phospholipids .
The lipid tails of one layer face the lipid tails of the other layer , meeting at the interface of the two layers .
The phospholipid heads face outward , one layer exposed to the interior of the cell and one layer exposed to the exterior ( Figure 3.3 ) .
Because the phosphate groups are polar and hydrophilic , they are attracted to water in the intracellular fluid .
Intracellular fluid ( ICF ) is the fluid interior of the cell .
The phosphate groups are also attracted to the extracellular fluid .
Extracellular fluid ( ECF ) is the fluid environment outside the enclosure of the cell membrane .
Interstitial fluid ( IF ) is the term given to extracellular fluid not contained within blood vessels .
Because the lipid tails are hydrophobic , they meet in the inner region of the membrane , excluding watery intracellular and extracellular fluid from this space .
The cell membrane has many proteins , as well as other lipids ( such as cholesterol ) , that are associated with the phospholipid bilayer .
An important feature of the membrane is that it remains fluid ; the lipids and proteins in the cell membrane are not rigidly locked in place .
The lipid bilayer forms the basis of the cell membrane , but it is peppered throughout with various proteins .
Two different types of proteins that are commonly associated with the cell membrane are the integral proteins and peripheral protein ( Figure 3.4 ) .
As its name suggests , an integral protein is a protein that is embedded in the membrane .
A channel protein is an example of an integral protein that selectively allows particular materials , such as certain ions , to pass into or out of the cell .
Another important group of integral proteins are cell recognition proteins , which serve to mark a cell ’ s identity so that it can be recognized by other cells .
A receptor is a type of recognition protein that can selectively bind a specific molecule outside the cell , and this binding induces a chemical reaction within the cell .
A ligand is the specific molecule that binds to and activates a receptor .
Some integral proteins serve dual roles as both a receptor and an ion channel .
One example of a receptor-ligand interaction is the receptors on nerve cells that bind neurotransmitters , such as dopamine .
When a dopamine molecule binds to a dopamine receptor protein , a channel within the transmembrane protein opens to allow certain ions to flow into the cell .
Some integral membrane proteins are glycoproteins .
A glycoprotein is a protein that has carbohydrate molecules attached , which extend into the extracellular matrix .
The attached carbohydrate tags on glycoproteins aid in cell recognition .
The carbohydrates that extend from membrane proteins and even from some membrane lipids collectively form the glycocalyx .
The glycocalyx is a fuzzy-appearing coating around the cell formed from glycoproteins and other carbohydrates attached to the cell membrane .
The glycocalyx can have various roles .
For example , it may have molecules that allow the cell to bind to another cell , it may contain receptors for hormones , or it might have enzymes to break down nutrients .
The glycocalyces found in a person ’ s body are products of that person ’ s genetic makeup .
They give each of the individual ’ s trillions of cells the “ identity ” of belonging in the person ’ s body .
This identity is the primary way that a person ’ s immune defense cells “ know ” not to attack the person ’ s own body cells , but it also is the reason organs donated by another person might be rejected .
Peripheral proteins are typically found on the inner or outer surface of the lipid bilayer but can also be attached to the internal or external surface of an integral protein .
These proteins typically perform a specific function for the cell .
Some peripheral proteins on the surface of intestinal cells , for example , act as digestive enzymes to break down nutrients to sizes that can pass through the cells and into the bloodstream .
One of the great wonders of the cell membrane is its ability to regulate the concentration of substances inside the cell .
These substances include ions such as Ca , Na , K , and Cl ; nutrients including sugars , fatty acids , and amino acids ; and waste products , particularly carbon dioxide ( CO ) , which must leave the cell .
The membrane ’ s lipid bilayer structure provides the first level of control .
The phospholipids are tightly packed together , and the membrane has a hydrophobic interior .
This structure causes the membrane to be selectively permeable .
A membrane that has selective permeability allows only substances meeting certain criteria to pass through it unaided .
In the case of the cell membrane , only relatively small , nonpolar materials can move through the lipid bilayer ( remember , the lipid tails of the membrane are nonpolar ) .
Some examples of these are other lipids , oxygen and carbon dioxide gases , and alcohol .
However , water-soluble materials—like glucose , amino acids , and electrolytes—need some assistance to cross the membrane because they are repelled by the hydrophobic tails of the phospholipid bilayer .
All substances that move through the membrane do so by one of two general methods , which are categorized based on whether or not energy is required .
Passive transport is the movement of substances across the membrane without the expenditure of cellular energy .
In contrast , active transport is the movement of substances across the membrane using energy from adenosine triphosphate ( ATP ) .
In order to understand how substances move passively across a cell membrane , it is necessary to understand concentration gradients and diffusion .
A concentration gradient is the difference in concentration of a substance across a space .
Molecules ( or ions ) will spread/diffuse from where they are more concentrated to where they are less concentrated until they are equally distributed in that space .
( When molecules move in this way , they are said to move down their concentration gradient . )
Diffusion is the movement of particles from an area of higher concentration to an area of lower concentration .
A couple of common examples will help to illustrate this concept .
Imagine being inside a closed bathroom .
If a bottle of perfume were sprayed , the scent molecules would naturally diffuse from the spot where they left the bottle to all corners of the bathroom , and this diffusion would go on until no more concentration gradient remains .
Another example is a spoonful of sugar placed in a cup of tea .
Eventually the sugar will diffuse throughout the tea until no concentration gradient remains .
In both cases , if the room is warmer or the tea hotter , diffusion occurs even faster as the molecules are bumping into each other and spreading out faster than at cooler temperatures .
Having an internal body temperature around 98.6 F thus also aids in diffusion of particles within the body .
Visit this link ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/diffusion ) to see diffusion and how it is propelled by the kinetic energy of molecules in solution .
How does temperature affect diffusion rate , and why ?
Whenever a substance exists in greater concentration on one side of a semipermeable membrane , such as the cell membranes , any substance that can move down its concentration gradient across the membrane will do so .
Consider substances that can easily diffuse through the lipid bilayer of the cell membrane , such as the gases oxygen ( O ) and CO .
O generally diffuses into cells because it is more concentrated outside of them , and CO typically diffuses out of cells because it is more concentrated inside of them .
Neither of these examples requires any energy on the part of the cell , and therefore they use passive transport to move across the membrane .
Before moving on , you need to review the gases that can diffuse across a cell membrane .
Because cells rapidly use up oxygen during metabolism , there is typically a lower concentration of O inside the cell than outside .
As a result , oxygen will diffuse from the interstitial fluid directly through the lipid bilayer of the membrane and into the cytoplasm within the cell .
On the other hand , because cells produce CO as a byproduct of metabolism , CO concentrations rise within the cytoplasm ; therefore , CO will move from the cell through the lipid bilayer and into the interstitial fluid , where its concentration is lower .
This mechanism of molecules moving across a cell membrane from the side where they are more concentrated to the side where they are less concentrated is a form of passive transport called simple diffusion ( Figure 3.5 ) .
Large polar or ionic molecules , which are hydrophilic , can not easily cross the phospholipid bilayer .
Very small polar molecules , such as water , can cross via simple diffusion due to their small size .
Charged atoms or molecules of any size can not cross the cell membrane via simple diffusion as the charges are repelled by the hydrophobic tails in the interior of the phospholipid bilayer .
Facilitated diffusion is the diffusion process used for those substances that can not cross the lipid bilayer due to their size , charge , and/or polarity ( Figure 3.6 ) .
A common example of facilitated diffusion is the movement of glucose into the cell , where it is used to make ATP .
Although glucose can be more concentrated outside of a cell , it can not cross the lipid bilayer via simple diffusion because it is both large and polar .
To resolve this , a specialized carrier protein called the glucose transporter will transfer glucose molecules into the cell to facilitate its inward diffusion .
As an example , even though sodium ions ( Na ) are highly concentrated outside of cells , these electrolytes are charged and can not pass through the nonpolar lipid bilayer of the membrane .
Their diffusion is facilitated by membrane proteins that form sodium channels ( or “ pores ” ) , so that Na ions can move down their concentration gradient from outside the cells to inside the cells .
There are many other solutes that must undergo facilitated diffusion to move into a cell , such as amino acids , or to move out of a cell , such as wastes .
Because facilitated diffusion is a passive process , it does not require energy expenditure by the cell .
Water also can move freely across the cell membrane of all cells , either through protein channels or by slipping between the lipid tails of the membrane itself .
Osmosis is the diffusion of water through a semipermeable membrane ( Figure 3.7 ) .
Two solutions that have the same concentration of solutes are said to be isotonic ( equal tension ) .
When cells and their extracellular environments are isotonic , the concentration of water molecules is the same outside and inside the cells , and the cells maintain their normal shape ( and function ) .
Osmosis occurs when there is an imbalance of solutes outside of a cell versus inside the cell .
A solution that has a higher concentration of solutes than another solution is said to be hypertonic , and water molecules tend to diffuse into a hypertonic solution ( Figure 3.8 ) .
Cells in a hypertonic solution will shrivel as water leaves the cell via osmosis .
In contrast , a solution that has a lower concentration of solutes than another solution is said to be hypotonic , and water molecules tend to diffuse out of a hypotonic solution .
Cells in a hypotonic solution will take on too much water and swell , with the risk of eventually bursting .
A critical aspect of homeostasis in living things is to create an internal environment in which all of the body ’ s cells are in an isotonic solution .
Various organ systems , particularly the kidneys , work to maintain this homeostasis .
Another mechanism besides diffusion to passively transport materials between compartments is filtration .
Unlike diffusion of a substance from where it is more concentrated to less concentrated , filtration uses a hydrostatic pressure gradient that pushes the fluid—and the solutes within it—from a higher pressure area to a lower pressure area .
Filtration is an extremely important process in the body .
For example , the circulatory system uses filtration to move plasma and substances across the endothelial lining of capillaries and into surrounding tissues , supplying cells with the nutrients .
Filtration pressure in the kidneys provides the mechanism to remove wastes from the bloodstream .
For all of the transport methods described above , the cell expends no energy .
Membrane proteins that aid in the passive transport of substances do so without the use of ATP .
During active transport , ATP is required to move a substance across a membrane , often with the help of protein carriers , and usually against its concentration gradient .
One of the most common types of active transport involves proteins that serve as pumps .
The word “ pump ” probably conjures up thoughts of using energy to pump up the tire of a bicycle or a basketball .
Similarly , energy from ATP is required for these membrane proteins to transport substances—molecules or ions—across the membrane , usually against their concentration gradients ( from an area of low concentration to an area of high concentration ) .
The sodium-potassium pump , which is also called Na /K ATPase , transports sodium out of a cell while moving potassium into the cell .
The Na /K pump is an important ion pump found in the membranes of many types of cells .
These pumps are particularly abundant in nerve cells , which are constantly pumping out sodium ions and pulling in potassium ions to maintain an electrical gradient across their cell membranes .
An electrical gradient is a difference in electrical charge across a space .
In the case of nerve cells , for example , the electrical gradient exists between the inside and outside of the cell , with the inside being negatively-charged ( at around -70 mV ) relative to the outside .
The negative electrical gradient is maintained because each Na /K pump moves three Na ions out of the cell and two K ions into the cell for each ATP molecule that is used ( Figure 3.9 ) .
This process is so important for nerve cells that it accounts for the majority of their ATP usage .
Active transport pumps can also work together with other active or passive transport systems to move substances across the membrane .
For example , the sodium-potassium pump maintains a high concentration of sodium ions outside of the cell .
Therefore , if the cell needs sodium ions , all it has to do is open a passive sodium channel , as the concentration gradient of the sodium ions will drive them to diffuse into the cell .
In this way , the action of an active transport pump ( the sodiumpotassium pump ) powers the passive transport of sodium ions by creating a concentration gradient .
When active transport powers the transport of another substance in this way , it is called secondary active transport .
Symporters are secondary active transporters that move two substances in the same direction .
For example , the sodiumglucose symporter uses sodium ions to “ pull ” glucose molecules into the cell .
Because cells store glucose for energy , glucose is typically at a higher concentration inside of the cell than outside .
However , due to the action of the sodiumpotassium pump , sodium ions will easily diffuse into the cell when the symporter is opened .
The flood of sodium ions through the symporter provides the energy that allows glucose to move through the symporter and into the cell , against its concentration gradient .
Conversely , antiporters are secondary active transport systems that transport substances in opposite directions .
For example , the sodium-hydrogen ion antiporter uses the energy from the inward flood of sodium ions to move hydrogen ions ( H+ ) out of the cell .
The sodium-hydrogen antiporter is used to maintain the pH of the cell 's interior .
Other forms of active transport do not involve membrane carriers .
Endocytosis ( bringing “ into the cell ” ) is the process of a cell ingesting material by enveloping it in a portion of its cell membrane , and then pinching off that portion of membrane ( Figure 3.10 ) .
Once pinched off , the portion of membrane and its contents becomes an independent , intracellular vesicle .
A vesicle is a membranous sac—a spherical and hollow organelle bounded by a lipid bilayer membrane .
Endocytosis often brings materials into the cell that must to be broken down or digested .
Phagocytosis ( “ cell eating ” ) is the endocytosis of large particles .
Many immune cells engage in phagocytosis of invading pathogens .
Like little Pac-men , their job is to patrol body tissues for unwanted matter , such as invading bacterial cells , phagocytize them , and digest them .
In contrast to phagocytosis , pinocytosis ( “ cell drinking ” ) brings fluid containing dissolved substances into a cell through membrane vesicles .
Phagocytosis and pinocytosis take in large portions of extracellular material , and they are typically not highly selective in the substances they bring in .
Cells regulate the endocytosis of specific substances via receptor-mediated endocytosis .
Receptor-mediated endocytosis is endocytosis by a portion of the cell membrane that contains many receptors that are specific for a certain substance .
Once the surface receptors have bound sufficient amounts of the specific substance ( the receptor ’ s ligand ) , the cell will endocytose the part of the cell membrane containing the receptor-ligand complexes .
Iron , a required component of hemoglobin , is endocytosed by red blood cells in this way .
Iron is bound to a protein called transferrin in the blood .
Specific transferrin receptors on red blood cell surfaces bind the iron-transferrin molecules , and the cell endocytoses the receptor-ligand complexes .
In contrast with endocytosis , exocytosis ( taking “ out of the cell ” ) is the process of a cell exporting material using vesicular transport ( Figure 3.11 ) .
Many cells manufacture substances that must be secreted , like a factory manufacturing a product for export .
These substances are typically packaged into membrane-bound vesicles within the cell .
When the vesicle membrane fuses with the cell membrane , the vesicle releases it contents into the interstitial fluid .
The vesicle membrane then becomes part of the cell membrane .
Cells of the stomach and pancreas produce and secrete digestive enzymes through exocytosis ( Figure 3.12 ) .
Endocrine cells produce and secrete hormones that are sent throughout the body , and certain immune cells produce and secrete large amounts of histamine , a chemical important for immune responses .
View the University of Michigan WebScope at http : //virtualslides.med.umich.edu/Histology/EMsmallCharts/ 3 % 20Image % 20Scope % 20finals/226 % 20- % 20Pancreas_001.svs/view.apml ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/pcells ) to explore the tissue sample in greater detail .
Cystic fibrosis ( CF ) affects approximately 30,000 people in the United States , with about 1,000 new cases reported each year .
The genetic disease is most well known for its damage to the lungs , causing breathing difficulties and chronic lung infections , but it also affects the liver , pancreas , and intestines .
Only about 50 years ago , the prognosis for children born with CF was very grim—a life expectancy rarely over 10 years .
Today , with advances in medical treatment , many CF patients live into their 30s .
The symptoms of CF result from a malfunctioning membrane ion channel called the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator , or CFTR .
In healthy people , the CFTR protein is an integral membrane protein that transports Cl ions out of the cell .
In a person who has CF , the gene for the CFTR is mutated , thus , the cell manufactures a defective channel protein that typically is not incorporated into the membrane , but is instead degraded by the cell .
The CFTR requires ATP in order to function , making its Cl transport a form of active transport .
This characteristic puzzled researchers for a long time because the Cl ions are actually flowing down their concentration gradient when transported out of cells .
Active transport generally pumps ions against their concentration gradient , but the CFTR presents an exception to this rule .
In normal lung tissue , the movement of Cl out of the cell maintains a Cl -rich , negatively charged environment immediately outside of the cell .
This is particularly important in the epithelial lining of the respiratory system .
Respiratory epithelial cells secrete mucus , which serves to trap dust , bacteria , and other debris .
A cilium ( plural = cilia ) is one of the hair-like appendages found on certain cells .
Cilia on the epithelial cells move the mucus and its trapped particles up the airways away from the lungs and toward the outside .
In order to be effectively moved upward , the mucus can not be too viscous ; rather it must have a thin , watery consistency .
The transport of Cl and the maintenance of an electronegative environment outside of the cell attract positive ions such as Na to the extracellular space .
The accumulation of both Cl and Na ions in the extracellular space creates solute-rich mucus , which has a low concentration of water molecules .
As a result , through osmosis , water moves from cells and extracellular matrix into the mucus , “ thinning ” it out .
This is how , in a normal respiratory system , the mucus is kept sufficiently watered-down to be propelled out of the respiratory system .
If the CFTR channel is absent , Cl ions are not transported out of the cell in adequate numbers , thus preventing them from drawing positive ions .
The absence of ions in the secreted mucus results in the lack of a normal water concentration gradient .
Thus , there is no osmotic pressure pulling water into the mucus .
The resulting mucus is thick and sticky , and the ciliated epithelia can not effectively remove it from the respiratory system .
Passageways in the lungs become blocked with mucus , along with the debris it carries .
Bacterial infections occur more easily because bacterial cells are not effectively carried away from the lungs .
All living cells in multicellular organisms contain an internal cytoplasmic compartment , and a nucleus within the cytoplasm .
Cytosol , the jelly-like substance within the cell , provides the fluid medium necessary for biochemical reactions .
Eukaryotic cells , including all animal cells , also contain various cellular organelles .
An organelle ( “ little organ ” ) is one of several different types of membrane-enclosed bodies in the cell , each performing a unique function .
Just as the various bodily organs work together in harmony to perform all of a human ’ s functions , the many different cellular organelles work together to keep the cell healthy and performing all of its important functions .
The organelles and cytosol , taken together , compose the cell ’ s cytoplasm .
The nucleus is a cell ’ s central organelle , which contains the cell ’ s DNA ( Figure 3.13 ) .
A set of three major organelles together form a system within the cell called the endomembrane system .
These organelles work together to perform various cellular jobs , including the task of producing , packaging , and exporting certain cellular products .
The organelles of the endomembrane system include the endoplasmic reticulum , Golgi apparatus , and vesicles .
The endoplasmic reticulum ( ER ) is a system of channels that is continuous with the nuclear membrane ( or “ envelope ” ) covering the nucleus and composed of the same lipid bilayer material .
The ER can be thought of as a series of winding thoroughfares similar to the waterway canals in Venice .
The ER provides passages throughout much of the cell that function in transporting , synthesizing , and storing materials .
The winding structure of the ER results in a large membranous surface area that supports its many functions ( Figure 3.14 ) .
Endoplasmic reticulum can exist in two forms : rough ER and smooth ER .
These two types of ER perform some very different functions and can be found in very different amounts depending on the type of cell .
Rough ER ( RER ) is socalled because its membrane is dotted with embedded granules—organelles called ribosomes , giving the RER a bumpy appearance .
A ribosome is an organelle that serves as the site of protein synthesis .
It is composed of two ribosomal RNA subunits that wrap around mRNA to start the process of translation , followed by protein synthesis .
Smooth ER ( SER ) lacks these ribosomes .
One of the main functions of the smooth ER is in the synthesis of lipids .
The smooth ER synthesizes phospholipids , the main component of biological membranes , as well as steroid hormones .
For this reason , cells that produce large quantities of such hormones , such as those of the female ovaries and male testes , contain large amounts of smooth ER .
In addition to lipid synthesis , the smooth ER also sequesters ( i.e. , stores ) and regulates the concentration of cellular Ca , a function extremely important in cells of the nervous system where Ca is the trigger for neurotransmitter release .
The smooth ER additionally metabolizes some carbohydrates and performs a detoxification role , breaking down certain toxins .
In contrast with the smooth ER , the primary job of the rough ER is the synthesis and modification of proteins destined for the cell membrane or for export from the cell .
For this protein synthesis , many ribosomes attach to the ER ( giving it the studded appearance of rough ER ) .
The Golgi apparatus is responsible for sorting , modifying , and shipping off the products that come from the rough ER , much like a post-office .
The Golgi apparatus looks like stacked flattened discs , almost like stacks of oddly shaped pancakes .
Like the ER , these discs are membranous .
The Golgi apparatus has two distinct sides , each with a different role .
One side of the apparatus receives products in vesicles .
These products are sorted through the apparatus , and then they are released from the opposite side after being repackaged into new vesicles .
If the product is to be exported from the cell , the vesicle migrates to the cell surface and fuses to the cell membrane , and the cargo is secreted ( Figure 3.15 ) .
Some of the protein products packaged by the Golgi include digestive enzymes that are meant to remain inside the cell for use in breaking down certain materials .
The enzyme-containing vesicles released by the Golgi may form new lysosomes , or fuse with existing , lysosomes .
A lysosome is an organelle that contains enzymes that break down and digest unneeded cellular components , such as a damaged organelle .
( A lysosome is similar to a wrecking crew that takes down old and unsound buildings in a neighborhood . )
Autophagy ( “ self-eating ” ) is the process of a cell digesting its own structures .
Lysosomes are also important for breaking down foreign material .
For example , when certain immune defense cells ( white blood cells ) phagocytize bacteria , the bacterial cell is transported into a lysosome and digested by the enzymes inside .
As one might imagine , such phagocytic defense cells contain large numbers of lysosomes .
Under certain circumstances , lysosomes perform a more grand and dire function .
In the case of damaged or unhealthy cells , lysosomes can be triggered to open up and release their digestive enzymes into the cytoplasm of the cell , killing the cell .
This “ self-destruct ” mechanism is called autolysis , and makes the process of cell death controlled ( a mechanism called “ apoptosis ” ) .
Watch this video ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/endomembrane1 ) to learn about the endomembrane system , which includes the rough and smooth ER and the Golgi body as well as lysosomes and vesicles .
What is the primary role of the endomembrane system ?
In addition to the jobs performed by the endomembrane system , the cell has many other important functions .
Just as you must consume nutrients to provide yourself with energy , so must each of your cells take in nutrients , some of which convert to chemical energy that can be used to power biochemical reactions .
Another important function of the cell is detoxification .
Humans take in all sorts of toxins from the environment and also produce harmful chemicals as byproducts of cellular processes .
Cells called hepatocytes in the liver detoxify many of these toxins .
A mitochondrion ( plural = mitochondria ) is a membranous , bean-shaped organelle that is the “ energy transformer ” of the cell .
Mitochondria consist of an outer lipid bilayer membrane as well as an additional inner lipid bilayer membrane ( Figure 3.16 ) .
The inner membrane is highly folded into winding structures with a great deal of surface area , called cristae .
It is along this inner membrane that a series of proteins , enzymes , and other molecules perform the biochemical reactions of cellular respiration .
These reactions convert energy stored in nutrient molecules ( such as glucose ) into adenosine triphosphate ( ATP ) , which provides usable cellular energy to the cell .
Cells use ATP constantly , and so the mitochondria are constantly at work .
Oxygen molecules are required during cellular respiration , which is why you must constantly breathe it in .
One of the organ systems in the body that uses huge amounts of ATP is the muscular system because ATP is required to sustain muscle contraction .
As a result , muscle cells are packed full of mitochondria .
Nerve cells also need large quantities of ATP to run their sodium-potassium pumps .
Therefore , an individual neuron will be loaded with over a thousand mitochondria .
On the other hand , a bone cell , which is not nearly as metabolically-active , might only have a couple hundred mitochondria .
Like lysosomes , a peroxisome is a membrane-bound cellular organelle that contains mostly enzymes ( Figure 3.17 ) .
Peroxisomes perform a couple of different functions , including lipid metabolism and chemical detoxification .
In contrast to the digestive enzymes found in lysosomes , the enzymes within peroxisomes serve to transfer hydrogen atoms from various molecules to oxygen , producing hydrogen peroxide ( H O ) .
In this way , peroxisomes neutralize poisons such as alcohol .
In order to appreciate the importance of peroxisomes , it is necessary to understand the concept of reactive oxygen species .
Reactive oxygen species ( ROS ) such as peroxides and free radicals are the highly reactive products of many normal cellular processes , including the mitochondrial reactions that produce ATP and oxygen metabolism .
Examples of ROS include the ) .
Some ROS are important for certain cellular functions , such as cell hydroxyl radical OH , H O , and superoxide ( signaling processes and immune responses against foreign substances .
Free radicals are reactive because they contain free unpaired electrons ; they can easily oxidize other molecules throughout the cell , causing cellular damage and even cell death .
Free radicals are thought to play a role in many destructive processes in the body , from cancer to coronary artery disease .
Peroxisomes , on the other hand , oversee reactions that neutralize free radicals .
Peroxisomes produce large amounts of the toxic H O in the process , but peroxisomes contain enzymes that convert H O into water and oxygen .
These byproducts are safely released into the cytoplasm .
Like miniature sewage treatment plants , peroxisomes neutralize harmful toxins so that they do not wreak havoc in the cells .
The liver is the organ primarily responsible for detoxifying the blood before it travels throughout the body , and liver cells contain an exceptionally high number of peroxisomes .
Defense mechanisms such as detoxification within the peroxisome and certain cellular antioxidants serve to neutralize many of these molecules .
Some vitamins and other substances , found primarily in fruits and vegetables , have antioxidant properties .
Antioxidants work by being oxidized themselves , halting the destructive reaction cascades initiated by the free radicals .
Sometimes though , ROS accumulate beyond the capacity of such defenses .
Oxidative stress is the term used to describe damage to cellular components caused by ROS .
Due to their characteristic unpaired electrons , ROS can set off chain reactions where they remove electrons from other molecules , which then become oxidized and reactive , and do the same to other molecules , causing a chain reaction .
ROS can cause permanent damage to cellular lipids , proteins , carbohydrates , and nucleic acids .
Damaged DNA can lead to genetic mutations and even cancer .
A mutation is a change in the nucleotide sequence in a gene within a cell ’ s DNA , potentially altering the protein coded by that gene .
Other diseases believed to be triggered or exacerbated by ROS include Alzheimer ’ s disease , cardiovascular diseases , diabetes , Parkinson ’ s disease , arthritis , Huntington ’ s disease , and schizophrenia , among many others .
It is noteworthy that these diseases are largely age-related .
Many scientists believe that oxidative stress is a major contributor to the aging process .
The free radical theory on aging was originally proposed in the 1950s , and still remains under debate .
Generally speaking , the free radical theory of aging suggests that accumulated cellular damage from oxidative stress contributes to the physiological and anatomical effects of aging .
There are two significantly different versions of this theory : one states that the aging process itself is a result of oxidative damage , and the other states that oxidative damage causes agerelated disease and disorders .
The latter version of the theory is more widely accepted than the former .
However , many lines of evidence suggest that oxidative damage does contribute to the aging process .
Research has shown that reducing oxidative damage can result in a longer lifespan in certain organisms such as yeast , worms , and fruit flies .
Conversely , increasing oxidative damage can shorten the lifespan of mice and worms .
Interestingly , a manipulation called calorierestriction ( moderately restricting the caloric intake ) has been shown to increase life span in some laboratory animals .
It is believed that this increase is at least in part due to a reduction of oxidative stress .
However , a long-term study of primates with calorie-restriction showed no increase in their lifespan .
A great deal of additional research will be required to better understand the link between reactive oxygen species and aging .
Much like the bony skeleton structurally supports the human body , the cytoskeleton helps the cells to maintain their structural integrity .
The cytoskeleton is a group of fibrous proteins that provide structural support for cells , but this is only one of the functions of the cytoskeleton .
Cytoskeletal components are also critical for cell motility , cell reproduction , and transportation of substances within the cell .
The cytoskeleton forms a complex thread-like network throughout the cell consisting of three different kinds of proteinbased filaments : microfilaments , intermediate filaments , and microtubules ( Figure 3.18 ) .
The thickest of the three is the microtubule , a structural filament composed of subunits of a protein called tubulin .
Microtubules maintain cell shape and structure , help resist compression of the cell , and play a role in positioning the organelles within the cell .
Microtubules also make up two types of cellular appendages important for motion : cilia and flagella .
Cilia are found on many cells of the body , including the epithelial cells that line the airways of the respiratory system .
Cilia move rhythmically ; they beat constantly , moving waste materials such as dust , mucus , and bacteria upward through the airways , away from the lungs and toward the mouth .
Beating cilia on cells in the female fallopian tubes move egg cells from the ovary towards the uterus .
A flagellum ( plural = flagella ) is an appendage larger than a cilium and specialized for cell locomotion .
The only flagellated cell in humans is the sperm cell that must propel itself towards female egg cells .
A very important function of microtubules is to set the paths ( somewhat like railroad tracks ) along which the genetic material can be pulled ( a process requiring ATP ) during cell division , so that each new daughter cell receives the appropriate set of chromosomes .
Two short , identical microtubule structures called centrioles are found near the nucleus of cells .
A centriole can serve as the cellular origin point for microtubules extending outward as cilia or flagella or can assist with the separation of DNA during cell division .
Microtubules grow out from the centrioles by adding more tubulin subunits , like adding additional links to a chain .
In contrast with microtubules , the microfilament is a thinner type of cytoskeletal filament ( see Figure 3.18b ) .
Actin , a protein that forms chains , is the primary component of these microfilaments .
Actin fibers , twisted chains of actin filaments , constitute a large component of muscle tissue and , along with the protein myosin , are responsible for muscle contraction .
Like microtubules , actin filaments are long chains of single subunits ( called actin subunits ) .
In muscle cells , these long actin strands , called thin filaments , are “ pulled ” by thick filaments of the myosin protein to contract the cell .
Actin also has an important role during cell division .
When a cell is about to split in half during cell division , actin filaments work with myosin to create a cleavage furrow that eventually splits the cell down the middle , forming two new cells from the original cell .
The final cytoskeletal filament is the intermediate filament .
As its name would suggest , an intermediate filament is a filament intermediate in thickness between the microtubules and microfilaments ( see Figure 3.18c ) .
Intermediate filaments are made up of long fibrous subunits of a protein called keratin that are wound together like the threads that compose a rope .
Intermediate filaments , in concert with the microtubules , are important for maintaining cell shape and structure .
Unlike the microtubules , which resist compression , intermediate filaments resist tension—the forces that pull apart cells .
There are many cases in which cells are prone to tension , such as when epithelial cells of the skin are compressed , tugging them in different directions .
Intermediate filaments help anchor organelles together within a cell and also link cells to other cells by forming special cell-to-cell junctions .
The nucleus is generally considered the control center of the cell because it stores all of the genetic instructions for manufacturing proteins .
Interestingly , some cells in the body , such as muscle cells , contain more than one nucleus ( Figure 3.20 ) , which is known as multinucleated .
Other cells , such as mammalian red blood cells ( RBCs ) , do not contain nuclei at all .
RBCs eject their nuclei as they mature , making space for the large numbers of hemoglobin molecules that carry oxygen throughout the body ( Figure 3.21 ) .
Without nuclei , the life span of RBCs is short , and so the body must produce new ones constantly .
View the University of Michigan WebScope at http : //141.214.65.171/Histology/Basic % 20Tissues/Muscle/ 058thin_HISTO_83X.svs/view.apml ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/mnucleate ) to explore the tissue sample in greater detail .
View the University of Michigan WebScope at http : //virtualslides.med.umich.edu/Histology/EMsmallCharts/ 3 % 20Image % 20Scope % 20finals/139 % 20- % 20Erythroblast_001.svs/view.apml ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/ RBC ) to explore the tissue sample in greater detail .
Inside the nucleus lies the blueprint that dictates everything a cell will do and all of the products it will make .
This information is stored within DNA .
The nucleus sends “ commands ” to the cell via molecular messengers that translate the information from DNA .
Each cell in your body ( with the exception of germ cells ) contains the complete set of your DNA .
When a cell divides , the DNA must be duplicated so that the each new cell receives a full complement of DNA .
The following section will explore the structure of the nucleus and its contents , as well as the process of DNA replication .
Like most other cellular organelles , the nucleus is surrounded by a membrane called the nuclear envelope .
This membranous covering consists of two adjacent lipid bilayers with a thin fluid space in between them .
Spanning these two bilayers are nuclear pores .
A nuclear pore is a tiny passageway for the passage of proteins , RNA , and solutes between the nucleus and the cytoplasm .
Proteins called pore complexes lining the nuclear pores regulate the passage of materials into and out of the nucleus .
Inside the nuclear envelope is a gel-like nucleoplasm with solutes that include the building blocks of nucleic acids .
There also can be a dark-staining mass often visible under a simple light microscope , called a nucleolus ( plural = nucleoli ) .
The nucleolus is a region of the nucleus that is responsible for manufacturing the RNA necessary for construction of ribosomes .
Once synthesized , newly made ribosomal subunits exit the cell ’ s nucleus through the nuclear pores .
The genetic instructions that are used to build and maintain an organism are arranged in an orderly manner in strands of DNA .
Within the nucleus are threads of chromatin composed of DNA and associated proteins ( Figure 3.22 ) .
Along the chromatin threads , the DNA is wrapped around a set of histone proteins .
A nucleosome is a single , wrapped DNA-histone complex .
Multiple nucleosomes along the entire molecule of DNA appear like a beaded necklace , in which the string is the DNA and the beads are the associated histones .
When a cell is in the process of division , the chromatin condenses into chromosomes , so that the DNA can be safely transported to the “ daughter cells. ” The chromosome is composed of DNA and proteins ; it is the condensed form of chromatin .
It is estimated that humans have almost 22,000 genes distributed on 46 chromosomes .
In order for an organism to grow , develop , and maintain its health , cells must reproduce themselves by dividing to produce two new daughter cells , each with the full complement of DNA as found in the original cell .
Billions of new cells are produced in an adult human every day .
Only very few cell types in the body do not divide , including nerve cells , skeletal muscle fibers , and cardiac muscle cells .
The division time of different cell types varies .
Epithelial cells of the skin and gastrointestinal lining , for instance , divide very frequently to replace those that are constantly being rubbed off of the surface by friction .
A DNA molecule is made of two strands that “ complement ” each other in the sense that the molecules that compose the strands fit together and bind to each other , creating a double-stranded molecule that looks much like a long , twisted ladder .
Each side rail of the DNA ladder is composed of alternating sugar and phosphate groups ( Figure 3.23 ) .
The two sides of the ladder are not identical , but are complementary .
These two backbones are bonded to each other across pairs of protruding bases , each bonded pair forming one “ rung , ” or cross member .
The four DNA bases are adenine ( A ) , thymine ( T ) , cytosine ( C ) , and guanine ( G ) .
Because of their shape and charge , the two bases that compose a pair always bond together .
Adenine always binds with thymine , and cytosine always binds with guanine .
The particular sequence of bases along the DNA molecule determines the genetic code .
Therefore , if the two complementary strands of DNA were pulled apart , you could infer the order of the bases in one strand from the bases in the other , complementary strand .
For example , if one strand has a region with the sequence AGTGCCT , then the sequence of the complementary strand would be TCACGGA .
DNA replication is the copying of DNA that occurs before cell division can take place .
After a great deal of debate and experimentation , the general method of DNA replication was deduced in 1958 by two scientists in California , Matthew Meselson and Franklin Stahl .
This method is illustrated in Figure 3.24 and described below .
Stage 1 : Initiation .
The two complementary strands are separated , much like unzipping a zipper .
Special enzymes , including helicase , untwist and separate the two strands of DNA .
Stage 2 : Elongation .
Each strand becomes a template along which a new complementary strand is built .
DNA polymerase brings in the correct bases to complement the template strand , synthesizing a new strand base by base .
A DNA polymerase is an enzyme that adds free nucleotides to the end of a chain of DNA , making a new double strand .
This growing strand continues to be built until it has fully complemented the template strand .
Stage 3 : Termination .
Once the two original strands are bound to their own , finished , complementary strands , DNA replication is stopped and the two new identical DNA molecules are complete .
Each new DNA molecule contains one strand from the original molecule and one newly synthesized strand .
The term for this mode of replication is “ semiconservative , ” because half of the original DNA molecule is conserved in each new DNA molecule .
This process continues until the cell ’ s entire genome , the entire complement of an organism ’ s DNA , is replicated .
As you might imagine , it is very important that DNA replication take place precisely so that new cells in the body contain the exact same genetic material as their parent cells .
Mistakes made during DNA replication , such as the accidental addition of an inappropriate nucleotide , have the potential to render a gene dysfunctional or useless .
Fortunately , there are mechanisms in place to minimize such mistakes .
A DNA proofreading process enlists the help of special enzymes that scan the newly synthesized molecule for mistakes and corrects them .
Once the process of DNA replication is complete , the cell is ready to divide .
You will explore the process of cell division later in the chapter .
Watch this video ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/DNArep ) to learn about DNA replication .
DNA replication proceeds simultaneously at several sites on the same molecule .
What separates the base pair at the start of DNA replication ?
This refers to the fact that DNA contains the information necessary for the cell to build one very important type of molecule : the protein .
Most structural components of the cell are made up , at least in part , by proteins and virtually all the functions that a cell carries out are completed with the help of proteins .
One of the most important classes of proteins is enzymes , which help speed up necessary biochemical reactions that take place inside the cell .
Some of these critical biochemical reactions include building larger molecules from smaller components ( such as occurs during DNA replication or synthesis of microtubules ) and breaking down larger molecules into smaller components ( such as when harvesting chemical energy from nutrient molecules ) .
Whatever the cellular process may be , it is almost sure to involve proteins .
Just as the cell ’ s genome describes its full complement of DNA , a cell ’ s proteome is its full complement of proteins .
Protein synthesis begins with genes .
A gene is a functional segment of DNA that provides the genetic information necessary to build a protein .
Each particular gene provides the code necessary to construct a particular protein .
Gene expression , which transforms the information coded in a gene to a final gene product , ultimately dictates the structure and function of a cell by determining which proteins are made .
The interpretation of genes works in the following way .
Recall that proteins are polymers , or chains , of many amino acid building blocks .
The sequence of bases in a gene ( that is , its sequence of A , T , C , G nucleotides ) translates to an amino acid sequence .
A triplet is a section of three DNA bases in a row that codes for a specific amino acid .
Similar to the way in which the three-letter code d-o-g signals the image of a dog , the three-letter DNA base code signals the use of a particular amino acid .
For example , the DNA triplet CAC ( cytosine , adenine , and cytosine ) specifies the amino acid valine .
Therefore , a gene , which is composed of multiple triplets in a unique sequence , provides the code to build an entire protein , with multiple amino acids in the proper sequence ( Figure 3.25 ) .
The mechanism by which cells turn the DNA code into a protein product is a two-step process , with an RNA molecule as the intermediate .
DNA is housed within the nucleus , and protein synthesis takes place in the cytoplasm , thus there must be some sort of intermediate messenger that leaves the nucleus and manages protein synthesis .
This intermediate messenger is messenger RNA ( mRNA ) , a single-stranded nucleic acid that carries a copy of the genetic code for a single gene out of the nucleus and into the cytoplasm where it is used to produce proteins .
There are several different types of RNA , each having different functions in the cell .
The structure of RNA is similar to DNA with a few small exceptions .
For one thing , unlike DNA , most types of RNA , including mRNA , are single-stranded and contain no complementary strand .
Second , the ribose sugar in RNA contains an additional oxygen atom compared with DNA .
Finally , instead of the base thymine , RNA contains the base uracil .
This means that adenine will always pair up with uracil during the protein synthesis process .
Gene expression begins with the process called transcription , which is the synthesis of a strand of mRNA that is complementary to the gene of interest .
This process is called transcription because the mRNA is like a transcript , or copy , of the gene ’ s DNA code .
Transcription begins in a fashion somewhat like DNA replication , in that a region of DNA unwinds and the two strands separate , however , only that small portion of the DNA will be split apart .
The triplets within the gene on this section of the DNA molecule are used as the template to transcribe the complementary strand of RNA ( Figure 3.26 ) .
A codon is a three-base sequence of mRNA , so-called because they directly encode amino acids .
Like DNA replication , there are three stages to transcription : initiation , elongation , and termination .
Stage 1 : Initiation .
A region at the beginning of the gene called a promoter —a particular sequence of nucleotides—triggers the start of transcription .
Stage 2 : Elongation .
Transcription starts when RNA polymerase unwinds the DNA segment .
One strand , referred to as the coding strand , becomes the template with the genes to be coded .
The polymerase then aligns the correct nucleic acid ( A , C , G , or U ) with its complementary base on the coding strand of DNA .
RNA polymerase is an enzyme that adds new nucleotides to a growing strand of RNA .
This process builds a strand of mRNA .
Stage 3 : Termination .
When the polymerase has reached the end of the gene , one of three specific triplets ( UAA , UAG , or UGA ) codes a “ stop ” signal , which triggers the enzymes to terminate transcription and release the mRNA transcript .
Before the mRNA molecule leaves the nucleus and proceeds to protein synthesis , it is modified in a number of ways .
For this reason , it is often called a pre-mRNA at this stage .
For example , your DNA , and thus complementary mRNA , contains long regions called non-coding regions that do not code for amino acids .
Their function is still a mystery , but the process called splicing removes these non-coding regions from the pre-mRNA transcript ( Figure 3.27 ) .
A spliceosome —a structure composed of various proteins and other molecules—attaches to the mRNA and “ splices ” or cuts out the non-coding regions .
The removed segment of the transcript is called an intron .
The remaining exons are pasted together .
An exon is a segment of RNA that remains after splicing .
Interestingly , some introns that are removed from mRNA are not always non-coding .
When different coding regions of mRNA are spliced out , different variations of the protein will eventually result , with differences in structure and function .
This process results in a much larger variety of possible proteins and protein functions .
When the mRNA transcript is ready , it travels out of the nucleus and into the cytoplasm .
Like translating a book from one language into another , the codons on a strand of mRNA must be translated into the amino acid alphabet of proteins .
Translation is the process of synthesizing a chain of amino acids called a polypeptide .
The substrate on which translation takes place is the ribosome .
Remember that many of a cell ’ s ribosomes are found associated with the rough ER , and carry out the synthesis of proteins destined for the Golgi apparatus .
Ribosomal RNA ( rRNA ) is a type of RNA that , together with proteins , composes the structure of the ribosome .
Ribosomes exist in the cytoplasm as two distinct components , a small and a large subunit .
When an mRNA molecule is ready to be translated , the two subunits come together and attach to the mRNA .
The ribosome provides a substrate for translation , bringing together and aligning the mRNA molecule with the molecular “ translators ” that must decipher its code .
The other major requirement for protein synthesis is the translator molecules that physically “ read ” the mRNA codons .
Transfer RNA ( tRNA ) is a type of RNA that ferries the appropriate corresponding amino acids to the ribosome , and attaches each new amino acid to the last , building the polypeptide chain one-by-one .
Thus tRNA transfers specific amino acids from the cytoplasm to a growing polypeptide .
The tRNA molecules must be able to recognize the codons on mRNA and match them with the correct amino acid .
The tRNA is modified for this function .
On one end of its structure is a binding site for a specific amino acid .
On the other end is a base sequence that matches the codon specifying its particular amino acid .
This sequence of three bases on the tRNA molecule is called an anticodon .
For example , a tRNA responsible for shuttling the amino acid glycine contains a binding site for glycine on one end .
On the other end it contains an anticodon that complements the glycine codon ( GGA is a codon for glycine , and so the tRNAs anticodon would read CCU ) .
Equipped with its particular cargo and matching anticodon , a tRNA molecule can read its recognized mRNA codon and bring the corresponding amino acid to the growing chain ( Figure 3.28 ) .
Much like the processes of DNA replication and transcription , translation consists of three main stages : initiation , elongation , and termination .
Initiation takes place with the binding of a ribosome to an mRNA transcript .
The elongation stage involves the recognition of a tRNA anticodon with the next mRNA codon in the sequence .
Once the anticodon and codon sequences are bound ( remember , they are complementary base pairs ) , the tRNA presents its amino acid cargo and the growing polypeptide strand is attached to this next amino acid .
This attachment takes place with the assistance of various enzymes and requires energy .
The tRNA molecule then releases the mRNA strand , the mRNA strand shifts one codon over in the ribosome , and the next appropriate tRNA arrives with its matching anticodon .
This process continues until the final codon on the mRNA is reached which provides a “ stop ” message that signals termination of translation and triggers the release of the complete , newly synthesized protein .
Thus , a gene within the DNA molecule is transcribed into mRNA , which is then translated into a protein product ( Figure 3.29 ) .
Commonly , an mRNA transcription will be translated simultaneously by several adjacent ribosomes .
This increases the efficiency of protein synthesis .
A single ribosome might translate an mRNA molecule in approximately one minute ; so multiple ribosomes aboard a single transcript could produce multiple times the number of the same protein in the same minute .
A polyribosome is a string of ribosomes translating a single mRNA strand .
Watch this video ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/ribosome ) to learn about ribosomes .
The ribosome binds to the mRNA molecule to start translation of its code into a protein .
What happens to the small and large ribosomal subunits at the end of translation ?
While there are a few cells in the body that do not undergo cell division ( such as gametes , red blood cells , most neurons , and some muscle cells ) , most somatic cells divide regularly .
A somatic cell is a general term for a body cell , and all human cells , except for the cells that produce eggs and sperm ( which are referred to as germ cells ) , are somatic cells .
Somatic cells contain two copies of each of their chromosomes ( one copy received from each parent ) .
A homologous pair of chromosomes is the two copies of a single chromosome found in each somatic cell .
The human is a diploid organism , having 23 homologous pairs of chromosomes in each of the somatic cells .
The condition of having pairs of chromosomes is known as diploidy .
Cells in the body replace themselves over the lifetime of a person .
For example , the cells lining the gastrointestinal tract must be frequently replaced when constantly “ worn off ” by the movement of food through the gut .
But what triggers a cell to divide , and how does it prepare for and complete cell division ?
The cell cycle is the sequence of events in the life of the cell from the moment it is created at the end of a previous cycle of cell division until it then divides itself , generating two new cells .
One “ turn ” or cycle of the cell cycle consists of two general phases : interphase , followed by mitosis and cytokinesis .
Interphase is the period of the cell cycle during which the cell is not dividing .
The majority of cells are in interphase most of the time .
Mitosis is the division of genetic material , during which the cell nucleus breaks down and two new , fully functional , nuclei are formed .
Cytokinesis divides the cytoplasm into two distinctive cells .
A cell grows and carries out all normal metabolic functions and processes in a period called G ( Figure 3.30 ) .
G phase ( gap 1 phase ) is the first gap , or growth phase in the cell cycle .
For cells that will divide again , G is followed by replication of the DNA , during the S phase .
The S phase ( synthesis phase ) is period during which a cell replicates its DNA .
After the synthesis phase , the cell proceeds through the G phase .
The G phase is a second gap phase , during which the cell continues to grow and makes the necessary preparations for mitosis .
Between G , S , and G phases , cells will vary the most in their duration of the G1 phase .
It is here that a cell might spend a couple of hours , or many days .
The S phase typically lasts between 8-10 hours and the G phase approximately 5 hours .
In contrast to these phases , the G phase is a resting phase of the cell cycle .
Cells that have temporarily stopped dividing and are resting ( a common condition ) and cells that have permanently ceased dividing ( like nerve cells ) are said to be in G .
Billions of cells in the human body divide every day .
During the synthesis phase ( S , for DNA synthesis ) of interphase , the amount of DNA within the cell precisely doubles .
Therefore , after DNA replication but before cell division , each cell actually contains two copies of each chromosome .
Each copy of the chromosome is referred to as a sister chromatid and is physically bound to the other copy .
The centromere is the structure that attaches one sister chromatid to another .
Because a human cell has 46 chromosomes , during this phase , there are 92 chromatids ( 46 × 2 ) in the cell .
Make sure not to confuse the concept of a pair of chromatids ( one chromosome and its exact copy attached during mitosis ) and a homologous pair of chromosomes ( two paired chromosomes which were inherited separately , one from each parent ) ( Figure 3.31 ) .
The mitotic phase of the cell typically takes between 1 and 2 hours .
During this phase , a cell undergoes two major processes .
First , it completes mitosis , during which the contents of the nucleus are equitably pulled apart and distributed between its two halves .
Cytokinesis then occurs , dividing the cytoplasm and cell body into two new cells .
Mitosis is divided into four major stages that take place after interphase ( Figure 3.32 ) and in the following order : prophase , metaphase , anaphase , and telophase .
The process is then followed by cytokinesis .
Prophase is the first phase of mitosis , during which the loosely packed chromatin coils and condenses into visible chromosomes .
During prophase , each chromosome becomes visible with its identical partner attached , forming the familiar X-shape of sister chromatids .
The nucleolus disappears early during this phase , and the nuclear envelope also disintegrates .
A major occurrence during prophase concerns a very important structure that contains the origin site for microtubule growth .
Recall the cellular structures called centrioles that serve as origin points from which microtubules extend .
These tiny structures also play a very important role during mitosis .
A centrosome is a pair of centrioles together .
The cell contains two centrosomes side-by-side , which begin to move apart during prophase .
As the centrosomes migrate to two different sides of the cell , microtubules begin to extend from each like long fingers from two hands extending toward each other .
The mitotic spindle is the structure composed of the centrosomes and their emerging microtubules .
Near the end of prophase there is an invasion of the nuclear area by microtubules from the mitotic spindle .
The nuclear membrane has disintegrated , and the microtubules attach themselves to the centromeres that adjoin pairs of sister chromatids .
The kinetochore is a protein structure on the centromere that is the point of attachment between the mitotic spindle and the sister chromatids .
This stage is referred to as late prophase or “ prometaphase ” to indicate the transition between prophase and metaphase .
Metaphase is the second stage of mitosis .
During this stage , the sister chromatids , with their attached microtubules , line up along a linear plane in the middle of the cell .
A metaphase plate forms between the centrosomes that are now located at either end of the cell .
The metaphase plate is the name for the plane through the center of the spindle on which the sister chromatids are positioned .
The microtubules are now poised to pull apart the sister chromatids and bring one from each pair to each side of the cell .
Anaphase is the third stage of mitosis .
Anaphase takes place over a few minutes , when the pairs of sister chromatids are separated from one another , forming individual chromosomes once again .
These chromosomes are pulled to opposite ends of the cell by their kinetochores , as the microtubules shorten .
Each end of the cell receives one partner from each pair of sister chromatids , ensuring that the two new daughter cells will contain identical genetic material .
Telophase is the final stage of mitosis .
Telophase is characterized by the formation of two new daughter nuclei at either end of the dividing cell .
These newly formed nuclei surround the genetic material , which uncoils such that the chromosomes return to loosely packed chromatin .
Nucleoli also reappear within the new nuclei , and the mitotic spindle breaks apart , each new cell receiving its own complement of DNA , organelles , membranes , and centrioles .
At this point , the cell is already beginning to split in half as cytokinesis begins .
The cleavage furrow is a contractile band made up of microfilaments that forms around the midline of the cell during cytokinesis .
( Recall that microfilaments consist of actin . )
This contractile band squeezes the two cells apart until they finally separate .
Two new cells are now formed .
One of these cells ( the “ stem cell ” ) enters its own cell cycle ; able to grow and divide again at some future time .
The other cell transforms into the functional cell of the tissue , typically replacing an “ old ” cell there .
Imagine a cell that completed mitosis but never underwent cytokinesis .
In some cases , a cell may divide its genetic material and grow in size , but fail to undergo cytokinesis .
This results in larger cells with more than one nucleus .
Usually this is an unwanted aberration and can be a sign of cancerous cells .
A very elaborate and precise system of regulation controls direct the way cells proceed from one phase to the next in the cell cycle and begin mitosis .
The control system involves molecules within the cell as well as external triggers .
These internal and external control triggers provide “ stop ” and “ advance ” signals for the cell .
Precise regulation of the cell cycle is critical for maintaining the health of an organism , and loss of cell cycle control can lead to cancer .
As the cell proceeds through its cycle , each phase involves certain processes that must be completed before the cell should advance to the next phase .
A checkpoint is a point in the cell cycle at which the cycle can be signaled to move forward or stopped .
At each of these checkpoints , different varieties of molecules provide the stop or go signals , depending on certain conditions within the cell .
A cyclin is one of the primary classes of cell cycle control molecules ( Figure 3.33 ) .
A cyclindependent kinase ( CDK ) is one of a group of molecules that work together with cyclins to determine progression past cell checkpoints .
By interacting with many additional molecules , these triggers push the cell cycle forward unless prevented from doing so by “ stop ” signals , if for some reason the cell is not ready .
At the G checkpoint , the cell must be ready for DNA synthesis to occur .
At the G checkpoint the cell must be fully prepared for mitosis .
Even during mitosis , a crucial stop and go checkpoint in metaphase ensures that the cell is fully prepared to complete cell division .
The metaphase checkpoint ensures that all sister chromatids are properly attached to their respective microtubules and lined up at the metaphase plate before the signal is given to separate them during anaphase .
Most people understand that cancer or tumors are caused by abnormal cells that multiply continuously .
If the abnormal cells continue to divide unstopped , they can damage the tissues around them , spread to other parts of the body , and eventually result in death .
In healthy cells , the tight regulation mechanisms of the cell cycle prevent this from happening , while failures of cell cycle control can cause unwanted and excessive cell division .
Failures of control may be caused by inherited genetic abnormalities that compromise the function of certain “ stop ” and “ go ” signals .
Environmental insult that damages DNA can also cause dysfunction in those signals .
Often , a combination of both genetic predisposition and environmental factors lead to cancer .
The process of a cell escaping its normal control system and becoming cancerous may actually happen throughout the body quite frequently .
Fortunately , certain cells of the immune system are capable of recognizing cells that have become cancerous and destroying them .
However , in certain cases the cancerous cells remain undetected and continue to proliferate .
If the resulting tumor does not pose a threat to surrounding tissues , it is said to be benign and can usually be easily removed .
If capable of damage , the tumor is considered malignant and the patient is diagnosed with cancer .
Cancer is an extremely complex condition , capable of arising from a wide variety of genetic and environmental causes .
Typically , mutations or aberrations in a cell ’ s DNA that compromise normal cell cycle control systems lead to cancerous tumors .
Cell cycle control is an example of a homeostatic mechanism that maintains proper cell function and health .
While progressing through the phases of the cell cycle , a large variety of intracellular molecules provide stop and go signals to regulate movement forward to the next phase .
These signals are maintained in an intricate balance so that the cell only proceeds to the next phase when it is ready .
This homeostatic control of the cell cycle can be thought of like a car ’ s cruise control .
Cruise control will continually apply just the right amount of acceleration to maintain a desired speed , unless the driver hits the brakes , in which case the car will slow down .
Similarly , the cell includes molecular messengers , such as cyclins , that push the cell forward in its cycle .
In addition to cyclins , a class of proteins that are encoded by genes called proto-oncogenes provide important signals that regulate the cell cycle and move it forward .
Examples of proto-oncogene products include cell-surface receptors for growth factors , or cell-signaling molecules , two classes of molecules that can promote DNA replication and cell division .
In contrast , a second class of genes known as tumor suppressor genes sends stop signals during a cell cycle .
For example , certain protein products of tumor suppressor genes signal potential problems with the DNA and thus stop the cell from dividing , while other proteins signal the cell to die if it is damaged beyond repair .
Some tumor suppressor proteins also signal a sufficient surrounding cellular density , which indicates that the cell need not presently divide .
The latter function is uniquely important in preventing tumor growth : normal cells exhibit a phenomenon called “ contact inhibition ; ” thus , extensive cellular contact with neighboring cells causes a signal that stops further cell division .
These two contrasting classes of genes , proto-oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes , are like the accelerator and brake pedal of the cell ’ s own “ cruise control system , ” respectively .
Under normal conditions , these stop and go signals are maintained in a homeostatic balance .
Generally speaking , there are two ways that the cell ’ s cruise control can lose control : a malfunctioning ( overactive ) accelerator , or a malfunctioning ( underactive ) brake .
When compromised through a mutation , or otherwise altered , proto-oncogenes can be converted to oncogenes , which produce oncoproteins that push a cell forward in its cycle and stimulate cell division even when it is undesirable to do so .
For example , a cell that should be programmed to self-destruct ( a process called apoptosis ) due to extensive DNA damage might instead be triggered to proliferate by an oncoprotein .
On the other hand , a dysfunctional tumor suppressor gene may fail to provide the cell with a necessary stop signal , also resulting in unwanted cell division and proliferation .
A delicate homeostatic balance between the many proto-oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes delicately controls the cell cycle and ensures that only healthy cells replicate .
Therefore , a disruption of this homeostatic balance can cause aberrant cell division and cancerous growths .
Visit this link ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/mitosis ) to learn about mitosis .
Mitosis results in two identical diploid cells .
What structures forms during prophase ?
Throughout development and adulthood , the process of cellular differentiation leads cells to assume their final morphology and physiology .
Differentiation is the process by which unspecialized cells become specialized to carry out distinct functions .
A stem cell is an unspecialized cell that can divide without limit as needed and can , under specific conditions , differentiate into specialized cells .
Stem cells are divided into several categories according to their potential to differentiate .
The first embryonic cells that arise from the division of the zygote are the ultimate stem cells ; these stems cells are described as totipotent because they have the potential to differentiate into any of the cells needed to enable an organism to grow and develop .
The embryonic cells that develop from totipotent stem cells and are precursors to the fundamental tissue layers of the embryo are classified as pluripotent .
A pluripotent stem cell is one that has the potential to differentiate into any type of human tissue but can not support the full development of an organism .
These cells then become slightly more specialized , and are referred to as multipotent cells .
A multipotent stem cell has the potential to differentiate into different types of cells within a given cell lineage or small number of lineages , such as a red blood cell or white blood cell .
Finally , multipotent cells can become further specialized oligopotent cells .
An oligopotent stem cell is limited to becoming one of a few different cell types .
In contrast , a unipotent cell is fully specialized and can only reproduce to generate more of its own specific cell type .
Stem cells are unique in that they can also continually divide and regenerate new stem cells instead of further specializing .
There are different stem cells present at different stages of a human ’ s life .
They include the embryonic stem cells of the embryo , fetal stem cells of the fetus , and adult stem cells in the adult .
One type of adult stem cell is the epithelial stem cell , which gives rise to the keratinocytes in the multiple layers of epithelial cells in the epidermis of skin .
When a cell differentiates ( becomes more specialized ) , it may undertake major changes in its size , shape , metabolic activity , and overall function .
Because all cells in the body , beginning with the fertilized egg , contain the same DNA , how do the different cell types come to be so different ?
The answer is analogous to a movie script .
The different actors in a movie all read from the same script , however , they are each only reading their own part of the script .
Similarly , all cells contain the same full complement of DNA , but each type of cell only “ reads ” the portions of DNA that are relevant to its own function .
In biology , this is referred to as the unique genetic expression of each cell .
In order for a cell to differentiate into its specialized form and function , it need only manipulate those genes ( and thus those proteins ) that will be expressed , and not those that will remain silent .
The primary mechanism by which genes are turned “ on ” or “ off ” is through transcription factors .
A transcription factor is one of a class of proteins that bind to specific genes on the DNA molecule and either promote or inhibit their transcription ( Figure 3.35 ) .
Stem cell research aims to find ways to use stem cells to regenerate and repair cellular damage .
Over time , most adult cells undergo the wear and tear of aging and lose their ability to divide and repair themselves .
Stem cells do not display a particular morphology or function .
Adult stem cells , which exist as a small subset of cells in most tissues , keep dividing and can differentiate into a number of specialized cells generally formed by that tissue .
These cells enable the body to renew and repair body tissues .
The mechanisms that induce a non-differentiated cell to become a specialized cell are poorly understood .
In a laboratory setting , it is possible to induce stem cells to differentiate into specialized cells by changing the physical and chemical conditions of growth .
Several sources of stem cells are used experimentally and are classified according to their origin and potential for differentiation .
Human embryonic stem cells ( hESCs ) are extracted from embryos and are pluripotent .
The adult stem cells that are present in many organs and differentiated tissues , such as bone marrow and skin , are multipotent , being limited in differentiation to the types of cells found in those tissues .
The stem cells isolated from umbilical cord blood are also multipotent , as are cells from deciduous teeth ( baby teeth ) .
Researchers have recently developed induced pluripotent stem cells ( iPSCs ) from mouse and human adult stem cells .
These cells are genetically reprogrammed multipotent adult cells that function like embryonic stem cells ; they are capable of generating cells characteristic of all three germ layers .
Because of their capacity to divide and differentiate into specialized cells , stem cells offer a potential treatment for diseases such as diabetes and heart disease ( Figure 3.36 ) .
Cell-based therapy refers to treatment in which stem cells induced to differentiate in a growth dish are injected into a patient to repair damaged or destroyed cells or tissues .
Many obstacles must be overcome for the application of cell-based therapy .
Although embryonic stem cells have a nearly unlimited range of differentiation potential , they are seen as foreign by the patient ’ s immune system and may trigger rejection .
Also , the destruction of embryos to isolate embryonic stem cells raises considerable ethical and legal questions .
In contrast , adult stem cells isolated from a patient are not seen as foreign by the body , but they have a limited range of differentiation .
Some individuals bank the cord blood or deciduous teeth of their child , storing away those sources of stem cells for future use , should their child need it .
Induced pluripotent stem cells are considered a promising advance in the field because using them avoids the legal , ethical , and immunological pitfalls of embryonic stem cells .
These cells contain essentially the same internal structures yet they vary enormously in shape and function .
The different types of cells are not randomly distributed throughout the body ; rather they occur in organized layers , a level of organization referred to as tissue .
The micrograph that opens this chapter shows the high degree of organization among different types of cells in the tissue of the cervix .
You can also see how that organization breaks down when cancer takes over the regular mitotic functioning of a cell .
The variety in shape reflects the many different roles that cells fulfill in your body .
The human body starts as a single cell at fertilization .
As this fertilized egg divides , it gives rise to trillions of cells , each built from the same blueprint , but organizing into tissues and becoming irreversibly committed to a developmental pathway .
The cells within a tissue share a common embryonic origin .
Microscopic observation reveals that the cells in a tissue share morphological features and are arranged in an orderly pattern that achieves the tissue ’ s functions .
From the evolutionary perspective , tissues appear in more complex organisms .
For example , multicellular protists , ancient eukaryotes , do not have cells organized into tissues .
Although there are many types of cells in the human body , they are organized into four broad categories of tissues : epithelial , connective , muscle , and nervous .
Each of these categories is characterized by specific functions that contribute to the overall health and maintenance of the body .
A disruption of the structure is a sign of injury or disease .
Such changes can be detected through histology , the microscopic study of tissue appearance , organization , and function .
Epithelial tissue , also referred to as epithelium , refers to the sheets of cells that cover exterior surfaces of the body , lines internal cavities and passageways , and forms certain glands .
Connective tissue , as its name implies , binds the cells and organs of the body together and functions in the protection , support , and integration of all parts of the body .
Muscle tissue is excitable , responding to stimulation and contracting to provide movement , and occurs as three major types : skeletal ( voluntary ) muscle , smooth muscle , and cardiac muscle in the heart .
Nervous tissue is also excitable , allowing the propagation of electrochemical signals in the form of nerve impulses that communicate between different regions of the body ( Figure 4.2 ) .
The next level of organization is the organ , where several types of tissues come together to form a working unit .
Just as knowing the structure and function of cells helps you in your study of tissues , knowledge of tissues will help you understand how organs function .
The epithelial and connective tissues are discussed in detail in this chapter .
Muscle and nervous tissues will be discussed only briefly in this chapter .
The zygote , or fertilized egg , is a single cell formed by the fusion of an egg and sperm .
After fertilization the zygote gives rise to rapid mitotic cycles , generating many cells to form the embryo .
The first embryonic cells generated have the ability to differentiate into any type of cell in the body and , as such , are called totipotent , meaning each has the capacity to divide , differentiate , and develop into a new organism .
As cell proliferation progresses , three major cell lineages are established within the embryo .
As explained in a later chapter , each of these lineages of embryonic cells forms the distinct germ layers from which all the tissues and organs of the human body eventually form .
Each germ layer is identified by its relative position : ectoderm ( ecto= “ outer ” ) , mesoderm ( meso= “ middle ” ) , and endoderm ( endo= “ inner ” ) .
Figure 4.3 shows the types of tissues and organs associated with the each of the three germ layers .
Note that epithelial tissue originates in all three layers , whereas nervous tissue derives primarily from the ectoderm and muscle tissue from mesoderm .
View this slideshow ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/stemcells ) to learn more about stem cells .
How do somatic stem cells differ from embryonic stem cells ?
There are two basic types of tissue membranes : connective tissue and epithelial membranes ( Figure 4.4 ) .
The connective tissue membrane is formed solely from connective tissue .
These membranes encapsulate organs , such as the kidneys , and line our movable joints .
A synovial membrane is a type of connective tissue membrane that lines the cavity of a freely movable joint .
For example , synovial membranes surround the joints of the shoulder , elbow , and knee .
Fibroblasts in the inner layer of the synovial membrane release hyaluronan into the joint cavity .
The hyaluronan effectively traps available water to form the synovial fluid , a natural lubricant that enables the bones of a joint to move freely against one another without much friction .
This synovial fluid readily exchanges water and nutrients with blood , as do all body fluids .
The epithelial membrane is composed of epithelium attached to a layer of connective tissue , for example , your skin .
The mucous membrane is also a composite of connective and epithelial tissues .
Sometimes called mucosae , these epithelial membranes line the body cavities and hollow passageways that open to the external environment , and include the digestive , respiratory , excretory , and reproductive tracts .
Mucous , produced by the epithelial exocrine glands , covers the epithelial layer .
The underlying connective tissue , called the lamina propria ( literally “ own layer ” ) , help support the fragile epithelial layer .
A serous membrane is an epithelial membrane composed of mesodermally derived epithelium called the mesothelium that is supported by connective tissue .
These membranes line the coelomic cavities of the body , that is , those cavities that do not open to the outside , and they cover the organs located within those cavities .
They are essentially membranous bags , with mesothelium lining the inside and connective tissue on the outside .
Serous fluid secreted by the cells of the thin squamous mesothelium lubricates the membrane and reduces abrasion and friction between organs .
Serous membranes are identified according locations .
Three serous membranes line the thoracic cavity ; the two pleura that cover the lungs and the pericardium that covers the heart .
A fourth , the peritoneum , is the serous membrane in the abdominal cavity that covers abdominal organs and forms double sheets of mesenteries that suspend many of the digestive organs .
The skin is an epithelial membrane also called the cutaneous membrane .
It is a stratified squamous epithelial membrane resting on top of connective tissue .
The apical surface of this membrane is exposed to the external environment and is covered with dead , keratinized cells that help protect the body from desiccation and pathogens .
Epithelium also forms much of the glandular tissue of the body .
Skin is not the only area of the body exposed to the outside .
Other areas include the airways , the digestive tract , as well as the urinary and reproductive systems , all of which are lined by an epithelium .
Hollow organs and body cavities that do not connect to the exterior of the body , which includes , blood vessels and serous membranes , are lined by endothelium ( plural = endothelia ) , which is a type of epithelium .
Epithelial cells derive from all three major embryonic layers .
The epithelia lining the skin , parts of the mouth and nose , and the anus develop from the ectoderm .
Cells lining the airways and most of the digestive system originate in the endoderm .
The epithelium that lines vessels in the lymphatic and cardiovascular system derives from the mesoderm and is called an endothelium .
All epithelia share some important structural and functional features .
This tissue is highly cellular , with little or no extracellular material present between cells .
Adjoining cells form a specialized intercellular connection between their cell membranes called a cell junction .
The epithelial cells exhibit polarity with differences in structure and function between the exposed or apical facing surface of the cell and the basal surface close to the underlying body structures .
The basal lamina , a mixture of glycoproteins and collagen , provides an attachment site for the epithelium , separating it from underlying connective tissue .
The basal lamina attaches to a reticular lamina , which is secreted by the underlying connective tissue , forming a basement membrane that helps hold it all together .
Epithelial tissues are nearly completely avascular .
For instance , no blood vessels cross the basement membrane to enter the tissue , and nutrients must come by diffusion or absorption from underlying tissues or the surface .
Many epithelial tissues are capable of rapidly replacing damaged and dead cells .
Sloughing off of damaged or dead cells is a characteristic of surface epithelium and allows our airways and digestive tracts to rapidly replace damaged cells with new cells .
Epithelial tissues provide the body ’ s first line of protection from physical , chemical , and biological wear and tear .
The cells of an epithelium act as gatekeepers of the body controlling permeability and allowing selective transfer of materials across a physical barrier .
All substances that enter the body must cross an epithelium .
Some epithelia often include structural features that allow the selective transport of molecules and ions across their cell membranes .
Many epithelial cells are capable of secretion and release mucous and specific chemical compounds onto their apical surfaces .
The epithelium of the small intestine releases digestive enzymes , for example .
Cells lining the respiratory tract secrete mucous that traps incoming microorganisms and particles .
A glandular epithelium contains many secretory cells .
Epithelial cells are typically characterized by the polarized distribution of organelles and membrane-bound proteins between their basal and apical surfaces .
Particular structures found in some epithelial cells are an adaptation to specific functions .
Certain organelles are segregated to the basal sides , whereas other organelles and extensions , such as cilia , when present , are on the apical surface .
Cilia are microscopic extensions of the apical cell membrane that are supported by microtubules .
They beat in unison and move fluids as well as trapped particles .
Ciliated epithelium lines the ventricles of the brain where it helps circulate the cerebrospinal fluid .
The ciliated epithelium of your airway forms a mucociliary escalator that sweeps particles of dust and pathogens trapped in the secreted mucous toward the throat .
It is called an escalator because it continuously pushes mucous with trapped particles upward .
In contrast , nasal cilia sweep the mucous blanket down towards your throat .
In both cases , the transported materials are usually swallowed , and end up in the acidic environment of your stomach .
Cells of epithelia are closely connected and are not separated by intracellular material .
Three basic types of connections allow varying degrees of interaction between the cells : tight junctions , anchoring junctions , and gap junctions ( Figure 4.5 ) .
At one end of the spectrum is the tight junction , which separates the cells into apical and basal compartments .
When two adjacent epithelial cells form a tight junction , there is no extracellular space between them and the movement of substances through the extracellular space between the cells is blocked .
This enables the epithelia to act as selective barriers .
An anchoring junction includes several types of cell junctions that help stabilize epithelial tissues .
Anchoring junctions are common on the lateral and basal surfaces of cells where they provide strong and flexible connections .
There are three types of anchoring junctions : desmosomes , hemidesmosomes , and adherens .
Desmosomes occur in patches on the membranes of cells .
The patches are structural proteins on the inner surface of the cell ’ s membrane .
The adhesion molecule , cadherin , is embedded in these patches and projects through the cell membrane to link with the cadherin molecules of adjacent cells .
These connections are especially important in holding cells together .
Hemidesmosomes , which look like half a desmosome , link cells to the extracellular matrix , for example , the basal lamina .
While similar in appearance to desmosomes , they include the adhesion proteins called integrins rather than cadherins .
Adherens junctions use either cadherins or integrins depending on whether they are linking to other cells or matrix .
The junctions are characterized by the presence of the contractile protein actin located on the cytoplasmic surface of the cell membrane .
The actin can connect isolated patches or form a belt-like structure inside the cell .
These junctions influence the shape and folding of the epithelial tissue .
In contrast with the tight and anchoring junctions , a gap junction forms an intercellular passageway between the membranes of adjacent cells to facilitate the movement of small molecules and ions between the cytoplasm of adjacent cells .
These junctions allow electrical and metabolic coupling of adjacent cells , which coordinates function in large groups of cells .
Epithelial tissues are classified according to the shape of the cells and number of the cell layers formed ( Figure 4.6 ) .
Cell shapes can be squamous ( flattened and thin ) , cuboidal ( boxy , as wide as it is tall ) , or columnar ( rectangular , taller than it is wide ) .
Similarly , the number of cell layers in the tissue can be one—where every cell rests on the basal lamina—which is a simple epithelium , or more than one , which is a stratified epithelium and only the basal layer of cells rests on the basal lamina .
Pseudostratified ( pseudo= “ false ” ) describes tissue with a single layer of irregularly shaped cells that give the appearance of more than one layer .
Transitional describes a form of specialized stratified epithelium in which the shape of the cells can vary .
The shape of the cells in the single cell layer of simple epithelium reflects the functioning of those cells .
The cells in simple squamous epithelium have the appearance of thin scales .
Squamous cell nuclei tend to be flat , horizontal , and elliptical , mirroring the form of the cell .
The endothelium is the epithelial tissue that lines vessels of the lymphatic and cardiovascular system , and it is made up of a single layer of squamous cells .
Simple squamous epithelium , because of the thinness of the cell , is present where rapid passage of chemical compounds is observed .
The alveoli of lungs where gases diffuse , segments of kidney tubules , and the lining of capillaries are also made of simple squamous epithelial tissue .
The mesothelium is a simple squamous epithelium that forms the surface layer of the serous membrane that lines body cavities and internal organs .
Its primary function is to provide a smooth and protective surface .
Mesothelial cells are squamous epithelial cells that secrete a fluid that lubricates the mesothelium .
In simple cuboidal epithelium , the nucleus of the box-like cells appears round and is generally located near the center of the cell .
These epithelia are active in the secretion and absorptions of molecules .
Simple cuboidal epithelia are observed in the lining of the kidney tubules and in the ducts of glands .
In simple columnar epithelium , the nucleus of the tall column-like cells tends to be elongated and located in the basal end of the cells .
Like the cuboidal epithelia , this epithelium is active in the absorption and secretion of molecules .
Simple columnar epithelium forms the lining of some sections of the digestive system and parts of the female reproductive tract .
Ciliated columnar epithelium is composed of simple columnar epithelial cells with cilia on their apical surfaces .
These epithelial cells are found in the lining of the fallopian tubes and parts of the respiratory system , where the beating of the cilia helps remove particulate matter .
Pseudostratified columnar epithelium is a type of epithelium that appears to be stratified but instead consists of a single layer of irregularly shaped and differently sized columnar cells .
In pseudostratified epithelium , nuclei of neighboring cells appear at different levels rather than clustered in the basal end .
The arrangement gives the appearance of stratification ; but in fact all the cells are in contact with the basal lamina , although some do not reach the apical surface .
Pseudostratified columnar epithelium is found in the respiratory tract , where some of these cells have cilia .
Both simple and pseudostratified columnar epithelia are heterogeneous epithelia because they include additional types of cells interspersed among the epithelial cells .
For example , a goblet cell is a mucous-secreting unicellular “ gland ” interspersed between the columnar epithelial cells of mucous membranes ( Figure 4.7 ) .
View the University of Michigan WebScope at http : //virtualslides.med.umich.edu/Histology/Digestive % 20System/ Intestines/169_HISTO_40X.svs/view.apml ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/goblet ) to explore the tissue sample in greater detail .
A stratified epithelium consists of several stacked layers of cells .
This epithelium protects against physical and chemical wear and tear .
The stratified epithelium is named by the shape of the most apical layer of cells , closest to the free space .
Stratified squamous epithelium is the most common type of stratified epithelium in the human body .
The apical cells are squamous , whereas the basal layer contains either columnar or cuboidal cells .
The top layer may be covered with dead cells filled with keratin .
Mammalian skin is an example of this dry , keratinized , stratified squamous epithelium .
The lining of the mouth cavity is an example of an unkeratinized , stratified squamous epithelium .
Stratified cuboidal epithelium and stratified columnar epithelium can also be found in certain glands and ducts , but are uncommon in the human body .
Another kind of stratified epithelium is transitional epithelium , so-called because of the gradual changes in the shapes of the apical cells as the bladder fills with urine .
It is found only in the urinary system , specifically the ureters and urinary bladder .
When the bladder is empty , this epithelium is convoluted and has cuboidal apical cells with convex , umbrella shaped , apical surfaces .
As the bladder fills with urine , this epithelium loses its convolutions and the apical cells transition from cuboidal to squamous .
It appears thicker and more multi-layered when the bladder is empty , and more stretched out and less stratified when the bladder is full and distended .
Figure 4.8 summarizes the different categories of epithelial cell tissue cells .
Watch this video ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/etissues ) to find out more about the anatomy of epithelial tissues .
Where in the body would one find non-keratinizing stratified squamous epithelium ?
A gland is a structure made up of one or more cells modified to synthesize and secrete chemical substances .
Most glands consist of groups of epithelial cells .
The secretions of endocrine glands are called hormones .
Hormones are released into the interstitial fluid , diffused into the bloodstream , and delivered to targets , in other words , cells that have receptors to bind the hormones .
The endocrine system is part of a major regulatory system coordinating the regulation and integration of body responses .
A few examples of endocrine glands include the anterior pituitary , thymus , adrenal cortex , and gonads .
Exocrine glands release their contents through a duct that leads to the epithelial surface .
Mucous , sweat , saliva , and breast milk are all examples of secretions from exocrine glands .
They are all discharged through tubular ducts .
Secretions into the lumen of the gastrointestinal tract , technically outside of the body , are of the exocrine category .
Exocrine glands are classified as either unicellular or multicellular .
The unicellular glands are scattered single cells , such as goblet cells , found in the mucous membranes of the small and large intestine .
The multicellular exocrine glands known as serous glands develop from simple epithelium to form a secretory surface that secretes directly into an inner cavity .
These glands line the internal cavities of the abdomen and chest and release their secretions directly into the cavities .
Other multicellular exocrine glands release their contents through a tubular duct .
The duct is single in a simple gland but in compound glands is divided into one or more branches ( Figure 4.9 ) .
In tubular glands , the ducts can be straight or coiled , whereas tubes that form pockets are alveolar ( acinar ) , such as the exocrine portion of the pancreas .
Combinations of tubes and pockets are known as tubuloalveolar ( tubuloacinar ) compound glands .
In a branched gland , a duct is connected to more than one secretory group of cells .
Exocrine glands can be classified by their mode of secretion and the nature of the substances released , as well as by the structure of the glands and shape of ducts ( Figure 4.10 ) .
Merocrine secretion is the most common type of exocrine secretion .
The secretions are enclosed in vesicles that move to the apical surface of the cell where the contents are released by exocytosis .
For example , watery mucous containing the glycoprotein mucin , a lubricant that offers some pathogen protection is a merocrine secretion .
The eccrine glands that produce and secrete sweat are another example .
Apocrine secretion accumulates near the apical portion of the cell .
That portion of the cell and its secretory contents pinch off from the cell and are released .
Apocrine sweat glands in the axillary and genital areas release fatty secretions that local bacteria break down ; this causes body odor .
Both merocrine and apocrine glands continue to produce and secrete their contents with little damage caused to the cell because the nucleus and golgi regions remain intact after secretion .
In contrast , the process of holocrine secretion involves the rupture and destruction of the entire gland cell .
The cell accumulates its secretory products and releases them only when it bursts .
New gland cells differentiate from cells in the surrounding tissue to replace those lost by secretion .
The sebaceous glands that produce the oils on the skin and hair are holocrine glands/cells ( Figure 4.11 ) .
Glands are also named after the products they produce .
The serous gland produces watery , blood-plasma-like secretions rich in enzymes such as alpha amylase , whereas the mucous gland releases watery to viscous products rich in the glycoprotein mucin .
Both serous and mucous glands are common in the salivary glands of the mouth .
Mixed exocrine glands contain both serous and mucous glands and release both types of secretions .
Unlike epithelial tissue , which is composed of cells closely packed with little or no extracellular space in between , connective tissue cells are dispersed in a matrix .
The matrix usually includes a large amount of extracellular material produced by the connective tissue cells that are embedded within it .
The matrix plays a major role in the functioning of this tissue .
The major component of the matrix is a ground substance often crisscrossed by protein fibers .
This ground substance is usually a fluid , but it can also be mineralized and solid , as in bones .
Connective tissues come in a vast variety of forms , yet they typically have in common three characteristic components : cells , large amounts of amorphous ground substance , and protein fibers .
The amount and structure of each component correlates with the function of the tissue , from the rigid ground substance in bones supporting the body to the inclusion of specialized cells ; for example , a phagocytic cell that engulfs pathogens and also rids tissue of cellular debris .
Protection is another major function of connective tissue , in the form of fibrous capsules and bones that protect delicate organs and , of course , the skeletal system .
Specialized cells in connective tissue defend the body from microorganisms that enter the body .
Transport of fluid , nutrients , waste , and chemical messengers is ensured by specialized fluid connective tissues , such as blood and lymph .
Adipose cells store surplus energy in the form of fat and contribute to the thermal insulation of the body .
All connective tissues derive from the mesodermal layer of the embryo ( see Figure 4.3 ) .
The first connective tissue to develop in the embryo is mesenchyme , the stem cell line from which all connective tissues are later derived .
Clusters of mesenchymal cells are scattered throughout adult tissue and supply the cells needed for replacement and repair after a connective tissue injury .
A second type of embryonic connective tissue forms in the umbilical cord , called mucous connective tissue or Wharton ’ s jelly .
This tissue is no longer present after birth , leaving only scattered mesenchymal cells throughout the body .
The three broad categories of connective tissue are classified according to the characteristics of their ground substance and the types of fibers found within the matrix ( Table 4.1 ) .
Connective tissue proper includes loose connective tissue and dense connective tissue .
Both tissues have a variety of cell types and protein fibers suspended in a viscous ground substance .
Dense connective tissue is reinforced by bundles of fibers that provide tensile strength , elasticity , and protection .
In loose connective tissue , the fibers are loosely organized , leaving large spaces in between .
Supportive connective tissue —bone and cartilage—provide structure and strength to the body and protect soft tissues .
A few distinct cell types and densely packed fibers in a matrix characterize these tissues .
In bone , the matrix is rigid and described as calcified because of the deposited calcium salts .
In fluid connective tissue , in other words , lymph and blood , various specialized cells circulate in a watery fluid containing salts , nutrients , and dissolved proteins .
Fibroblasts are present in all connective tissue proper ( Figure 4.12 ) .
Fibrocytes , adipocytes , and mesenchymal cells are fixed cells , which means they remain within the connective tissue .
Other cells move in and out of the connective tissue in response to chemical signals .
Macrophages , mast cells , lymphocytes , plasma cells , and phagocytic cells are found in connective tissue proper but are actually part of the immune system protecting the body .
The most abundant cell in connective tissue proper is the fibroblast .
Polysaccharides and proteins secreted by fibroblasts combine with extra-cellular fluids to produce a viscous ground substance that , with embedded fibrous proteins , forms the extra-cellular matrix .
As you might expect , a fibrocyte , a less active form of fibroblast , is the second most common cell type in connective tissue proper .
Adipocytes are cells that store lipids as droplets that fill most of the cytoplasm .
There are two basic types of adipocytes : white and brown .
The brown adipocytes store lipids as many droplets , and have high metabolic activity .
In contrast , white fat adipocytes store lipids as a single large drop and are metabolically less active .
Their effectiveness at storing large amounts of fat is witnessed in obese individuals .
The number and type of adipocytes depends on the tissue and location , and vary among individuals in the population .
The mesenchymal cell is a multipotent adult stem cell .
These cells can differentiate into any type of connective tissue cells needed for repair and healing of damaged tissue .
The macrophage cell is a large cell derived from a monocyte , a type of blood cell , which enters the connective tissue matrix from the blood vessels .
The macrophage cells are an essential component of the immune system , which is the body ’ s defense against potential pathogens and degraded host cells .
When stimulated , macrophages release cytokines , small proteins that act as chemical messengers .
Cytokines recruit other cells of the immune system to infected sites and stimulate their activities .
Roaming , or free , macrophages move rapidly by amoeboid movement , engulfing infectious agents and cellular debris .
In contrast , fixed macrophages are permanent residents of their tissues .
The mast cell , found in connective tissue proper , has many cytoplasmic granules .
These granules contain the chemical signals histamine and heparin .
When irritated or damaged , mast cells release histamine , an inflammatory mediator , which causes vasodilation and increased blood flow at a site of injury or infection , along with itching , swelling , and redness you recognize as an allergic response .
Like blood cells , mast cells are derived from hematopoietic stem cells and are part of the immune system .
Three main types of fibers are secreted by fibroblasts : collagen fibers , elastic fibers , and reticular fibers .
Collagen fiber is made from fibrous protein subunits linked together to form a long and straight fiber .
Collagen fibers , while flexible , have great tensile strength , resist stretching , and give ligaments and tendons their characteristic resilience and strength .
These fibers hold connective tissues together , even during the movement of the body .
Elastic fiber contains the protein elastin along with lesser amounts of other proteins and glycoproteins .
The main property of elastin is that after being stretched or compressed , it will return to its original shape .
Elastic fibers are prominent in elastic tissues found in skin and the elastic ligaments of the vertebral column .
Reticular fiber is also formed from the same protein subunits as collagen fibers ; however , these fibers remain narrow and are arrayed in a branching network .
All of these fiber types are embedded in ground substance .
Secreted by fibroblasts , ground substance is made of polysaccharides , specifically hyaluronic acid , and proteins .
These combine to form a proteoglycan with a protein core and polysaccharide branches .
The proteoglycan attracts and traps available moisture forming the clear , viscous , colorless matrix you now know as ground substance .
Loose connective tissue is found between many organs where it acts both to absorb shock and bind tissues together .
It allows water , salts , and various nutrients to diffuse through to adjacent or imbedded cells and tissues .
Adipose tissue consists mostly of fat storage cells , with little extracellular matrix ( Figure 4.13 ) .
A large number of capillaries allow rapid storage and mobilization of lipid molecules .
White adipose tissue is most abundant .
It can appear yellow and owes its color to carotene and related pigments from plant food .
White fat contributes mostly to lipid storage and can serve as insulation from cold temperatures and mechanical injuries .
White adipose tissue can be found protecting the kidneys and cushioning the back of the eye .
Brown adipose tissue is more common in infants , hence the term “ baby fat. ” In adults , there is a reduced amount of brown fat and it is found mainly in the neck and clavicular regions of the body .
The many mitochondria in the cytoplasm of brown adipose tissue help explain its efficiency at metabolizing stored fat .
Brown adipose tissue is thermogenic , meaning that as it breaks down fats , it releases metabolic heat , rather than producing adenosine triphosphate ( ATP ) , a key molecule used in metabolism .
Areolar tissue shows little specialization .
It contains all the cell types and fibers previously described and is distributed in a random , web-like fashion .
It fills the spaces between muscle fibers , surrounds blood and lymph vessels , and supports organs in the abdominal cavity .
Areolar tissue underlies most epithelia and represents the connective tissue component of epithelial membranes , which are described further in a later section .
Reticular tissue is a mesh-like , supportive framework for soft organs such as lymphatic tissue , the spleen , and the liver ( Figure 4.14 ) .
Reticular cells produce the reticular fibers that form the network onto which other cells attach .
It derives its name from the Latin reticulus , which means “ little net. ” Dense connective tissue contains more collagen fibers than does loose connective tissue .
As a consequence , it displays greater resistance to stretching .
There are two major categories of dense connective tissue : regular and irregular .
Dense regular connective tissue fibers are parallel to each other , enhancing tensile strength and resistance to stretching in the direction of the fiber orientations .
Ligaments and tendons are made of dense regular connective tissue , but in ligaments not all fibers are parallel .
Dense regular elastic tissue contains elastin fibers in addition to collagen fibers , which allows the ligament to return to its original length after stretching .
The ligaments in the vocal folds and between the vertebrae in the vertebral column are elastic .
In dense irregular connective tissue , the direction of fibers is random .
This arrangement gives the tissue greater strength in all directions and less strength in one particular direction .
In some tissues , fibers crisscross and form a mesh .
In other tissues , stretching in several directions is achieved by alternating layers where fibers run in the same orientation in each layer , and it is the layers themselves that are stacked at an angle .
The dermis of the skin is an example of dense irregular connective tissue rich in collagen fibers .
Dense irregular elastic tissues give arterial walls the strength and the ability to regain original shape after stretching ( Figure 4.15 ) .
Your opponent stands ready as you prepare to hit the serve , but you are confident that you will smash the ball past your opponent .
As you toss the ball high in the air , a burning pain shoots across your wrist and you drop the tennis racket .
That dull ache in the wrist that you ignored through the summer is now an unbearable pain .
The game is over for now .
After examining your swollen wrist , the doctor in the emergency room announces that you have developed wrist tendinitis .
She recommends icing the tender area , taking non-steroidal anti-inflammatory medication to ease the pain and to reduce swelling , and complete rest for a few weeks .
She interrupts your protests that you can not stop playing .
She issues a stern warning about the risk of aggravating the condition and the possibility of surgery .
She consoles you by mentioning that well known tennis players such as Venus and Serena Williams and Rafael Nadal have also suffered from tendinitis related injuries .
What is tendinitis and how did it happen ?
Tendinitis is the inflammation of a tendon , the thick band of fibrous connective tissue that attaches a muscle to a bone .
The condition causes pain and tenderness in the area around a joint .
On rare occasions , a sudden serious injury will cause tendinitis .
Most often , the condition results from repetitive motions over time that strain the tendons needed to perform the tasks .
Persons whose jobs and hobbies involve performing the same movements over and over again are often at the greatest risk of tendinitis .
You hear of tennis and golfer ’ s elbow , jumper 's knee , and swimmer ’ s shoulder .
In all cases , overuse of the joint causes a microtrauma that initiates the inflammatory response .
Tendinitis is routinely diagnosed through a clinical examination .
In case of severe pain , X-rays can be examined to rule out the possibility of a bone injury .
Severe cases of tendinitis can even tear loose a tendon .
Surgical repair of a tendon is painful .
Connective tissue in the tendon does not have abundant blood supply and heals slowly .
While older adults are at risk for tendinitis because the elasticity of tendon tissue decreases with age , active people of all ages can develop tendinitis .
Young athletes , dancers , and computer operators ; anyone who performs the same movements constantly is at risk for tendinitis .
Although repetitive motions are unavoidable in many activities and may lead to tendinitis , precautions can be taken that can lessen the probability of developing tendinitis .
For active individuals , stretches before exercising and cross training or changing exercises are recommended .
For the passionate athlete , it may be time to take some lessons to improve technique .
All of the preventive measures aim to increase the strength of the tendon and decrease the stress put on it .
With proper rest and managed care , you will be back on the court to hit that slice-spin serve over the net .
Watch this animation ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/tendonitis ) to learn more about tendonitis , a painful condition caused by swollen or injured tendons .
Two major forms of supportive connective tissue , cartilage and bone , allow the body to maintain its posture and protect internal organs .
The distinctive appearance of cartilage is due to polysaccharides called chondroitin sulfates , which bind with ground substance proteins to form proteoglycans .
Embedded within the cartilage matrix are chondrocytes , or cartilage cells , and the space they occupy are called lacunae ( singular = lacuna ) .
A layer of dense irregular connective tissue , the perichondrium , encapsulates the cartilage .
Cartilaginous tissue is avascular , thus all nutrients need to diffuse through the matrix to reach the chondrocytes .
This is a factor contributing to the very slow healing of cartilaginous tissues .
The three main types of cartilage tissue are hyaline cartilage , fibrocartilage , and elastic cartilage ( Figure 4.16 ) .
Hyaline cartilage , the most common type of cartilage in the body , consists of short and dispersed collagen fibers and contains large amounts of proteoglycans .
Under the microscope , tissue samples appear clear .
The surface of hyaline cartilage is smooth .
Both strong and flexible , it is found in the rib cage and nose and covers bones where they meet to form moveable joints .
It makes up a template of the embryonic skeleton before bone formation .
A plate of hyaline cartilage at the ends of bone allows continued growth until adulthood .
Fibrocartilage is tough because it has thick bundles of collagen fibers dispersed through its matrix .
Menisci in the knee joint and the intervertebral discs are examples of fibrocartilage .
Elastic cartilage contains elastic fibers as well as collagen and proteoglycans .
This tissue gives rigid support as well as elasticity .
Tug gently at your ear lobes , and notice that the lobes return to their initial shape .
The external ear contains elastic cartilage .
Bone is the hardest connective tissue .
It provides protection to internal organs and supports the body .
Bone ’ s rigid extracellular matrix contains mostly collagen fibers embedded in a mineralized ground substance containing hydroxyapatite , a form of calcium phosphate .
Both components of the matrix , organic and inorganic , contribute to the unusual properties of bone .
Without collagen , bones would be brittle and shatter easily .
Without mineral crystals , bones would flex and provide little support .
Osteocytes , bone cells like chondrocytes , are located within lacunae .
The histology of transverse tissue from long bone shows a typical arrangement of osteocytes in concentric circles around a central canal .
Bone is a highly vascularized tissue .
Unlike cartilage , bone tissue can recover from injuries in a relatively short time .
Cancellous bone looks like a sponge under the microscope and contains empty spaces between trabeculae , or arches of bone proper .
It is lighter than compact bone and found in the interior of some bones and at the end of long bones .
Compact bone is solid and has greater structural strength .
Blood and lymph are fluid connective tissues .
Cells circulate in a liquid extracellular matrix .
The formed elements circulating in blood are all derived from hematopoietic stem cells located in bone marrow ( Figure 4.17 ) .
Erythrocytes , red blood cells , transport oxygen and some carbon dioxide .
Leukocytes , white blood cells , are responsible for defending against potentially harmful microorganisms or molecules .
Platelets are cell fragments involved in blood clotting .
Some white blood cells have the ability to cross the endothelial layer that lines blood vessels and enter adjacent tissues .
Nutrients , salts , and wastes are dissolved in the liquid matrix and transported through the body .
Lymph contains a liquid matrix and white blood cells .
Lymphatic capillaries are extremely permeable , allowing larger molecules and excess fluid from interstitial spaces to enter the lymphatic vessels .
Lymph drains into blood vessels , delivering molecules to the blood that could not otherwise directly enter the bloodstream .
In this way , specialized lymphatic capillaries transport absorbed fats away from the intestine and deliver these molecules to the blood .
the University View at Cardiovascular % 20System/081-3_HISTO_40X.svs/view.apml explore the tissue sample in greater detail .
of Michigan Webscope http : //virtualslides.med.umich.edu/Histology/ to ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/cardiovascular ) Visit this link ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/10quiz ) to test your connective tissue knowledge with this 10-question quiz .
Can you name the 10 tissue types shown in the histology slides ?
By the end of this section , you will be able to : Identify the three types of muscle tissue Compare and contrast the functions of each muscle tissue type Explain how muscle tissue can enable motion Muscle tissue is characterized by properties that allow movement .
Muscle cells are excitable ; they respond to a stimulus .
They are contractile , meaning they can shorten and generate a pulling force .
When attached between two movable objects , in other words , bones , contractions of the muscles cause the bones to move .
Some muscle movement is voluntary , which means it is under conscious control .
For example , a person decides to open a book and read a chapter on anatomy .
Other movements are involuntary , meaning they are not under conscious control , such as the contraction of your pupil in bright light .
Muscle tissue is classified into three types according to structure and function : skeletal , cardiac , and smooth ( Table 4.2 ) .
Skeletal muscle is attached to bones and its contraction makes possible locomotion , facial expressions , posture , and other voluntary movements of the body .
Forty percent of your body mass is made up of skeletal muscle .
Skeletal muscles generate heat as a byproduct of their contraction and thus participate in thermal homeostasis .
Shivering is an involuntary contraction of skeletal muscles in response to perceived lower than normal body temperature .
The muscle cell , or myocyte , develops from myoblasts derived from the mesoderm .
Myocytes and their numbers remain relatively constant throughout life .
Skeletal muscle tissue is arranged in bundles surrounded by connective tissue .
Under the light microscope , muscle cells appear striated with many nuclei squeezed along the membranes .
The striation is due to the regular alternation of the contractile proteins actin and myosin , along with the structural proteins that couple the contractile proteins to connective tissues .
The cells are multinucleated as a result of the fusion of the many myoblasts that fuse to form each long muscle fiber .
Cardiac muscle forms the contractile walls of the heart .
The cells of cardiac muscle , known as cardiomyocytes , also appear striated under the microscope .
Unlike skeletal muscle fibers , cardiomyocytes are single cells typically with a single centrally located nucleus .
A principal characteristic of cardiomyocytes is that they contract on their own intrinsic rhythms without any external stimulation .
Cardiomyocyte attach to one another with specialized cell junctions called intercalated discs .
Intercalated discs have both anchoring junctions and gap junctions .
Attached cells form long , branching cardiac muscle fibers that are , essentially , a mechanical and electrochemical syncytium allowing the cells to synchronize their actions .
The cardiac muscle pumps blood through the body and is under involuntary control .
The attachment junctions hold adjacent cells together across the dynamic pressures changes of the cardiac cycle .
Smooth muscle tissue contraction is responsible for involuntary movements in the internal organs .
It forms the contractile component of the digestive , urinary , and reproductive systems as well as the airways and arteries .
Each cell is spindle shaped with a single nucleus and no visible striations ( Figure 4.18 ) .
Watch this video ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/musctissue ) to learn more about muscle tissue .
In looking through a microscope how could you distinguish skeletal muscle tissue from smooth muscle ?
Two main classes of cells make up nervous tissue : the neuron and neuroglia ( Figure 4.19 ) .
Neurons propagate information via electrochemical impulses , called action potentials , which are biochemically linked to the release of chemical signals .
Neuroglia play an essential role in supporting neurons and modulating their information propagation .
Follow this link ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/nobel ) to learn more about nervous tissue .
What are the main parts of a nerve cell ?
Neurons display distinctive morphology , well suited to their role as conducting cells , with three main parts .
The cell body includes most of the cytoplasm , the organelles , and the nucleus .
Dendrites branch off the cell body and appear as thin extensions .
A long “ tail , ” the axon , extends from the neuron body and can be wrapped in an insulating layer known as myelin , which is formed by accessory cells .
The synapse is the gap between nerve cells , or between a nerve cell and its target , for example , a muscle or a gland , across which the impulse is transmitted by chemical compounds known as neurotransmitters .
Neurons categorized as multipolar neurons have several dendrites and a single prominent axon .
Bipolar neurons possess a single dendrite and axon with the cell body , while unipolar neurons have only a single process extending out from the cell body , which divides into a functional dendrite and into a functional axon .
When a neuron is sufficiently stimulated , it generates an action potential that propagates down the axon towards the synapse .
If enough neurotransmitters are released at the synapse to stimulate the next neuron or target , a response is generated .
The second class of neural cells comprises the neuroglia or glial cells , which have been characterized as having a simple support role .
The word “ glia ” comes from the Greek word for glue .
Recent research is shedding light on the more complex role of neuroglia in the function of the brain and nervous system .
Astrocyte cells , named for their distinctive star shape , are abundant in the central nervous system .
The astrocytes have many functions , including regulation of ion concentration in the intercellular space , uptake and/or breakdown of some neurotransmitters , and formation of the blood-brain barrier , the membrane that separates the circulatory system from the brain .
Microglia protect the nervous system against infection but are not nervous tissue because they are related to macrophages .
Oligodendrocyte cells produce myelin in the central nervous system ( brain and spinal cord ) while the Schwann cell produces myelin in the peripheral nervous system ( Figure 4.20 ) .
In the former case , understanding how tissues respond to damage can guide strategies to aid repair .
In the latter case , understanding the impact of aging can help in the search for ways to diminish its effects .
Inflammation is the standard , initial response of the body to injury .
Whether biological , chemical , physical , or radiation burns , all injuries lead to the same sequence of physiological events .
Inflammation limits the extent of injury , partially or fully eliminates the cause of injury , and initiates repair and regeneration of damaged tissue .
Necrosis , or accidental cell death , causes inflammation .
Apoptosis is programmed cell death , a normal step-by-step process that destroys cells no longer needed by the body .
By mechanisms still under investigation , apoptosis does not initiate the inflammatory response .
Acute inflammation resolves over time by the healing of tissue .
If inflammation persists , it becomes chronic and leads to diseased conditions .
Arthritis and tuberculosis are examples of chronic inflammation .
Cornelius Celsus is credited with documenting these signs during the days of the Roman Empire , as early as the first century AD .
A fifth sign , loss of function , may also accompany inflammation .
Upon tissue injury , damaged cells release inflammatory chemical signals that evoke local vasodilation , the widening of the blood vessels .
Increased blood flow results in apparent redness and heat .
In response to injury , mast cells present in tissue degranulate , releasing the potent vasodilator histamine .
Increased blood flow and inflammatory mediators recruit white blood cells to the site of inflammation .
The endothelium lining the local blood vessel becomes “ leaky ” under the influence of histamine and other inflammatory mediators allowing neutrophils , macrophages , and fluid to move from the blood into the interstitial tissue spaces .
The excess liquid in tissue causes swelling , more properly called edema .
The swollen tissues squeezing pain receptors cause the sensation of pain .
Prostaglandins released from injured cells also activate pain neurons .
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs ( NSAIDs ) reduce pain because they inhibit the synthesis of prostaglandins .
High levels of NSAIDs reduce inflammation .
Antihistamines decrease allergies by blocking histamine receptors and as a result the histamine response .
After containment of an injury , the tissue repair phase starts with removal of toxins and waste products .
Clotting ( coagulation ) reduces blood loss from damaged blood vessels and forms a network of fibrin proteins that trap blood cells and bind the edges of the wound together .
A scab forms when the clot dries , reducing the risk of infection .
Sometimes a mixture of dead leukocytes and fluid called pus accumulates in the wound .
As healing progresses , fibroblasts from the surrounding connective tissues replace the collagen and extracellular material lost by the injury .
Angiogenesis , the growth of new blood vessels , results in vascularization of the new tissue known as granulation tissue .
The clot retracts pulling the edges of the wound together , and it slowly dissolves as the tissue is repaired .
When a large amount of granulation tissue forms and capillaries disappear , a pale scar is often visible in the healed area .
A primary union describes the healing of a wound where the edges are close together .
When there is a gaping wound , it takes longer to refill the area with cells and collagen .
The process called secondary union occurs as the edges of the wound are pulled together by what is called wound contraction .
When a wound is more than one quarter of an inch deep , sutures ( stitches ) are recommended to promote a primary union and avoid the formation of a disfiguring scar .
Regeneration is the addition of new cells of the same type as the ones that were injured ( Figure 4.21 ) .
Watch this video ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/healinghand ) to see a hand heal .
Over what period of time do you think these images were taken ?
According to poet Ralph Waldo Emerson , “ The surest poison is time. ” In fact , biology confirms that many functions of the body decline with age .
All the cells , tissues , and organs are affected by senescence , with noticeable variability between individuals owing to different genetic makeup and lifestyles .
The outward signs of aging are easily recognizable .
The skin and other tissues become thinner and drier , reducing their elasticity , contributing to wrinkles and high blood pressure .
Hair turns gray because follicles produce less melanin , the brown pigment of hair and the iris of the eye .
The face looks flabby because elastic and collagen fibers decrease in connective tissue and muscle tone is lost .
Glasses and hearing aids may become parts of life as the senses slowly deteriorate , all due to reduced elasticity .
Overall height decreases as the bones lose calcium and other minerals .
With age , fluid decreases in the fibrous cartilage disks intercalated between the vertebrae in the spine .
Joints lose cartilage and stiffen .
Many tissues , including those in muscles , lose mass through a process called atrophy .
Lumps and rigidity become more widespread .
As a consequence , the passageways , blood vessels , and airways become more rigid .
The brain and spinal cord lose mass .
Nerves do not transmit impulses with the same speed and frequency as in the past .
Some loss of thought clarity and memory can accompany aging .
More severe problems are not necessarily associated with the aging process and may be symptoms of underlying illness .
As exterior signs of aging increase , so do the interior signs , which are not as noticeable .
The incidence of heart diseases , respiratory syndromes , and type 2 diabetes increases with age , though these are not necessarily age-dependent effects .
Wound healing is slower in the elderly , accompanied by a higher frequency of infection as the capacity of the immune system to fend off pathogen declines .
Aging is also apparent at the cellular level because all cells experience changes with aging .
Telomeres , regions of the chromosomes necessary for cell division , shorten each time cells divide .
As they do , cells are less able to divide and regenerate .
Because of alterations in cell membranes , transport of oxygen and nutrients into the cell and removal of carbon dioxide and waste products from the cell are not as efficient in the elderly .
Cells may begin to function abnormally , which may lead to diseases associated with aging , including arthritis , memory issues , and some cancers .
The progressive impact of aging on the body varies considerably among individuals , but Studies indicate , however , that exercise and healthy lifestyle choices can slow down the deterioration of the body that comes with old age .
Cancer is a generic term for many diseases in which cells escape regulatory signals .
Uncontrolled growth , invasion into adjacent tissues , and colonization of other organs , if not treated early enough , are its hallmarks .
Health suffers when tumors “ rob ” blood supply from the “ normal ” organs .
A mutation is defined as a permanent change in the DNA of a cell .
Epigenetic modifications , changes that do not affect the code of the DNA but alter how the DNA is decoded , are also known to generate abnormal cells .
Alterations in the genetic material may be caused by environmental agents , infectious agents , or errors in the replication of DNA that accumulate with age .
Many mutations do not cause any noticeable change in the functions of a cell .
However , if the modification affects key proteins that have an impact on the cell ’ s ability to proliferate in an orderly fashion , the cell starts to divide abnormally .
As changes in cells accumulate , they lose their ability to form regular tissues .
A tumor , a mass of cells displaying abnormal architecture , forms in the tissue .
Many tumors are benign , meaning they do not metastasize nor cause disease .
A tumor becomes malignant , or cancerous , when it breaches the confines of its tissue , promotes angiogenesis , attracts the growth of capillaries , and metastasizes to other organs ( Figure 4.22 ) .
The specific names of cancers reflect the tissue of origin .
Cancers derived from epithelial cells are referred to as carcinomas .
Cancer in myeloid tissue or blood cells form myelomas .
Leukemias are cancers of white blood cells , whereas sarcomas derive from connective tissue .
Cells in tumors differ both in structure and function .
Some cells , called cancer stem cells , appear to be a subtype of cell responsible for uncontrolled growth .
Recent research shows that contrary to what was previously assumed , tumors are not disorganized masses of cells , but have their own structures .
Watch this video ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/tumor ) to learn more about tumors .
What is a tumor ?
Cancer treatments vary depending on the disease ’ s type and stage .
Traditional approaches , including surgery , radiation , chemotherapy , and hormonal therapy , aim to remove or kill rapidly dividing cancer cells , but these strategies have their limitations .
Depending on a tumor ’ s location , for example , cancer surgeons may be unable to remove it .
Radiation and chemotherapy are difficult , and it is often impossible to target only the cancer cells .
The treatments inevitably destroy healthy tissue as well .
To address this , researchers are working on pharmaceuticals that can target specific proteins implicated in cancer-associated molecular pathways .
Do you think about covering it with makeup , adding a tattoo , or maybe a body piercing ?
Or do you think about the fact that the skin belongs to one of the body ’ s most essential and dynamic systems : the integumentary system ?
The integumentary system refers to the skin and its accessory structures , and it is responsible for much more than simply lending to your outward appearance .
In the adult human body , the skin makes up about 16 percent of body weight and covers an area of 1.5 to 2 m .
In fact , the skin and accessory structures are the largest organ system in the human body .
As such , the skin protects your inner organs and it is in need of daily care and protection to maintain its health .
This chapter will introduce the structure and functions of the integumentary system , as well as some of the diseases , disorders , and injuries that can affect this system .
The skin and its accessory structures make up the integumentary system , which provides the body with overall protection .
The skin is made of multiple layers of cells and tissues , which are held to underlying structures by connective tissue ( Figure 5.2 ) .
The deeper layer of skin is well vascularized ( has numerous blood vessels ) .
It also has numerous sensory , and autonomic and sympathetic nerve fibers ensuring communication to and from the brain .
The skin consists of two main layers and a closely associated layer .
View this animation ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/ l/layers ) to learn more about layers of the skin .
What are the basic functions of each of these layers ?
The epidermis is composed of keratinized , stratified squamous epithelium .
It is made of four or five layers of epithelial cells , depending on its location in the body .
It does not have any blood vessels within it ( i.e. , it is avascular ) .
Skin that has four layers of cells is referred to as “ thin skin. ” From deep to superficial , these layers are the stratum basale , stratum spinosum , stratum granulosum , and stratum corneum .
Most of the skin can be classified as thin skin .
“ Thick skin ” is found only on the palms of the hands and the soles of the feet .
It has a fifth layer , called the stratum lucidum , located between the stratum corneum and the stratum granulosum ( Figure 5.3 ) .
The cells in all of the layers except the stratum basale are called keratinocytes .
A keratinocyte is a cell that manufactures and stores the protein keratin .
Keratin is an intracellular fibrous protein that gives hair , nails , and skin their hardness and water-resistant properties .
The keratinocytes in the stratum corneum are dead and regularly slough away , being replaced by cells from the deeper layers ( Figure 5.4 ) .
View the University of Michigan WebScope at http : //virtualslides.med_umich.edu/Histology/Basic % 20Tissues/ Epithelium % 20and % 20CT/106_HISTO_40X.svs/view.apml ?
to explore the tissue sample in greater detail .
If you zoom on the cells at the outermost layer of this section of skin , what do you notice about the cells ?
( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/Epidermis ) The stratum basale ( also called the stratum germinativum ) is the deepest epidermal layer and attaches the epidermis to the basal lamina , below which lie the layers of the dermis .
The cells in the stratum basale bond to the dermis via intertwining collagen fibers , referred to as the basement membrane .
A finger-like projection , or fold , known as the dermal papilla ( plural = dermal papillae ) is found in the superficial portion of the dermis .
Dermal papillae increase the strength of the connection between the epidermis and dermis ; the greater the folding , the stronger the connections made ( Figure 5.5 ) .
The stratum basale is a single layer of cells primarily made of basal cells .
A basal cell is a cuboidal-shaped stem cell that is a precursor of the keratinocytes of the epidermis .
All of the keratinocytes are produced from this single layer of cells , which are constantly going through mitosis to produce new cells .
As new cells are formed , the existing cells are pushed superficially away from the stratum basale .
Two other cell types are found dispersed among the basal cells in the stratum basale .
The first is a Merkel cell , which functions as a receptor and is responsible for stimulating sensory nerves that the brain perceives as touch .
These cells are especially abundant on the surfaces of the hands and feet .
The second is a melanocyte , a cell that produces the pigment melanin .
Melanin gives hair and skin its color , and also helps protect the living cells of the epidermis from ultraviolet ( UV ) radiation damage .
In a growing fetus , fingerprints form where the cells of the stratum basale meet the papillae of the underlying dermal layer ( papillary layer ) , resulting in the formation of the ridges on your fingers that you recognize as fingerprints .
Fingerprints are unique to each individual and are used for forensic analyses because the patterns do not change with the growth and aging processes .
As the name suggests , the stratum spinosum is spiny in appearance due to the protruding cell processes that join the cells via a structure called a desmosome .
The desmosomes interlock with each other and strengthen the bond between the cells .
It is interesting to note that the “ spiny ” nature of this layer is an artifact of the staining process .
Unstained epidermis samples do not exhibit this characteristic appearance .
The stratum spinosum is composed of eight to 10 layers of keratinocytes , formed as a result of cell division in the stratum basale ( Figure 5.6 ) .
Interspersed among the keratinocytes of this layer is a type of dendritic cell called the Langerhans cell , which functions as a macrophage by engulfing bacteria , foreign particles , and damaged cells that occur in this layer .
View the University of Michigan WebScope at http : //virtualslides.med.umich.edu/Histology/EMsmallCharts/ 3 % 20Image % 20Scope % 20finals/065 % 20- % 20Epidermis_001.svs/view.apml ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/ basal ) to explore the tissue sample in greater detail .
If you zoom on the cells at the outermost layer of this section of skin , what do you notice about the cells ?
The keratinocytes in the stratum spinosum begin the synthesis of keratin and release a water-repelling glycolipid that helps prevent water loss from the body , making the skin relatively waterproof .
As new keratinocytes are produced atop the stratum basale , the keratinocytes of the stratum spinosum are pushed into the stratum granulosum .
The stratum granulosum has a grainy appearance due to further changes to the keratinocytes as they are pushed from the stratum spinosum .
The cells ( three to five layers deep ) become flatter , their cell membranes thicken , and they generate large amounts of the proteins keratin , which is fibrous , and keratohyalin , which accumulates as lamellar granules within the cells ( see Figure 5.5 ) .
These two proteins make up the bulk of the keratinocyte mass in the stratum granulosum and give the layer its grainy appearance .
The nuclei and other cell organelles disintegrate as the cells die , leaving behind the keratin , keratohyalin , and cell membranes that will form the stratum lucidum , the stratum corneum , and the accessory structures of hair and nails .
The stratum lucidum is a smooth , seemingly translucent layer of the epidermis located just above the stratum granulosum and below the stratum corneum .
This thin layer of cells is found only in the thick skin of the palms , soles , and digits .
The keratinocytes that compose the stratum lucidum are dead and flattened ( see Figure 5.5 ) .
These cells are densely packed with eleiden , a clear protein rich in lipids , derived from keratohyalin , which gives these cells their transparent ( i.e. , lucid ) appearance and provides a barrier to water .
The stratum corneum is the most superficial layer of the epidermis and is the layer exposed to the outside environment ( see Figure 5.5 ) .
The increased keratinization ( also called cornification ) of the cells in this layer gives it its name .
There are usually 15 to 30 layers of cells in the stratum corneum .
This dry , dead layer helps prevent the penetration of microbes and the dehydration of underlying tissues , and provides a mechanical protection against abrasion for the more delicate , underlying layers .
Cells in this layer are shed periodically and are replaced by cells pushed up from the stratum granulosum ( or stratum lucidum in the case of the palms and soles of feet ) .
The entire layer is replaced during a period of about 4 weeks .
Cosmetic procedures , such as microdermabrasion , help remove some of the dry , upper layer and aim to keep the skin looking “ fresh ” and healthy .
The dermis might be considered the “ core ” of the integumentary system ( derma= “ skin ” ) , as distinct from the epidermis ( epi= “ upon ” or “ over ” ) and hypodermis ( hypo= “ below ” ) .
It contains blood and lymph vessels , nerves , and other structures , such as hair follicles and sweat glands .
The dermis is made of two layers of connective tissue that compose an interconnected mesh of elastin and collagenous fibers , produced by fibroblasts ( Figure 5.7 ) .
The papillary layer is made of loose , areolar connective tissue , which means the collagen and elastin fibers of this layer form a loose mesh .
This superficial layer of the dermis projects into the stratum basale of the epidermis to form finger-like dermal papillae ( see Figure 5.7 ) .
Within the papillary layer are fibroblasts , a small number of fat cells ( adipocytes ) , and an abundance of small blood vessels .
In addition , the papillary layer contains phagocytes , defensive cells that help fight bacteria or other infections that have breached the skin .
This layer also contains lymphatic capillaries , nerve fibers , and touch receptors called the Meissner corpuscles .
Underlying the papillary layer is the much thicker reticular layer , composed of dense , irregular connective tissue .
This layer is well vascularized and has a rich sensory and sympathetic nerve supply .
The reticular layer appears reticulated ( netlike ) due to a tight meshwork of fibers .
Elastin fibers provide some elasticity to the skin , enabling movement .
Collagen fibers provide structure and tensile strength , with strands of collagen extending into both the papillary layer and the hypodermis .
In addition , collagen binds water to keep the skin hydrated .
Collagen injections and Retin-A creams help restore skin turgor by either introducing collagen externally or stimulating blood flow and repair of the dermis , respectively .
The hypodermis ( also called the subcutaneous layer or superficial fascia ) is a layer directly below the dermis and serves to connect the skin to the underlying fascia ( fibrous tissue ) of the bones and muscles .
It is not strictly a part of the skin , although the border between the hypodermis and dermis can be difficult to distinguish .
The hypodermis consists of wellvascularized , loose , areolar connective tissue and adipose tissue , which functions as a mode of fat storage and provides insulation and cushioning for the integument .
The hypodermis is home to most of the fat that concerns people when they are trying to keep their weight under control .
Adipose tissue present in the hypodermis consists of fat-storing cells called adipocytes .
This stored fat can serve as an energy reserve , insulate the body to prevent heat loss , and act as a cushion to protect underlying structures from trauma .
Where the fat is deposited and accumulates within the hypodermis depends on hormones ( testosterone , estrogen , insulin , glucagon , leptin , and others ) , as well as genetic factors .
Fat distribution changes as our bodies mature and age .
Men tend to accumulate fat in different areas ( neck , arms , lower back , and abdomen ) than do women ( breasts , hips , thighs , and buttocks ) .
The body mass index ( BMI ) is often used as a measure of fat , although this measure is , in fact , derived from a mathematical formula that compares body weight ( mass ) to height .
Therefore , its accuracy as a health indicator can be called into question in individuals who are extremely physically fit .
In many animals , there is a pattern of storing excess calories as fat to be used in times when food is not readily available .
In much of the developed world , insufficient exercise coupled with the ready availability and consumption of high-calorie foods have resulted in unwanted accumulations of adipose tissue in many people .
Although periodic accumulation of excess fat may have provided an evolutionary advantage to our ancestors , who experienced unpredictable bouts of famine , it is now becoming chronic and considered a major health threat .
Recent studies indicate that a distressing percentage of our population is overweight and/or clinically obese .
Not only is this a problem for the individuals affected , but it also has a severe impact on our healthcare system .
Changes in lifestyle , specifically in diet and exercise , are the best ways to control body fat accumulation , especially when it reaches levels that increase the risk of heart disease and diabetes .
The color of skin is influenced by a number of pigments , including melanin , carotene , and hemoglobin .
Recall that melanin is produced by cells called melanocytes , which are found scattered throughout the stratum basale of the epidermis .
The melanin is transferred into the keratinocytes via a cellular vesicle called a melanosome ( Figure 5.8 ) .
Melanin occurs in two primary forms .
Eumelanin exists as black and brown , whereas pheomelanin provides a red color .
Dark-skinned individuals produce more melanin than those with pale skin .
Exposure to the UV rays of the sun or a tanning salon causes melanin to be manufactured and built up in keratinocytes , as sun exposure stimulates keratinocytes to secrete chemicals that stimulate melanocytes .
The accumulation of melanin in keratinocytes results in the darkening of the skin , or a tan .
This increased melanin accumulation protects the DNA of epidermal cells from UV ray damage and the breakdown of folic acid , a nutrient necessary for our health and well-being .
In contrast , too much melanin can interfere with the production of vitamin D , an important nutrient involved in calcium absorption .
Thus , the amount of melanin present in our skin is dependent on a balance between available sunlight and folic acid destruction , and protection from UV radiation and vitamin D production .
It requires about 10 days after initial sun exposure for melanin synthesis to peak , which is why pale-skinned individuals tend to suffer sunburns of the epidermis initially .
Dark-skinned individuals can also get sunburns , but are more protected than are pale-skinned individuals .
Melanosomes are temporary structures that are eventually destroyed by fusion with lysosomes ; this fact , along with melanin-filled keratinocytes in the stratum corneum sloughing off , makes tanning impermanent .
Too much sun exposure can eventually lead to wrinkling due to the destruction of the cellular structure of the skin , and in severe cases , can cause sufficient DNA damage to result in skin cancer .
When there is an irregular accumulation of melanocytes in the skin , freckles appear .
Moles are larger masses of melanocytes , and although most are benign , they should be monitored for changes that might indicate the presence of cancer ( Figure 5.9 ) .
The first thing a clinician sees is the skin , and so the examination of the skin should be part of any thorough physical examination .
Most skin disorders are relatively benign , but a few , including melanomas , can be fatal if untreated .
A couple of the more noticeable disorders , albinism and vitiligo , affect the appearance of the skin and its accessory organs .
Although neither is fatal , it would be hard to claim that they are benign , at least to the individuals so afflicted .
Albinism is a genetic disorder that affects ( completely or partially ) the coloring of skin , hair , and eyes .
The defect is primarily due to the inability of melanocytes to produce melanin .
Individuals with albinism tend to appear white or very pale due to the lack of melanin in their skin and hair .
Recall that melanin helps protect the skin from the harmful effects of UV radiation .
Individuals with albinism tend to need more protection from UV radiation , as they are more prone to sunburns and skin cancer .
They also tend to be more sensitive to light and have vision problems due to the lack of pigmentation on the retinal wall .
Treatment of this disorder usually involves addressing the symptoms , such as limiting UV light exposure to the skin and eyes .
In vitiligo , the melanocytes in certain areas lose their ability to produce melanin , possibly due to an autoimmune reaction .
This leads to a loss of color in patches ( Figure 5.10 ) .
Neither albinism nor vitiligo directly affects the lifespan of an individual .
Other changes in the appearance of skin coloration can be indicative of diseases associated with other body systems .
Liver disease or liver cancer can cause the accumulation of bile and the yellow pigment bilirubin , leading to the skin appearing yellow or jaundiced ( jaune is the French word for “ yellow ” ) .
Tumors of the pituitary gland can result in the secretion of large amounts of melanocyte-stimulating hormone ( MSH ) , which results in a darkening of the skin .
Similarly , Addison ’ s disease can stimulate the release of excess amounts of adrenocorticotropic hormone ( ACTH ) , which can give the skin a deep bronze color .
A sudden drop in oxygenation can affect skin color , causing the skin to initially turn ashen ( white ) .
With a prolonged reduction in oxygen levels , dark red deoxyhemoglobin becomes dominant in the blood , making the skin appear blue , a condition referred to as cyanosis ( kyanos is the Greek word for “ blue ” ) .
This happens when the oxygen supply is restricted , as when someone is experiencing difficulty in breathing because of asthma or a heart attack .
However , in these cases the effect on skin color has nothing do with the skin ’ s pigmentation .
This ABC video follows the story of a pair of fraternal African-American twins , one of whom is albino .
Watch this video ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/albino ) to learn about the challenges these children and their family face .
Which ethnicities do you think are exempt from the possibility of albinism ?
These structures embryologically originate from the epidermis and can extend down through the dermis into the hypodermis .
Hair is a keratinous filament growing out of the epidermis .
It is primarily made of dead , keratinized cells .
Strands of hair originate in an epidermal penetration of the dermis called the hair follicle .
The hair shaft is the part of the hair not anchored to the follicle , and much of this is exposed at the skin ’ s surface .
The rest of the hair , which is anchored in the follicle , lies below the surface of the skin and is referred to as the hair root .
The hair root ends deep in the dermis at the hair bulb , and includes a layer of mitotically active basal cells called the hair matrix .
The hair bulb surrounds the hair papilla , which is made of connective tissue and contains blood capillaries and nerve endings from the dermis ( Figure 5.11 ) .
The medulla forms the central core of the hair , which is surrounded by the cortex , a layer of compressed , keratinized cells that is covered by an outer layer of very hard , keratinized cells known as the cuticle .
These layers are depicted in a longitudinal cross-section of the hair follicle ( Figure 5.12 ) , although not all hair has a medullary layer .
Hair texture ( straight , curly ) is determined by the shape and structure of the cortex , and to the extent that it is present , the medulla .
The shape and structure of these layers are , in turn , determined by the shape of the hair follicle .
Hair growth begins with the production of keratinocytes by the basal cells of the hair bulb .
As new cells are deposited at the hair bulb , the hair shaft is pushed through the follicle toward the surface .
Keratinization is completed as the cells are pushed to the skin surface to form the shaft of hair that is externally visible .
The external hair is completely dead and composed entirely of keratin .
For this reason , our hair does not have sensation .
Furthermore , you can cut your hair or shave without damaging the hair structure because the cut is superficial .
Most chemical hair removers also act superficially ; however , electrolysis and yanking both attempt to destroy the hair bulb so hair can not grow .
The wall of the hair follicle is made of three concentric layers of cells .
The cells of the internal root sheath surround the root of the growing hair and extend just up to the hair shaft .
They are derived from the basal cells of the hair matrix .
The external root sheath , which is an extension of the epidermis , encloses the hair root .
It is made of basal cells at the base of the hair root and tends to be more keratinous in the upper regions .
The glassy membrane is a thick , clear connective tissue sheath covering the hair root , connecting it to the tissue of the dermis .
The hair follicle is made of multiple layers of cells that form from basal cells in the hair matrix and the hair root .
Cells of the hair matrix divide and differentiate to form the layers of the hair .
Watch this video ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/ l/follicle ) to learn more about hair follicles .
Hair serves a variety of functions , including protection , sensory input , thermoregulation , and communication .
For example , hair on the head protects the skull from the sun .
The hair in the nose and ears , and around the eyes ( eyelashes ) defends the body by trapping and excluding dust particles that may contain allergens and microbes .
Hair of the eyebrows prevents sweat and other particles from dripping into and bothering the eyes .
Hair also has a sensory function due to sensory innervation by a hair root plexus surrounding the base of each hair follicle .
Hair is extremely sensitive to air movement or other disturbances in the environment , much more so than the skin surface .
This feature is also useful for the detection of the presence of insects or other potentially damaging substances on the skin surface .
This is visible in humans as goose bumps and even more obvious in animals , such as when a frightened cat raises its fur .
Of course , this is much more obvious in organisms with a heavier coat than most humans , such as dogs and cats .
Hair grows and is eventually shed and replaced by new hair .
This occurs in three phases .
The first is the anagen phase , during which cells divide rapidly at the root of the hair , pushing the hair shaft up and out .
The length of this phase is measured in years , typically from 2 to 7 years .
The catagen phase lasts only 2 to 3 weeks , and marks a transition from the hair follicle ’ s active growth .
Finally , during the telogen phase , the hair follicle is at rest and no new growth occurs .
At the end of this phase , which lasts about 2 to 4 months , another anagen phase begins .
The basal cells in the hair matrix then produce a new hair follicle , which pushes the old hair out as the growth cycle repeats itself .
Hair typically grows at the rate of 0.3 mm per day during the anagen phase .
On average , 50 hairs are lost and replaced per day .
Hair loss occurs if there is more hair shed than what is replaced and can happen due to hormonal or dietary changes .
Hair loss can also result from the aging process , or the influence of hormones .
Similar to the skin , hair gets its color from the pigment melanin , produced by melanocytes in the hair papilla .
Different hair color results from differences in the type of melanin , which is genetically determined .
As a person ages , the melanin production decreases , and hair tends to lose its color and becomes gray and/or white .
The nail bed is a specialized structure of the epidermis that is found at the tips of our fingers and toes .
The nail body is formed on the nail bed , and protects the tips of our fingers and toes as they are the farthest extremities and the parts of the body that experience the maximum mechanical stress ( Figure 5.13 ) .
In addition , the nail body forms a back-support for picking up small objects with the fingers .
The nail body is composed of densely packed dead keratinocytes .
The epidermis in this part of the body has evolved a specialized structure upon which nails can form .
The nail body forms at the nail root , which has a matrix of proliferating cells from the stratum basale that enables the nail to grow continuously .
The lateral nail fold overlaps the nail on the sides , helping to anchor the nail body .
The nail fold that meets the proximal end of the nail body forms the nail cuticle , also called the eponychium .
The nail bed is rich in blood vessels , making it appear pink , except at the base , where a thick layer of epithelium over the nail matrix forms a crescent-shaped region called the lunula ( the “ little moon ” ) .
The area beneath the free edge of the nail , furthest from the cuticle , is called the hyponychium .
It consists of a thickened layer of stratum corneum .
Nails are accessory structures of the integumentary system .
Visit this link ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/nails ) to learn more about the origin and growth of fingernails .
When the body becomes warm , sudoriferous glands produce sweat to cool the body .
Sweat glands develop from epidermal projections into the dermis and are classified as merocrine glands ; that is , the secretions are excreted by exocytosis through a duct without affecting the cells of the gland .
There are two types of sweat glands , each secreting slightly different products .
An eccrine sweat gland is type of gland that produces a hypotonic sweat for thermoregulation .
These glands are found all over the skin ’ s surface , but are especially abundant on the palms of the hand , the soles of the feet , and the forehead ( Figure 5.14 ) .
They are coiled glands lying deep in the dermis , with the duct rising up to a pore on the skin surface , where the sweat is released .
This type of sweat , released by exocytosis , is hypotonic and composed mostly of water , with some salt , antibodies , traces of metabolic waste , and dermicidin , an antimicrobial peptide .
Eccrine glands are a primary component of thermoregulation in humans and thus help to maintain homeostasis .
An apocrine sweat gland is usually associated with hair follicles in densely hairy areas , such as armpits and genital regions .
Apocrine sweat glands are larger than eccrine sweat glands and lie deeper in the dermis , sometimes even reaching the hypodermis , with the duct normally emptying into the hair follicle .
In addition to water and salts , apocrine sweat includes organic compounds that make the sweat thicker and subject to bacterial decomposition and subsequent smell .
The release of this sweat is under both nervous and hormonal control , and plays a role in the poorly understood human pheromone response .
Most commercial antiperspirants use an aluminum-based compound as their primary active ingredient to stop sweat .
When the antiperspirant enters the sweat gland duct , the aluminum-based compounds precipitate due to a change in pH and form a physical block in the duct , which prevents sweat from coming out of the pore .
Sweating regulates body temperature .
The composition of the sweat determines whether body odor is a byproduct of sweating .
Visit this link ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/sweating ) to learn more about sweating and body odor .
A sebaceous gland is a type of oil gland that is found all over the body and helps to lubricate and waterproof the skin and hair .
Most sebaceous glands are associated with hair follicles .
They generate and excrete sebum , a mixture of lipids , onto the skin surface , thereby naturally lubricating the dry and dead layer of keratinized cells of the stratum corneum , keeping it pliable .
The fatty acids of sebum also have antibacterial properties , and prevent water loss from the skin in low-humidity environments .
The secretion of sebum is stimulated by hormones , many of which do not become active until puberty .
Thus , sebaceous glands are relatively inactive during childhood .
The skin protects the rest of the body from the basic elements of nature such as wind , water , and UV sunlight .
It acts as a protective barrier against water loss , due to the presence of layers of keratin and glycolipids in the stratum corneum .
It also is the first line of defense against abrasive activity due to contact with grit , microbes , or harmful chemicals .
Sweat excreted from sweat glands deters microbes from over-colonizing the skin surface by generating dermicidin , which has antibiotic properties .
The word “ armor ” evokes several images .
You might think of a Roman centurion or a medieval knight in a suit of armor .
The skin , in its own way , functions as a form of armor—body armor .
It provides a barrier between your vital , life-sustaining organs and the influence of outside elements that could potentially damage them .
For any form of armor , a breach in the protective barrier poses a danger .
The skin can be breached when a child skins a knee or an adult has blood drawn—one is accidental and the other medically necessary .
However , you also breach this barrier when you choose to “ accessorize ” your skin with a tattoo or body piercing .
Because the needles involved in producing body art and piercings must penetrate the skin , there are dangers associated with the practice .
These include allergic reactions ; skin infections ; blood-borne diseases , such as tetanus , hepatitis C , and hepatitis D ; and the growth of scar tissue .
Despite the risk , the practice of piercing the skin for decorative purposes has become increasingly popular .
According to the American Academy of Dermatology , 24 percent of people from ages 18 to 50 have a tattoo .
Tattooing has a long history , dating back thousands of years ago .
The dyes used in tattooing typically derive from metals .
A person with tattoos should be cautious when having a magnetic resonance imaging ( MRI ) scan because an MRI machine uses powerful magnets to create images of the soft tissues of the body , which could react with the metals contained in the tattoo dyes .
Watch this video ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/tattoo ) to learn more about tattooing .
The fact that you can feel an ant crawling on your skin , allowing you to flick it off before it bites , is because the skin , and especially the hairs projecting from hair follicles in the skin , can sense changes in the environment .
The skin acts as a sense organ because the epidermis , dermis , and the hypodermis contain specialized sensory nerve structures that detect touch , surface temperature , and pain .
Merkel cells , seen scattered in the stratum basale , are also touch receptors .
In addition to these specialized receptors , there are sensory nerves connected to each hair follicle , pain and temperature receptors scattered throughout the skin , and motor nerves innervate the arrector pili muscles and glands .
This rich innervation helps us sense our environment and react accordingly .
The integumentary system helps regulate body temperature through its tight association with the sympathetic nervous system , the division of the nervous system involved in our fight-or-flight responses .
The sympathetic nervous system is continuously monitoring body temperature and initiating appropriate motor responses .
Recall that sweat glands , accessory structures to the skin , secrete water , salt , and other substances to cool the body when it becomes warm .
Even when the body does not appear to be noticeably sweating , approximately 500 mL of sweat ( insensible perspiration ) are secreted a day .
When the sweat evaporates from the skin surface , the body is cooled as body heat is dissipated .
In addition to sweating , arterioles in the dermis dilate so that excess heat carried by the blood can dissipate through the skin and into the surrounding environment ( Figure 5.16b ) .
This accounts for the skin redness that many people experience when exercising .
When body temperatures drop , the arterioles constrict to minimize heat loss , particularly in the ends of the digits and tip of the nose .
This reduced circulation can result in the skin taking on a whitish hue .
Although the temperature of the skin drops as a result , passive heat loss is prevented , and internal organs and structures remain warm .
If the temperature of the skin drops too much ( such as environmental temperatures below freezing ) , the conservation of body core heat can result in the skin actually freezing , a condition called frostbite .
All systems in the body accumulate subtle and some not-so-subtle changes as a person ages .
Among these changes are reductions in cell division , metabolic activity , blood circulation , hormonal levels , and muscle strength ( Figure 5.17 ) .
In the skin , these changes are reflected in decreased mitosis in the stratum basale , leading to a thinner epidermis .
The dermis , which is responsible for the elasticity and resilience of the skin , exhibits a reduced ability to regenerate , which leads to slower wound healing .
The hypodermis , with its fat stores , loses structure due to the reduction and redistribution of fat , which in turn contributes to the thinning and sagging of skin .
The accessory structures also have lowered activity , generating thinner hair and nails , and reduced amounts of sebum and sweat .
A reduced sweating ability can cause some elderly to be intolerant to extreme heat .
Other cells in the skin , such as melanocytes and dendritic cells , also become less active , leading to a paler skin tone and lowered immunity .
Wrinkling of the skin occurs due to breakdown of its structure , which results from decreased collagen and elastin production in the dermis , weakening of muscles lying under the skin , and the inability of the skin to retain adequate moisture .
Many anti-aging products can be found in stores today .
In general , these products try to rehydrate the skin and thereby fill out the wrinkles , and some stimulate skin growth using hormones and growth factors .
Additionally , invasive techniques include collagen injections to plump the tissue and injections of BOTOX ( the name brand of the botulinum neurotoxin ) that paralyze the muscles that crease the skin and cause wrinkling .
The epidermal layer of human skin synthesizes vitamin D when exposed to UV radiation .
In the presence of sunlight , a form of vitamin D called cholecalciferol is synthesized from a derivative of the steroid cholesterol in the skin .
The liver converts cholecalciferol to calcidiol , which is then converted to calcitriol ( the active chemical form of the vitamin ) in the kidneys .
Vitamin D is essential for normal absorption of calcium and phosphorous , which are required for healthy bones .
The absence of sun exposure can lead to a lack of vitamin D in the body , leading to a condition called rickets , a painful condition in children where the bones are misshapen due to a lack of calcium , causing bowleggedness .
Elderly individuals who suffer from vitamin D deficiency can develop a condition called osteomalacia , a softening of the bones .
In present day society , vitamin D is added as a supplement to many foods , including milk and orange juice , compensating for the need for sun exposure .
In addition to its essential role in bone health , vitamin D is essential for general immunity against bacterial , viral , and fungal infections .
Recent studies are also finding a link between insufficient vitamin D and cancer .
These range from annoying but relatively benign bacterial or fungal infections that are categorized as disorders , to skin cancer and severe burns , which can be fatal .
In this section , you will learn several of the most common skin conditions .
One of the most talked about diseases is skin cancer .
Cancer is a broad term that describes diseases caused by abnormal cells in the body dividing uncontrollably .
Most cancers are identified by the organ or tissue in which the cancer originates .
One common form of cancer is skin cancer .
The Skin Cancer Foundation reports that one in five Americans will experience some type of skin cancer in their lifetime .
The degradation of the ozone layer in the atmosphere and the resulting increase in exposure to UV radiation has contributed to its rise .
Overexposure to UV radiation damages DNA , which can lead to the formation of cancerous lesions .
Although melanin offers some protection against DNA damage from the sun , often it is not enough .
The fact that cancers can also occur on areas of the body that are normally not exposed to UV radiation suggests that there are additional factors that can lead to cancerous lesions .
In general , cancers result from an accumulation of DNA mutations .
These mutations can result in cell populations that do not die when they should and uncontrolled cell proliferation that leads to tumors .
Although many tumors are benign ( harmless ) , some produce cells that can mobilize and establish tumors in other organs of the body ; this process is referred to as metastasis .
Cancers are characterized by their ability to metastasize .
Basal cell carcinoma is a form of cancer that affects the mitotically active stem cells in the stratum basale of the epidermis .
It is the most common of all cancers that occur in the United States and is frequently found on the head , neck , arms , and back , which are areas that are most susceptible to long-term sun exposure .
Although UV rays are the main culprit , exposure to other agents , such as radiation and arsenic , can also lead to this type of cancer .
Wounds on the skin due to open sores , tattoos , burns , etc .
may be predisposing factors as well .
Basal cell carcinomas start in the stratum basale and usually spread along this boundary .
At some point , they begin to grow toward the surface and become an uneven patch , bump , growth , or scar on the skin surface ( Figure 5.18 ) .
Like most cancers , basal cell carcinomas respond best to treatment when caught early .
Treatment options include surgery , freezing ( cryosurgery ) , and topical ointments ( Mayo Clinic 2012 ) .
Squamous cell carcinoma is a cancer that affects the keratinocytes of the stratum spinosum and presents as lesions commonly found on the scalp , ears , and hands ( Figure 5.19 ) .
It is the second most common skin cancer .
The American Cancer Society reports that two of 10 skin cancers are squamous cell carcinomas , and it is more aggressive than basal cell carcinoma .
If not removed , these carcinomas can metastasize .
Surgery and radiation are used to cure squamous cell carcinoma .
A melanoma is a cancer characterized by the uncontrolled growth of melanocytes , the pigment-producing cells in the epidermis .
Typically , a melanoma develops from a mole .
It is the most fatal of all skin cancers , as it is highly metastatic and can be difficult to detect before it has spread to other organs .
Melanomas usually appear as asymmetrical brown and black patches with uneven borders and a raised surface ( Figure 5.20 ) .
Treatment typically involves surgical excision and immunotherapy .
Doctors often give their patients the following ABCDE mnemonic to help with the diagnosis of early-stage melanoma .
If you observe a mole on your body displaying these signs , consult a doctor .
Eczema is an inflammatory condition and occurs in individuals of all ages .
Acne involves the clogging of pores , which can lead to infection and inflammation , and is often seen in adolescents .
Other disorders , not discussed here , include seborrheic dermatitis ( on the scalp ) , psoriasis , cold sores , impetigo , scabies , hives , and warts .
Eczema is an allergic reaction that manifests as dry , itchy patches of skin that resemble rashes ( Figure 5.21 ) .
It may be accompanied by swelling of the skin , flaking , and in severe cases , bleeding .
Many who suffer from eczema have antibodies against dust mites in their blood , but the link between eczema and allergy to dust mites has not been proven .
Symptoms are usually managed with moisturizers , corticosteroid creams , and immunosuppressants .
Acne is a skin disturbance that typically occurs on areas of the skin that are rich in sebaceous glands ( face and back ) .
It is most common along with the onset of puberty due to associated hormonal changes , but can also occur in infants and continue into adulthood .
Hormones , such as androgens , stimulate the release of sebum .
An overproduction and accumulation of sebum along with keratin can block hair follicles .
This plug is initially white .
The sebum , when oxidized by exposure to air , turns black .
Acne results from infection by acne-causing bacteria ( Propionibacterium and Staphylococcus ) , which can lead to redness and potential scarring due to the natural wound healing process ( Figure 5.22 ) .
Have you ever had a skin rash that did not respond to over-the-counter creams , or a mole that you were concerned about ?
Dermatologists help patients with these types of problems and more , on a daily basis .
Dermatologists are medical doctors who specialize in diagnosing and treating skin disorders .
Like all medical doctors , dermatologists earn a medical degree and then complete several years of residency training .
In addition , dermatologists may then participate in a dermatology fellowship or complete additional , specialized training in a dermatology practice .
If practicing in the United States , dermatologists must pass the United States Medical Licensing Exam ( USMLE ) , become licensed in their state of practice , and be certified by the American Board of Dermatology .
Most dermatologists work in a medical office or private-practice setting .
They diagnose skin conditions and rashes , prescribe oral and topical medications to treat skin conditions , and may perform simple procedures , such as mole or wart removal .
In addition , they may refer patients to an oncologist if skin cancer that has metastasized is suspected .
Recently , cosmetic procedures have also become a prominent part of dermatology .
Botox injections , laser treatments , and collagen and dermal filler injections are popular among patients , hoping to reduce the appearance of skin aging .
Dermatology is a competitive specialty in medicine .
Limited openings in dermatology residency programs mean that many medical students compete for a few select spots .
Dermatology is an appealing specialty to many prospective doctors , because unlike emergency room physicians or surgeons , dermatologists generally do not have to work excessive hours or be “ on-call ” weekends and holidays .
Moreover , the popularity of cosmetic dermatology has made it a growing field with many lucrative opportunities .
It is not unusual for dermatology clinics to market themselves exclusively as cosmetic dermatology centers , and for dermatologists to specialize exclusively in these procedures .
Consider visiting a dermatologist to talk about why he or she entered the field and what the field of dermatology is like .
Visit this site ( http : //www.Diplomaguide.com ) for additional information .
Because the skin is the part of our bodies that meets the world most directly , it is especially vulnerable to injury .
Injuries include burns and wounds , as well as scars and calluses .
They can be caused by sharp objects , heat , or excessive pressure or friction to the skin .
Skin injuries set off a healing process that occurs in several overlapping stages .
The first step to repairing damaged skin is the formation of a blood clot that helps stop the flow of blood and scabs over with time .
Many different types of cells are involved in wound repair , especially if the surface area that needs repair is extensive .
Before the basal stem cells of the stratum basale can recreate the epidermis , fibroblasts mobilize and divide rapidly to repair the damaged tissue by collagen deposition , forming granulation tissue .
Blood capillaries follow the fibroblasts and help increase blood circulation and oxygen supply to the area .
Immune cells , such as macrophages , roam the area and engulf any foreign matter to reduce the chance of infection .
A burn results when the skin is damaged by intense heat , radiation , electricity , or chemicals .
The damage results in the death of skin cells , which can lead to a massive loss of fluid .
Dehydration , electrolyte imbalance , and renal and circulatory failure follow , which can be fatal .
Burn patients are treated with intravenous fluids to offset dehydration , as well as intravenous nutrients that enable the body to repair tissues and replace lost proteins .
Another serious threat to the lives of burn patients is infection .
Burned skin is extremely susceptible to bacteria and other pathogens , due to the loss of protection by intact layers of skin .
Burns are sometimes measured in terms of the size of the total surface area affected .
This is referred to as the “ rule of nines , ” which associates specific anatomical areas with a percentage that is a factor of nine ( Figure 5.23 ) .
Burns are also classified by the degree of their severity .
A first-degree burn is a superficial burn that affects only the epidermis .
Although the skin may be painful and swollen , these burns typically heal on their own within a few days .
Mild sunburn fits into the category of a first-degree burn .
A second-degree burn goes deeper and affects both the epidermis and a portion of the dermis .
These burns result in swelling and a painful blistering of the skin .
It is important to keep the burn site clean and sterile to prevent infection .
If this is done , the burn will heal within several weeks .
A third-degree burn fully extends into the epidermis and dermis , destroying the tissue and affecting the nerve endings and sensory function .
These are serious burns that may appear white , red , or black ; they require medical attention and will heal slowly without it .
A fourth-degree burn is even more severe , affecting the underlying muscle and bone .
Oddly , third and fourth-degree burns are usually not as painful because the nerve endings themselves are damaged .
Skin grafts are required when the damage from trauma or infection can not be closed with sutures or staples .
Watch this video ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/skingraft ) to learn more about skin grafting procedures .
Most cuts or wounds , with the exception of ones that only scratch the surface ( the epidermis ) , lead to scar formation .
A scar is collagen-rich skin formed after the process of wound healing that differs from normal skin .
Scarring occurs in cases in which there is repair of skin damage , but the skin fails to regenerate the original skin structure .
Fibroblasts generate scar tissue in the form of collagen , and the bulk of repair is due to the basket-weave pattern generated by collagen fibers and does not result in regeneration of the typical cellular structure of skin .
Instead , the tissue is fibrous in nature and does not allow for the regeneration of accessory structures , such as hair follicles , sweat glands , or sebaceous glands .
Sometimes , there is an overproduction of scar tissue , because the process of collagen formation does not stop when the wound is healed ; this results in the formation of a raised or hypertrophic scar called a keloid .
In contrast , scars that result from acne and chickenpox have a sunken appearance and are called atrophic scars .
Scarring of skin after wound healing is a natural process and does not need to be treated further .
Application of mineral oil and lotions may reduce the formation of scar tissue .
However , modern cosmetic procedures , such as dermabrasion , laser treatments , and filler injections have been invented as remedies for severe scarring .
All of these procedures try to reorganize the structure of the epidermis and underlying collagen tissue to make it look more natural .
Skin and its underlying tissue can be affected by excessive pressure .
One example of this is called a bedsore .
Bedsores , also called decubitis ulcers , are caused by constant , long-term , unrelieved pressure on certain body parts that are bony , reducing blood flow to the area and leading to necrosis ( tissue death ) .
Bedsores are most common in elderly patients who have debilitating conditions that cause them to be immobile .
Most hospitals and long-term care facilities have the practice of turning the patients every few hours to prevent the incidence of bedsores .
If left untreated by removal of necrotized tissue , bedsores can be fatal if they become infected .
The skin can also be affected by pressure associated with rapid growth .
A stretch mark results when the dermis is stretched beyond its limits of elasticity , as the skin stretches to accommodate the excess pressure .
Stretch marks usually accompany rapid weight gain during puberty and pregnancy .
They initially have a reddish hue , but lighten over time .
Other than for cosmetic reasons , treatment of stretch marks is not required .
They occur most commonly over the hips and abdomen .
When you wear shoes that do not fit well and are a constant source of abrasion on your toes , you tend to form a callus at the point of contact .
This occurs because the basal stem cells in the stratum basale are triggered to divide more often to increase the thickness of the skin at the point of abrasion to protect the rest of the body from further damage .
This is an example of a minor or local injury , and the skin manages to react and treat the problem independent of the rest of the body .
Calluses can also form on your fingers if they are subject to constant mechanical stress , such as long periods of writing , playing string instruments , or video games .
A corn is a specialized form of callus .
Corns form from abrasions on the skin that result from an elliptical-type motion .
While the soft tissue of a once living organism will decay and fall away over time , bone tissue will , under the right conditions , undergo a process of mineralization , effectively turning the bone to stone .
A well-preserved fossil skeleton can give us a good sense of the size and shape of an organism , just as your skeleton helps to define your size and shape .
Unlike a fossil skeleton , however , your skeleton is a structure of living tissue that grows , repairs , and renews itself .
The bones within it are dynamic and complex organs that serve a number of important functions , including some necessary to maintain homeostasis .
In the areas of the skeleton where bones move ( for example , the ribcage and joints ) , cartilage , a semi-rigid form of connective tissue , provides flexibility and smooth surfaces for movement .
Simply by looking at a person , you can see how the bones support , facilitate movement , and protect the human body .
Just as the steel beams of a building provide a scaffold to support its weight , the bones and cartilage of your skeletal system compose the scaffold that supports the rest of your body .
Without the skeletal system , you would be a limp mass of organs , muscle , and skin .
Bones also facilitate movement by serving as points of attachment for your muscles .
While some bones only serve as a support for the muscles , others also transmit the forces produced when your muscles contract .
From a mechanical point of view , bones act as levers and joints serve as fulcrums ( Figure 6.2 ) .
Unless a muscle spans a joint and contracts , a bone is not going to move .
For information on the interaction of the skeletal and muscular systems , that is , the musculoskeletal system , seek additional content .
Bones also protect internal organs from injury by covering or surrounding them .
For example , your ribs protect your lungs and heart , the bones of your vertebral column ( spine ) protect your spinal cord , and the bones of your cranium ( skull ) protect your brain ( Figure 6.3 ) .
An orthopedist is a doctor who specializes in diagnosing and treating disorders and injuries related to the musculoskeletal system .
Some orthopedic problems can be treated with medications , exercises , braces , and other devices , but others may be best treated with surgery ( Figure 6.4 ) .
While the origin of the word “ orthopedics ” ( ortho= “ straight ” ; paed= “ child ” ) , literally means “ straightening of the child , ” orthopedists can have patients who range from pediatric to geriatric .
In recent years , orthopedists have even performed prenatal surgery to correct spina bifida , a congenital defect in which the neural canal in the spine of the fetus fails to close completely during embryologic development .
Orthopedists commonly treat bone and joint injuries but they also treat other bone conditions including curvature of the spine .
Lateral curvatures ( scoliosis ) can be severe enough to slip under the shoulder blade ( scapula ) forcing it up as a hump .
Spinal curvatures can also be excessive dorsoventrally ( kyphosis ) causing a hunch back and thoracic compression .
These curvatures often appear in preteens as the result of poor posture , abnormal growth , or indeterminate causes .
Mostly , they are readily treated by orthopedists .
As people age , accumulated spinal column injuries and diseases like osteoporosis can also lead to curvatures of the spine , hence the stooping you sometimes see in the elderly .
Some orthopedists sub-specialize in sports medicine , which addresses both simple injuries , such as a sprained ankle , and complex injuries , such as a torn rotator cuff in the shoulder .
Treatment can range from exercise to surgery .
On a metabolic level , bone tissue performs several critical functions .
For one , the bone matrix acts as a reservoir for a number of minerals important to the functioning of the body , especially calcium , and phosphorus .
These minerals , incorporated into bone tissue , can be released back into the bloodstream to maintain levels needed to support physiological processes .
Calcium ions , for example , are essential for muscle contractions and controlling the flow of other ions involved in the transmission of nerve impulses .
Bone also serves as a site for fat storage and blood cell production .
The softer connective tissue that fills the interior of most bone is referred to as bone marrow ( Figure 6.5 ) .
There are two types of bone marrow : yellow marrow and red marrow .
Yellow marrow contains adipose tissue ; the triglycerides stored in the adipocytes of the tissue can serve as a source of energy .
Red marrow is where hematopoiesis —the production of blood cells—takes place .
Red blood cells , white blood cells , and platelets are all produced in the red marrow .
By the end of this section , you will be able to : Classify bones according to their shapes Describe the function of each category of bones The 206 bones that compose the adult skeleton are divided into five categories based on their shapes ( Figure 6.6 ) .
Their shapes and their functions are related such that each categorical shape of bone has a distinct function .
A long bone is one that is cylindrical in shape , being longer than it is wide .
Keep in mind , however , that the term describes the shape of a bone , not its size .
Long bones are found in the arms ( humerus , ulna , radius ) and legs ( femur , tibia , fibula ) , as well as in the fingers ( metacarpals , phalanges ) and toes ( metatarsals , phalanges ) .
Long bones function as levers ; they move when muscles contract .
A short bone is one that is cube-like in shape , being approximately equal in length , width , and thickness .
The only short bones in the human skeleton are in the carpals of the wrists and the tarsals of the ankles .
Short bones provide stability and support as well as some limited motion .
The term “ flat bone ” is somewhat of a misnomer because , although a flat bone is typically thin , it is also often curved .
Examples include the cranial ( skull ) bones , the scapulae ( shoulder blades ) , the sternum ( breastbone ) , and the ribs .
Flat bones serve as points of attachment for muscles and often protect internal organs .
An irregular bone is one that does not have any easily characterized shape and therefore does not fit any other classification .
These bones tend to have more complex shapes , like the vertebrae that support the spinal cord and protect it from compressive forces .
Many facial bones , particularly the ones containing sinuses , are classified as irregular bones .
A sesamoid bone is a small , round bone that , as the name suggests , is shaped like a sesame seed .
These bones form in tendons ( the sheaths of tissue that connect bones to muscles ) where a great deal of pressure is generated in a joint .
The sesamoid bones protect tendons by helping them overcome compressive forces .
Sesamoid bones vary in number and placement from person to person but are typically found in tendons associated with the feet , hands , and knees .
The patellae ( singular = patella ) are the only sesamoid bones found in common with every person .
Table 6.1 reviews bone classifications with their associated features , functions , and examples .
Bone is hard and many of its functions depend on that characteristic hardness .
Later discussions in this chapter will show that bone is also dynamic in that its shape adjusts to accommodate stresses .
This section will examine the gross anatomy of bone first and then move on to its histology .
The structure of a long bone allows for the best visualization of all of the parts of a bone ( Figure 6.7 ) .
A long bone has two parts : the diaphysis and the epiphysis .
The diaphysis is the tubular shaft that runs between the proximal and distal ends of the bone .
The hollow region in the diaphysis is called the medullary cavity , which is filled with yellow marrow .
The walls of the diaphysis are composed of dense and hard compact bone .
The wider section at each end of the bone is called the epiphysis ( plural = epiphyses ) , which is filled with spongy bone .
Red marrow fills the spaces in the spongy bone .
Each epiphysis meets the diaphysis at the metaphysis , the narrow area that contains the epiphyseal plate ( growth plate ) , a layer of hyaline ( transparent ) cartilage in a growing bone .
When the bone stops growing in early adulthood ( approximately 18–21 years ) , the cartilage is replaced by osseous tissue and the epiphyseal plate becomes an epiphyseal line .
The medullary cavity has a delicate membranous lining called the endosteum ( end= “ inside ” ; oste= “ bone ” ) , where bone growth , repair , and remodeling occur .
The outer surface of the bone is covered with a fibrous membrane called the periosteum ( peri = “ around ” or “ surrounding ” ) .
The periosteum contains blood vessels , nerves , and lymphatic vessels that nourish compact bone .
Tendons and ligaments also attach to bones at the periosteum .
The periosteum covers the entire outer surface except where the epiphyses meet other bones to form joints ( Figure 6.8 ) .
In this region , the epiphyses are covered with articular cartilage , a thin layer of cartilage that reduces friction and acts as a shock absorber .
Flat bones , like those of the cranium , consist of a layer of diploë ( spongy bone ) , lined on either side by a layer of compact bone ( Figure 6.9 ) .
The two layers of compact bone and the interior spongy bone work together to protect the internal organs .
If the outer layer of a cranial bone fractures , the brain is still protected by the intact inner layer .
The surface features of bones vary considerably , depending on the function and location in the body .
Table 6.2 describes the bone markings , which are illustrated in ( Figure 6.10 ) .
There are three general classes of bone markings : ( 1 ) articulations , ( 2 ) projections , and ( 3 ) holes .
As the name implies , an articulation is where two bone surfaces come together ( articulus = “ joint ” ) .
These surfaces tend to conform to one another , such as one being rounded and the other cupped , to facilitate the function of the articulation .
A projection is an area of a bone that projects above the surface of the bone .
These are the attachment points for tendons and ligaments .
In general , their size and shape is an indication of the forces exerted through the attachment to the bone .
A hole is an opening or groove in the bone that allows blood vessels and nerves to enter the bone .
As with the other markings , their size and shape reflect the size of the vessels and nerves that penetrate the bone at these points .
Bone contains a relatively small number of cells entrenched in a matrix of collagen fibers that provide a surface for inorganic salt crystals to adhere .
These salt crystals form when calcium phosphate and calcium carbonate combine to create hydroxyapatite , which incorporates other inorganic salts like magnesium hydroxide , fluoride , and sulfate as it crystallizes , or calcifies , on the collagen fibers .
The hydroxyapatite crystals give bones their hardness and strength , while the collagen fibers give them flexibility so that they are not brittle .
Although bone cells compose a small amount of the bone volume , they are crucial to the function of bones .
Four types of cells are found within bone tissue : osteoblasts , osteocytes , osteogenic cells , and osteoclasts ( Figure 6.11 ) .
The osteoblast is the bone cell responsible for forming new bone and is found in the growing portions of bone , including the periosteum and endosteum .
Osteoblasts , which do not divide , synthesize and secrete the collagen matrix and calcium salts .
As the secreted matrix surrounding the osteoblast calcifies , the osteoblast become trapped within it ; as a result , it changes in structure and becomes an osteocyte , the primary cell of mature bone and the most common type of bone cell .
Each osteocyte is located in a space called a lacuna and is surrounded by bone tissue .
Osteocytes maintain the mineral concentration of the matrix via the secretion of enzymes .
Like osteoblasts , osteocytes lack mitotic activity .
They can communicate with each other and receive nutrients via long cytoplasmic processes that extend through canaliculi ( singular = canaliculus ) , channels within the bone matrix .
If osteoblasts and osteocytes are incapable of mitosis , then how are they replenished when old ones die ?
The answer lies in the properties of a third category of bone cells—the osteogenic cell .
These osteogenic cells are undifferentiated with high mitotic activity and they are the only bone cells that divide .
Immature osteogenic cells are found in the deep layers of the periosteum and the marrow .
They differentiate and develop into osteoblasts .
The dynamic nature of bone means that new tissue is constantly formed , and old , injured , or unnecessary bone is dissolved for repair or for calcium release .
The cell responsible for bone resorption , or breakdown , is the osteoclast .
They are found on bone surfaces , are multinucleated , and originate from monocytes and macrophages , two types of white blood cells , not from osteogenic cells .
Osteoclasts are continually breaking down old bone while osteoblasts are continually forming new bone .
The ongoing balance between osteoblasts and osteoclasts is responsible for the constant but subtle reshaping of bone .
Table 6.3 reviews the bone cells , their functions , and locations .
The differences between compact and spongy bone are best explored via their histology .
Most bones contain compact and spongy osseous tissue , but their distribution and concentration vary based on the bone ’ s overall function .
Compact bone is dense so that it can withstand compressive forces , while spongy ( cancellous ) bone has open spaces and supports shifts in weight distribution .
Compact bone is the denser , stronger of the two types of bone tissue ( Figure 6.12 ) .
It can be found under the periosteum and in the diaphyses of long bones , where it provides support and protection .
The microscopic structural unit of compact bone is called an osteon , or Haversian system .
Each osteon is composed of concentric rings of calcified matrix called lamellae ( singular = lamella ) .
Running down the center of each osteon is the central canal , or Haversian canal , which contains blood vessels , nerves , and lymphatic vessels .
These vessels and nerves branch off at right angles through a perforating canal , also known as Volkmann ’ s canals , to extend to the periosteum and endosteum .
The osteocytes are located inside spaces called lacunae ( singular = lacuna ) , found at the borders of adjacent lamellae .
As described earlier , canaliculi connect with the canaliculi of other lacunae and eventually with the central canal .
This system allows nutrients to be transported to the osteocytes and wastes to be removed from them .
Like compact bone , spongy bone , also known as cancellous bone , contains osteocytes housed in lacunae , but they are not arranged in concentric circles .
Instead , the lacunae and osteocytes are found in a lattice-like network of matrix spikes called trabeculae ( singular = trabecula ) ( Figure 6.13 ) .
The trabeculae may appear to be a random network , but each trabecula forms along lines of stress to provide strength to the bone .
The spaces of the trabeculated network provide balance to the dense and heavy compact bone by making bones lighter so that muscles can move them more easily .
In addition , the spaces in some spongy bones contain red marrow , protected by the trabeculae , where hematopoiesis occurs .
Paget ’ s disease usually occurs in adults over age 40 .
It is a disorder of the bone remodeling process that begins with overactive osteoclasts .
This means more bone is resorbed than is laid down .
The osteoblasts try to compensate but the new bone they lay down is weak and brittle and therefore prone to fracture .
While some people with Paget ’ s disease have no symptoms , others experience pain , bone fractures , and bone deformities ( Figure 6.14 ) .
Bones of the pelvis , skull , spine , and legs are the most commonly affected .
When occurring in the skull , Paget ’ s disease can cause headaches and hearing loss .
What causes the osteoclasts to become overactive ?
The answer is still unknown , but hereditary factors seem to play a role .
Some scientists believe Paget ’ s disease is due to an as-yet-unidentified virus .
Paget ’ s disease is diagnosed via imaging studies and lab tests .
X-rays may show bone deformities or areas of bone resorption .
Bone scans are also useful .
In these studies , a dye containing a radioactive ion is injected into the body .
Areas of bone resorption have an affinity for the ion , so they will light up on the scan if the ions are absorbed .
In addition , blood levels of an enzyme called alkaline phosphatase are typically elevated in people with Paget ’ s disease .
Bisphosphonates , drugs that decrease the activity of osteoclasts , are often used in the treatment of Paget ’ s disease .
However , in a small percentage of cases , bisphosphonates themselves have been linked to an increased risk of fractures because the old bone that is left after bisphosphonates are administered becomes worn out and brittle .
Still , most doctors feel that the benefits of bisphosphonates more than outweigh the risk ; the medical professional has to weigh the benefits and risks on a case-by-case basis .
Bisphosphonate treatment can reduce the overall risk of deformities or fractures , which in turn reduces the risk of surgical repair and its associated risks and complications .
The spongy bone and medullary cavity receive nourishment from arteries that pass through the compact bone .
The arteries enter through the nutrient foramen ( plural = foramina ) , small openings in the diaphysis ( Figure 6.15 ) .
The osteocytes in spongy bone are nourished by blood vessels of the periosteum that penetrate spongy bone and blood that circulates in the marrow cavities .
As the blood passes through the marrow cavities , it is collected by veins , which then pass out of the bone through the foramina .
In addition to the blood vessels , nerves follow the same paths into the bone where they tend to concentrate in the more metabolically active regions of the bone .
The nerves sense pain , and it appears the nerves also play roles in regulating blood supplies and in bone growth , hence their concentrations in metabolically active sites of the bone .
Watch this video ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/microbone ) to see the microscopic features of a bone .
By the sixth or seventh week of embryonic life , the actual process of bone development , ossification ( osteogenesis ) , begins .
There are two osteogenic pathways—intramembranous ossification and endochondral ossification—but bone is the same regardless of the pathway that produces it .
Bone is a replacement tissue ; that is , it uses a model tissue on which to lay down its mineral matrix .
For skeletal development , the most common template is cartilage .
During fetal development , a framework is laid down that determines where bones will form .
This framework is a flexible , semi-solid matrix produced by chondroblasts and consists of hyaluronic acid , chondroitin sulfate , collagen fibers , and water .
As the matrix surrounds and isolates chondroblasts , they are called chondrocytes .
Unlike most connective tissues , cartilage is avascular , meaning that it has no blood vessels supplying nutrients and removing metabolic wastes .
All of these functions are carried on by diffusion through the matrix .
This is why damaged cartilage does not repair itself as readily as most tissues do .
Throughout fetal development and into childhood growth and development , bone forms on the cartilaginous matrix .
By the time a fetus is born , most of the cartilage has been replaced with bone .
Some additional cartilage will be replaced throughout childhood , and some cartilage remains in the adult skeleton .
During intramembranous ossification , compact and spongy bone develops directly from sheets of mesenchymal ( undifferentiated ) connective tissue .
The flat bones of the face , most of the cranial bones , and the clavicles ( collarbones ) are formed via intramembranous ossification .
The process begins when mesenchymal cells in the embryonic skeleton gather together and begin to differentiate into specialized cells ( Figure 6.16a ) .
Some of these cells will differentiate into capillaries , while others will become osteogenic cells and then osteoblasts .
Although they will ultimately be spread out by the formation of bone tissue , early osteoblasts appear in a cluster called an ossification center .
The osteoblasts secrete osteoid , uncalcified matrix , which calcifies ( hardens ) within a few days as mineral salts are deposited on it , thereby entrapping the osteoblasts within .
Once entrapped , the osteoblasts become osteocytes ( Figure 6.16b ) .
As osteoblasts transform into osteocytes , osteogenic cells in the surrounding connective tissue differentiate into new osteoblasts .
Osteoid ( unmineralized bone matrix ) secreted around the capillaries results in a trabecular matrix , while osteoblasts on the surface of the spongy bone become the periosteum ( Figure 6.16c ) .
The periosteum then creates a protective layer of compact bone superficial to the trabecular bone .
The trabecular bone crowds nearby blood vessels , which eventually condense into red marrow ( Figure 6.16d ) .
Intramembranous ossification begins in utero during fetal development and continues on into adolescence .
At birth , the skull and clavicles are not fully ossified nor are the sutures of the skull closed .
This allows the skull and shoulders to deform during passage through the birth canal .
The last bones to ossify via intramembranous ossification are the flat bones of the face , which reach their adult size at the end of the adolescent growth spurt .
In endochondral ossification , bone develops by replacing hyaline cartilage .
Cartilage does not become bone .
Instead , cartilage serves as a template to be completely replaced by new bone .
Endochondral ossification takes much longer than intramembranous ossification .
Bones at the base of the skull and long bones form via endochondral ossification .
In a long bone , for example , at about 6 to 8 weeks after conception , some of the mesenchymal cells differentiate into chondrocytes ( cartilage cells ) that form the cartilaginous skeletal precursor of the bones ( Figure 6.17a ) .
Soon after , the perichondrium , a membrane that covers the cartilage , appears Figure 6.17b ) .
As more matrix is produced , the chondrocytes in the center of the cartilaginous model grow in size .
As the matrix calcifies , nutrients can no longer reach the chondrocytes .
This results in their death and the disintegration of the surrounding cartilage .
Blood vessels invade the resulting spaces , not only enlarging the cavities but also carrying osteogenic cells with them , many of which will become osteoblasts .
These enlarging spaces eventually combine to become the medullary cavity .
As the cartilage grows , capillaries penetrate it .
This penetration initiates the transformation of the perichondrium into the bone-producing periosteum .
Here , the osteoblasts form a periosteal collar of compact bone around the cartilage of the diaphysis .
By the second or third month of fetal life , bone cell development and ossification ramps up and creates the primary ossification center , a region deep in the periosteal collar where ossification begins ( Figure 6.17c ) .
While these deep changes are occurring , chondrocytes and cartilage continue to grow at the ends of the bone ( the future epiphyses ) , which increases the bone ’ s length at the same time bone is replacing cartilage in the diaphyses .
By the time the fetal skeleton is fully formed , cartilage only remains at the joint surface as articular cartilage and between the diaphysis and epiphysis as the epiphyseal plate , the latter of which is responsible for the longitudinal growth of bones .
The epiphyseal plate is the area of growth in a long bone .
It is a layer of hyaline cartilage where ossification occurs in immature bones .
On the epiphyseal side of the epiphyseal plate , cartilage is formed .
On the diaphyseal side , cartilage is ossified , and the diaphysis grows in length .
The epiphyseal plate is composed of four zones of cells and activity ( Figure 6.18 ) .
The reserve zone is the region closest to the epiphyseal end of the plate and contains small chondrocytes within the matrix .
These chondrocytes do not participate in bone growth but secure the epiphyseal plate to the osseous tissue of the epiphysis .
The proliferative zone is the next layer toward the diaphysis and contains stacks of slightly larger chondrocytes .
It makes new chondrocytes ( via mitosis ) to replace those that die at the diaphyseal end of the plate .
Chondrocytes in the next layer , the zone of maturation and hypertrophy , are older and larger than those in the proliferative zone .
The more mature cells are situated closer to the diaphyseal end of the plate .
The longitudinal growth of bone is a result of cellular division in the proliferative zone and the maturation of cells in the zone of maturation and hypertrophy .
Most of the chondrocytes in the zone of calcified matrix , the zone closest to the diaphysis , are dead because the matrix around them has calcified .
Capillaries and osteoblasts from the diaphysis penetrate this zone , and the osteoblasts secrete bone tissue on the remaining calcified cartilage .
Thus , the zone of calcified matrix connects the epiphyseal plate to the diaphysis .
A bone grows in length when osseous tissue is added to the diaphysis .
Bones continue to grow in length until early adulthood .
The rate of growth is controlled by hormones , which will be discussed later .
When the chondrocytes in the epiphyseal plate cease their proliferation and bone replaces the cartilage , longitudinal growth stops .
All that remains of the epiphyseal plate is the epiphyseal line ( Figure 6.19 ) .
While bones are increasing in length , they are also increasing in diameter ; growth in diameter can continue even after longitudinal growth ceases .
This is called appositional growth .
Osteoclasts resorb old bone that lines the medullary cavity , while osteoblasts , via intramembranous ossification , produce new bone tissue beneath the periosteum .
The erosion of old bone along the medullary cavity and the deposition of new bone beneath the periosteum not only increase the diameter of the diaphysis but also increase the diameter of the medullary cavity .
This process is called modeling .
The process in which matrix is resorbed on one surface of a bone and deposited on another is known as bone modeling .
Modeling primarily takes place during a bone ’ s growth .
However , in adult life , bone undergoes remodeling , in which resorption of old or damaged bone takes place on the same surface where osteoblasts lay new bone to replace that which is resorbed .
Injury , exercise , and other activities lead to remodeling .
Those influences are discussed later in the chapter , but even without injury or exercise , about 5 to 10 percent of the skeleton is remodeled annually just by destroying old bone and renewing it with fresh bone .
Osteogenesis imperfecta ( OI ) is a genetic disease in which bones do not form properly and therefore are fragile and break easily .
It is also called brittle bone disease .
The disease is present from birth and affects a person throughout life .
The genetic mutation that causes OI affects the body ’ s production of collagen , one of the critical components of bone matrix .
The severity of the disease can range from mild to severe .
Those with the most severe forms of the disease sustain many more fractures than those with a mild form .
Frequent and multiple fractures typically lead to bone deformities and short stature .
Bowing of the long bones and curvature of the spine are also common in people afflicted with OI .
Curvature of the spine makes breathing difficult because the lungs are compressed .
Because collagen is such an important structural protein in many parts of the body , people with OI may also experience fragile skin , weak muscles , loose joints , easy bruising , frequent nosebleeds , brittle teeth , blue sclera , and hearing loss .
There is no known cure for OI .
Treatment focuses on helping the person retain as much independence as possible while minimizing fractures and maximizing mobility .
Toward that end , safe exercises , like swimming , in which the body is less likely to experience collisions or compressive forces , are recommended .
Braces to support legs , ankles , knees , and wrists are used as needed .
Canes , walkers , or wheelchairs can also help compensate for weaknesses .
When bones do break , casts , splints , or wraps are used .
In some cases , metal rods may be surgically implanted into the long bones of the arms and legs .
Research is currently being conducted on using bisphosphonates to treat OI .
Smoking and being overweight are especially risky in people with OI , since smoking is known to weaken bones , and extra body weight puts additional stress on the bones .
Watch this video ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/bonegrows ) to see how a bone grows .
By the end of this section , you will be able to : Differentiate among the different types of fractures Describe the steps involved in bone repair A fracture is a broken bone .
It will heal whether or not a physician resets it in its anatomical position .
If the bone is not reset correctly , the healing process will keep the bone in its deformed position .
When a broken bone is manipulated and set into its natural position without surgery , the procedure is called a closed reduction .
Open reduction requires surgery to expose the fracture and reset the bone .
While some fractures can be minor , others are quite severe and result in grave complications .
For example , a fractured diaphysis of the femur has the potential to release fat globules into the bloodstream .
These can become lodged in the capillary beds of the lungs , leading to respiratory distress and if not treated quickly , death .
Fractures are classified by their complexity , location , and other features ( Figure 6.20 ) .
Table 6.4 outlines common types of fractures .
Some fractures may be described using more than one term because it may have the features of more than one type ( e.g. , an open transverse fracture ) .
When a bone breaks , blood flows from any vessel torn by the fracture .
These vessels could be in the periosteum , osteons , and/or medullary cavity .
The blood begins to clot , and about six to eight hours after the fracture , the clotting blood has formed a fracture hematoma ( Figure 6.21a ) .
The disruption of blood flow to the bone results in the death of bone cells around the fracture .
This stabilizes the fracture .
Over the next several weeks , osteoclasts resorb the dead bone ; osteogenic cells become active , divide , and differentiate into osteoblasts .
The cartilage in the calli is replaced by trabecular bone via endochondral ossification ( Figure 6.21c ) .
Eventually , the internal and external calli unite , compact bone replaces spongy bone at the outer margins of the fracture , and healing is complete .
A slight swelling may remain on the outer surface of the bone , but quite often , that region undergoes remodeling ( Figure 6.21d ) , and no external evidence of the fracture remains .
Visit this website ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/fracturequiz ) to review different types of fractures and then take a short self-assessment quiz .
The food you take in via your digestive system and the hormones secreted by your endocrine system affect your bones .
Even using your muscles to engage in exercise has an impact on your bones .
During long space missions , astronauts can lose approximately 1 to 2 percent of their bone mass per month .
This loss of bone mass is thought to be caused by the lack of mechanical stress on astronauts ’ bones due to the low gravitational forces in space .
Lack of mechanical stress causes bones to lose mineral salts and collagen fibers , and thus strength .
Similarly , mechanical stress stimulates the deposition of mineral salts and collagen fibers .
The internal and external structure of a bone will change as stress increases or decreases so that the bone is an ideal size and weight for the amount of activity it endures .
That is why people who exercise regularly have thicker bones than people who are more sedentary .
It is also why a broken bone in a cast atrophies while its contralateral mate maintains its concentration of mineral salts and collagen fibers .
The bones undergo remodeling as a result of forces ( or lack of forces ) placed on them .
Numerous , controlled studies have demonstrated that people who exercise regularly have greater bone density than those who are more sedentary .
Any type of exercise will stimulate the deposition of more bone tissue , but resistance training has a greater effect than cardiovascular activities .
Resistance training is especially important to slow down the eventual bone loss due to aging and for preventing osteoporosis .
The vitamins and minerals contained in all of the food we consume are important for all of our organ systems .
However , there are certain nutrients that affect bone health .
You already know that calcium is a critical component of bone , especially in the form of calcium phosphate and calcium carbonate .
Since the body can not make calcium , it must be obtained from the diet .
However , calcium can not be absorbed from the small intestine without vitamin D. Therefore , intake of vitamin D is also critical to bone health .
In addition to vitamin D ’ s role in calcium absorption , it also plays a role , though not as clearly understood , in bone remodeling .
Milk and other dairy foods are not the only sources of calcium .
This important nutrient is also found in green leafy vegetables , broccoli , and intact salmon and canned sardines with their soft bones .
Nuts , beans , seeds , and shellfish provide calcium in smaller quantities .
Except for fatty fish like salmon and tuna , or fortified milk or cereal , vitamin D is not found naturally in many foods .
Vitamin K also supports bone mineralization and may have a synergistic role with vitamin D in the regulation of bone growth .
Green leafy vegetables are a good source of vitamin K. The minerals magnesium and fluoride may also play a role in supporting bone health .
While magnesium is only found in trace amounts in the human body , more than 60 percent of it is in the skeleton , suggesting it plays a role in the structure of bone .
Fluoride can displace the hydroxyl group in bone ’ s hydroxyapatite crystals and form fluorapatite .
Similar to its effect on dental enamel , fluorapatite helps stabilize and strengthen bone mineral .
Fluoride can also enter spaces within hydroxyapatite crystals , thus increasing their density .
Omega-3 fatty acids have long been known to reduce inflammation in various parts of the body .
Inflammation can interfere with the function of osteoblasts , so consuming omega-3 fatty acids , in the diet or in supplements , may also help enhance production of new osseous tissue .
Table 6.5 summarizes the role of nutrients in bone health .
The endocrine system produces and secretes hormones , many of which interact with the skeletal system .
These hormones are involved in controlling bone growth , maintaining bone once it is formed , and remodeling it .
Several hormones are necessary for controlling bone growth and maintaining the bone matrix .
The pituitary gland secretes growth hormone ( GH ) , which , as its name implies , controls bone growth in several ways .
It triggers chondrocyte proliferation in epiphyseal plates , resulting in the increasing length of long bones .
GH also increases calcium retention , which enhances mineralization , and stimulates osteoblastic activity , which improves bone density .
GH is not alone in stimulating bone growth and maintaining osseous tissue .
Thyroxine , a hormone secreted by the thyroid gland promotes osteoblastic activity and the synthesis of bone matrix .
During puberty , the sex hormones ( estrogen in girls , testosterone in boys ) also come into play .
They too promote osteoblastic activity and production of bone matrix , and in addition , are responsible for the growth spurt that often occurs during adolescence .
They also promote the conversion of the epiphyseal plate to the epiphyseal line ( i.e. , cartilage to its bony remnant ) , thus bringing an end to the longitudinal growth of bones .
Additionally , calcitriol , the active form of vitamin D , is produced by the kidneys and stimulates the absorption of calcium and phosphate from the digestive tract .
Osteoporosis is a disease characterized by a decrease in bone mass that occurs when the rate of bone resorption exceeds the rate of bone formation , a common occurrence as the body ages .
Notice how this is different from Paget ’ s disease .
In Paget ’ s disease , new bone is formed in an attempt to keep up with the resorption by the overactive osteoclasts , but that new bone is produced haphazardly .
In fact , when a physician is evaluating a patient with thinning bone , he or she will test for osteoporosis and Paget ’ s disease ( as well as other diseases ) .
Osteoporosis does not have the elevated blood levels of alkaline phosphatase found in Paget ’ s disease .
While osteoporosis can involve any bone , it most commonly affects the proximal ends of the femur , vertebrae , and wrist .
As a result of the loss of bone density , the osseous tissue may not provide adequate support for everyday functions , and something as simple as a sneeze can cause a vertebral fracture .
When an elderly person falls and breaks a hip ( really , the femur ) , it is very likely the femur that broke first , which resulted in the fall .
Histologically , osteoporosis is characterized by a reduction in the thickness of compact bone and the number and size of trabeculae in cancellous bone .
Figure 6.23 shows that women lose bone mass more quickly than men starting at about 50 years of age .
This occurs because 50 is the approximate age at which women go through menopause .
Not only do their menstrual periods lessen and eventually cease , but their ovaries reduce in size and then cease the production of estrogen , a hormone that promotes osteoblastic activity and production of bone matrix .
Thus , osteoporosis is more common in women than in men , but men can develop it , too .
Anyone with a family history of osteoporosis has a greater risk of developing the disease , so the best treatment is prevention , which should start with a childhood diet that includes adequate intake of calcium and vitamin D and a lifestyle that includes weight-bearing exercise .
These actions , as discussed above , are important in building bone mass .
Promoting proper nutrition and weight-bearing exercise early in life can maximize bone mass before the age of 30 , thus reducing the risk of osteoporosis .
For many elderly people , a hip fracture can be life threatening .
Current treatments for managing osteoporosis include bisphosphonates ( the same medications often used in Paget ’ s disease ) , calcitonin , and estrogen ( for women only ) .
Minimizing the risk of falls , for example , by removing tripping hazards , is also an important step in managing the potential outcomes from the disease .
Bone modeling and remodeling require osteoclasts to resorb unneeded , damaged , or old bone , and osteoblasts to lay down new bone .
Two hormones that affect the osteoclasts are parathyroid hormone ( PTH ) and calcitonin .
PTH stimulates osteoclast proliferation and activity .
As a result , calcium is released from the bones into the circulation , thus increasing the calcium ion concentration in the blood .
PTH also promotes the reabsorption of calcium by the kidney tubules , which can affect calcium homeostasis ( see below ) .
The small intestine is also affected by PTH , albeit indirectly .
Because another function of PTH is to stimulate the synthesis of vitamin D , and because vitamin D promotes intestinal absorption of calcium , PTH indirectly increases calcium uptake by the small intestine .
Calcitonin , a hormone secreted by the thyroid gland , has some effects that counteract those of PTH .
Calcitonin inhibits osteoclast activity and stimulates calcium uptake by the bones , thus reducing the concentration of calcium ions in the blood .
As evidenced by their opposing functions in maintaining calcium homeostasis , PTH and calcitonin are generally not secreted at the same time .
Table 6.6 summarizes the hormones that influence the skeletal system .
Calcium ions are needed not only for bone mineralization but for tooth health , regulation of the heart rate and strength of contraction , blood coagulation , contraction of smooth and skeletal muscle cells , and regulation of nerve impulse conduction .
The normal level of calcium in the blood is about 10 mg/dL .
When the body can not maintain this level , a person will experience hypoor hypercalcemia .
Hypocalcemia , a condition characterized by abnormally low levels of calcium , can have an adverse effect on a number of different body systems including circulation , muscles , nerves , and bone .
Without adequate calcium , blood has difficulty coagulating , the heart may skip beats or stop beating altogether , muscles may have difficulty contracting , nerves may have difficulty functioning , and bones may become brittle .
The causes of hypocalcemia can range from hormonal imbalances to an improper diet .
Treatments vary according to the cause , but prognoses are generally good .
Conversely , in hypercalcemia , a condition characterized by abnormally high levels of calcium , the nervous system is underactive , which results in lethargy , sluggish reflexes , constipation and loss of appetite , confusion , and in severe cases , coma .
Obviously , calcium homeostasis is critical .
The skeletal , endocrine , and digestive systems play a role in this , but the kidneys do , too .
These body systems work together to maintain a normal calcium level in the blood ( Figure 6.24 ) .
Calcium is a chemical element that can not be produced by any biological processes .
The only way it can enter the body is through the diet .
The bones act as a storage site for calcium : The body deposits calcium in the bones when blood levels get too high , and it releases calcium when blood levels drop too low .
This process is regulated by PTH , vitamin D , and calcitonin .
Cells of the parathyroid gland have plasma membrane receptors for calcium .
When calcium is not binding to these receptors , the cells release PTH , which stimulates osteoclast proliferation and resorption of bone by osteoclasts .
This demineralization process releases calcium into the blood .
PTH promotes reabsorption of calcium from the urine by the kidneys , so that the calcium returns to the blood .
Finally , PTH stimulates the synthesis of vitamin D , which in turn , stimulates calcium absorption from any digested food in the small intestine .
When all these processes return blood calcium levels to normal , there is enough calcium to bind with the receptors on the surface of the cells of the parathyroid glands , and this cycle of events is turned off ( Figure 6.24 ) .
When blood levels of calcium get too high , the thyroid gland is stimulated to release calcitonin ( Figure 6.24 ) , which inhibits osteoclast activity and stimulates calcium uptake by the bones , but also decreases reabsorption of calcium by the kidneys .
All of these actions lower blood levels of calcium .
When blood calcium levels return to normal , the thyroid gland stops secreting calcitonin .
It consists of the bones , cartilages , and ligaments .
Bones support the weight of the body , allow for body movements , and protect internal organs .
Cartilage provides flexible strength and support for body structures such as the thoracic cage , the external ear , and the trachea and larynx .
At joints of the body , cartilage can also unite adjacent bones or provide cushioning between them .
Ligaments are the strong connective tissue bands that hold the bones at a moveable joint together and serve to prevent excessive movements of the joint that would result in injury .
Providing movement of the skeleton are the muscles of the body , which are firmly attached to the skeleton via connective tissue structures called tendons .
As muscles contract , they pull on the bones to produce movements of the body .
Thus , without a skeleton , you would not be able to stand , run , or even feed yourself !
Each bone of the body serves a particular function , and therefore bones vary in size , shape , and strength based on these functions .
For example , the bones of the lower back and lower limb are thick and strong to support your body weight .
Similarly , the size of a bony landmark that serves as a muscle attachment site on an individual bone is related to the strength of this muscle .
Muscles can apply very strong pulling forces to the bones of the skeleton .
To resist these forces , bones have enlarged bony landmarks at sites where powerful muscles attach .
This means that not only the size of a bone , but also its shape , is related to its function .
For this reason , the identification of bony landmarks is important during your study of the skeletal system .
Bones are also dynamic organs that can modify their strength and thickness in response to changes in muscle strength or body weight .
Thus , muscle attachment sites on bones will thicken if you begin a workout program that increases muscle strength .
Similarly , the walls of weight-bearing bones will thicken if you gain body weight or begin pounding the pavement as part of a new running regimen .
In contrast , a reduction in muscle strength or body weight will cause bones to become thinner .
This may happen during a prolonged hospital stay , following limb immobilization in a cast , or going into the weightlessness of outer space .
Even a change in diet , such as eating only soft food due to the loss of teeth , will result in a noticeable decrease in the size and thickness of the jaw bones .
The skeleton consists of the bones of the body .
For adults , there are 206 bones in the skeleton .
Younger individuals have higher numbers of bones because some bones fuse together during childhood and adolescence to form an adult bone .
The primary functions of the skeleton are to provide a rigid , internal structure that can support the weight of the body against the force of gravity , and to provide a structure upon which muscles can act to produce movements of the body .
The lower portion of the skeleton is specialized for stability during walking or running .
In contrast , the upper skeleton has greater mobility and ranges of motion , features that allow you to lift and carry objects or turn your head and trunk .
In addition to providing for support and movements of the body , the skeleton has protective and storage functions .
It protects the internal organs , including the brain , spinal cord , heart , lungs , and pelvic organs .
The bones of the skeleton serve as the primary storage site for important minerals such as calcium and phosphate .
The bone marrow found within bones stores fat and houses the blood-cell producing tissue of the body .
The skeleton is subdivided into two major divisions—the axial and appendicular .
The skeleton is subdivided into two major divisions—the axial and appendicular .
The axial skeleton forms the vertical , central axis of the body and includes all bones of the head , neck , chest , and back ( Figure 7.2 ) .
It serves to protect the brain , spinal cord , heart , and lungs .
It also serves as the attachment site for muscles that move the head , neck , and back , and for muscles that act across the shoulder and hip joints to move their corresponding limbs .
The axial skeleton of the adult consists of 80 bones , including the skull , the vertebral column , and the thoracic cage .
The skull is formed by 22 bones .
Also associated with the head are an additional seven bones , including the hyoid bone and the ear ossicles ( three small bones found in each middle ear ) .
The vertebral column consists of 24 bones , each called a vertebra , plus the sacrum and coccyx .
The thoracic cage includes the 12 pairs of ribs , and the sternum , the flattened bone of the anterior chest .
The appendicular skeleton includes all bones of the upper and lower limbs , plus the bones that attach each limb to the axial skeleton .
There are 126 bones in the appendicular skeleton of an adult .
The bones of the appendicular skeleton are covered in a separate chapter .
It is subdivided into the facial bones and the brain case , or cranial vault ( Figure 7.3 ) .
The facial bones underlie the facial structures , form the nasal cavity , enclose the eyeballs , and support the teeth of the upper and lower jaws .
The rounded brain case surrounds and protects the brain and houses the middle and inner ear structures .
In the adult , the skull consists of 22 individual bones , 21 of which are immobile and united into a single unit .
The 22nd bone is the mandible ( lower jaw ) , which is the only moveable bone of the skull .
Watch this video ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/skull1 ) to view a rotating and exploded skull , with color-coded bones .
Which bone ( yellow ) is centrally located and joins with most of the other bones of the skull ?
The anterior skull consists of the facial bones and provides the bony support for the eyes and structures of the face .
This view of the skull is dominated by the openings of the orbits and the nasal cavity .
Also seen are the upper and lower jaws , with their respective teeth ( Figure 7.4 ) .
The orbit is the bony socket that houses the eyeball and muscles that move the eyeball or open the upper eyelid .
The upper margin of the anterior orbit is the supraorbital margin .
Located near the midpoint of the supraorbital margin is a small opening called the supraorbital foramen .
This provides for passage of a sensory nerve to the skin of the forehead .
Below the orbit is the infraorbital foramen , which is the point of emergence for a sensory nerve that supplies the anterior face below the orbit .
Inside the nasal area of the skull , the nasal cavity is divided into halves by the nasal septum .
The upper portion of the nasal septum is formed by the perpendicular plate of the ethmoid bone and the lower portion is the vomer bone .
Each side of the nasal cavity is triangular in shape , with a broad inferior space that narrows superiorly .
When looking into the nasal cavity from the front of the skull , two bony plates are seen projecting from each lateral wall .
The larger of these is the inferior nasal concha , an independent bone of the skull .
Located just above the inferior concha is the middle nasal concha , which is part of the ethmoid bone .
A third bony plate , also part of the ethmoid bone , is the superior nasal concha .
It is much smaller and out of sight , above the middle concha .
The superior nasal concha is located just lateral to the perpendicular plate , in the upper nasal cavity .
A view of the lateral skull is dominated by the large , rounded brain case above and the upper and lower jaws with their teeth below ( Figure 7.5 ) .
Separating these areas is the bridge of bone called the zygomatic arch .
The zygomatic arch is the bony arch on the side of skull that spans from the area of the cheek to just above the ear canal .
It is formed by the junction of two bony processes : a short anterior component , the temporal process of the zygomatic bone ( the cheekbone ) and a longer posterior portion , the zygomatic process of the temporal bone , extending forward from the temporal bone .
Thus the temporal process ( anteriorly ) and the zygomatic process ( posteriorly ) join together , like the two ends of a drawbridge , to form the zygomatic arch .
One of the major muscles that pulls the mandible upward during biting and chewing arises from the zygomatic arch .
On the lateral side of the brain case , above the level of the zygomatic arch , is a shallow space called the temporal fossa .
Below the level of the zygomatic arch and deep to the vertical portion of the mandible is another space called the infratemporal fossa .
Both the temporal fossa and infratemporal fossa contain muscles that act on the mandible during chewing .
The brain case contains and protects the brain .
The interior space that is almost completely occupied by the brain is called the cranial cavity .
This cavity is bounded superiorly by the rounded top of the skull , which is called the calvaria ( skullcap ) , and the lateral and posterior sides of the skull .
The bones that form the top and sides of the brain case are usually referred to as the “ flat ” bones of the skull .
The floor of the brain case is referred to as the base of the skull .
This is a complex area that varies in depth and has numerous openings for the passage of cranial nerves , blood vessels , and the spinal cord .
Inside the skull , the base is subdivided into three large spaces , called the anterior cranial fossa , middle cranial fossa , and posterior cranial fossa ( fossa = “ trench or ditch ” ) ( Figure 7.6 ) .
From anterior to posterior , the fossae increase in depth .
The shape and depth of each fossa corresponds to the shape and size of the brain region that each houses .
The boundaries and openings of the cranial fossae ( singular = fossa ) will be described in a later section .
The brain case consists of eight bones .
These include the paired parietal and temporal bones , plus the unpaired frontal , occipital , sphenoid , and ethmoid bones .
The parietal bone forms most of the upper lateral side of the skull ( see Figure 7.5 ) .
These are paired bones , with the right and left parietal bones joining together at the top of the skull .
Each parietal bone is also bounded anteriorly by the frontal bone , inferiorly by the temporal bone , and posteriorly by the occipital bone .
The temporal bone forms the lower lateral side of the skull ( see Figure 7.5 ) .
Common wisdom has it that the temporal bone ( temporal = “ time ” ) is so named because this area of the head ( the temple ) is where hair typically first turns gray , indicating the passage of time .
The temporal bone is subdivided into several regions ( Figure 7.7 ) .
The flattened , upper portion is the squamous portion of the temporal bone .
Below this area and projecting anteriorly is the zygomatic process of the temporal bone , which forms the posterior portion of the zygomatic arch .
Posteriorly is the mastoid portion of the temporal bone .
Projecting inferiorly from this region is a large prominence , the mastoid process , which serves as a muscle attachment site .
The mastoid process can easily be felt on the side of the head just behind your earlobe .
On the interior of the skull , the petrous portion of each temporal bone forms the prominent , diagonally oriented petrous ridge in the floor of the cranial cavity .
Located inside each petrous ridge are small cavities that house the structures of the middle and inner ears .
Important landmarks of the temporal bone , as shown in Figure 7.8 , include the following : External acoustic meatus ( ear canal ) —This is the large opening on the lateral side of the skull that is associated with the ear .
Internal acoustic meatus —This opening is located inside the cranial cavity , on the medial side of the petrous ridge .
It connects to the middle and inner ear cavities of the temporal bone .
Mandibular fossa —This is the deep , oval-shaped depression located on the external base of the skull , just in front of the external acoustic meatus .
The mandible ( lower jaw ) joins with the skull at this site as part of the temporomandibular joint , which allows for movements of the mandible during opening and closing of the mouth .
Articular tubercle —The smooth ridge located immediately anterior to the mandibular fossa .
Both the articular tubercle and mandibular fossa contribute to the temporomandibular joint , the joint that provides for movements between the temporal bone of the skull and the mandible .
Styloid process —Posterior to the mandibular fossa on the external base of the skull is an elongated , downward bony projection called the styloid process , so named because of its resemblance to a stylus ( a pen or writing tool ) .
This structure serves as an attachment site for several small muscles and for a ligament that supports the hyoid bone of the neck .
( See also Figure 7.7 . )
Stylomastoid foramen —This small opening is located between the styloid process and mastoid process .
This is the point of exit for the cranial nerve that supplies the facial muscles .
Carotid canal —The carotid canal is a zig-zag shaped tunnel that provides passage through the base of the skull for one of the major arteries that supplies the brain .
Its entrance is located on the outside base of the skull , anteromedial to the styloid process .
The canal then runs anteromedially within the bony base of the skull , and then turns upward to its exit in the floor of the middle cranial cavity , above the foramen lacerum .
The frontal bone is the single bone that forms the forehead .
At its anterior midline , between the eyebrows , there is a slight depression called the glabella ( see Figure 7.5 ) .
The frontal bone also forms the supraorbital margin of the orbit .
Near the middle of this margin , is the supraorbital foramen , the opening that provides passage for a sensory nerve to the forehead .
The frontal bone is thickened just above each supraorbital margin , forming rounded brow ridges .
These are located just behind your eyebrows and vary in size among individuals , although they are generally larger in males .
Inside the cranial cavity , the frontal bone extends posteriorly .
This flattened region forms both the roof of the orbit below and the floor of the anterior cranial cavity above ( see Figure 7.8b ) .
The occipital bone is the single bone that forms the posterior skull and posterior base of the cranial cavity ( Figure 7.9 ; see also Figure 7.8 ) .
On its outside surface , at the posterior midline , is a small protrusion called the external occipital protuberance , which serves as an attachment site for a ligament of the posterior neck .
Lateral to either side of this bump is a superior nuchal line ( nuchal = “ nape ” or “ posterior neck ” ) .
The nuchal lines represent the most superior point at which muscles of the neck attach to the skull , with only the scalp covering the skull above these lines .
On the base of the skull , the occipital bone contains the large opening of the foramen magnum , which allows for passage of the spinal cord as it exits the skull .
On either side of the foramen magnum is an oval-shaped occipital condyle .
These condyles form joints with the first cervical vertebra and thus support the skull on top of the vertebral column .
The sphenoid bone is a single , complex bone of the central skull ( Figure 7.10 ) .
It serves as a “ keystone ” bone , because it joins with almost every other bone of the skull .
The sphenoid forms much of the base of the central skull ( see Figure 7.8 ) and also extends laterally to contribute to the sides of the skull ( see Figure 7.5 ) .
Inside the cranial cavity , the right and left lesser wings of the sphenoid bone , which resemble the wings of a flying bird , form the lip of a prominent ridge that marks the boundary between the anterior and middle cranial fossae .
The sella turcica ( “ Turkish saddle ” ) is located at the midline of the middle cranial fossa .
This bony region of the sphenoid bone is named for its resemblance to the horse saddles used by the Ottoman Turks , with a high back and a tall front .
The rounded depression in the floor of the sella turcica is the hypophyseal ( pituitary ) fossa , which houses the pea-sized pituitary ( hypophyseal ) gland .
The greater wings of the sphenoid bone extend laterally to either side away from the sella turcica , where they form the anterior floor of the middle cranial fossa .
The greater wing is best seen on the outside of the lateral skull , where it forms a rectangular area immediately anterior to the squamous portion of the temporal bone .
On the inferior aspect of the skull , each half of the sphenoid bone forms two thin , vertically oriented bony plates .
These are the medial pterygoid plate and lateral pterygoid plate ( pterygoid = “ wing-shaped ” ) .
The right and left medial pterygoid plates form the posterior , lateral walls of the nasal cavity .
The somewhat larger lateral pterygoid plates serve as attachment sites for chewing muscles that fill the infratemporal space and act on the mandible .
The ethmoid bone is a single , midline bone that forms the roof and lateral walls of the upper nasal cavity , the upper portion of the nasal septum , and contributes to the medial wall of the orbit ( Figure 7.11 and Figure 7.12 ) .
On the interior of the skull , the ethmoid also forms a portion of the floor of the anterior cranial cavity ( see Figure 7.8b ) .
Within the nasal cavity , the perpendicular plate of the ethmoid bone forms the upper portion of the nasal septum .
The ethmoid bone also forms the lateral walls of the upper nasal cavity .
Extending from each lateral wall are the superior nasal concha and middle nasal concha , which are thin , curved projections that extend into the nasal cavity ( Figure 7.13 ) .
In the cranial cavity , the ethmoid bone forms a small area at the midline in the floor of the anterior cranial fossa .
This region also forms the narrow roof of the underlying nasal cavity .
This portion of the ethmoid bone consists of two parts , the crista galli and cribriform plates .
The crista galli ( “ rooster ’ s comb or crest ” ) is a small upward bony projection located at the midline .
It functions as an anterior attachment point for one of the covering layers of the brain .
To either side of the crista galli is the cribriform plate ( cribrum = “ sieve ” ) , a small , flattened area with numerous small openings termed olfactory foramina .
Small nerve branches from the olfactory areas of the nasal cavity pass through these openings to enter the brain .
The lateral portions of the ethmoid bone are located between the orbit and upper nasal cavity , and thus form the lateral nasal cavity wall and a portion of the medial orbit wall .
Located inside this portion of the ethmoid bone are several small , air-filled spaces that are part of the paranasal sinus system of the skull .
A suture is an immobile joint between adjacent bones of the skull .
The narrow gap between the bones is filled with dense , fibrous connective tissue that unites the bones .
The long sutures located between the bones of the brain case are not straight , but instead follow irregular , tightly twisting paths .
These twisting lines serve to tightly interlock the adjacent bones , thus adding strength to the skull for brain protection .
The two suture lines seen on the top of the skull are the coronal and sagittal sutures .
The coronal suture runs from side to side across the skull , within the coronal plane of section ( see Figure 7.5 ) .
It joins the frontal bone to the right and left parietal bones .
The sagittal suture extends posteriorly from the coronal suture , running along the midline at the top of the skull in the sagittal plane of section ( see Figure 7.9 ) .
It unites the right and left parietal bones .
On the posterior skull , the sagittal suture terminates by joining the lambdoid suture .
The lambdoid suture extends downward and laterally to either side away from its junction with the sagittal suture .
The lambdoid suture joins the occipital bone to the right and left parietal and temporal bones .
This suture is named for its upside-down `` V '' shape , which resembles the capital letter version of the Greek letter lambda ( Λ ) .
The squamous suture is located on the lateral skull .
It unites the squamous portion of the temporal bone with the parietal bone ( see Figure 7.5 ) .
At the intersection of four bones is the pterion , a small , capital-H-shaped suture line region that unites the frontal bone , parietal bone , squamous portion of the temporal bone , and greater wing of the sphenoid bone .
It is the weakest part of the skull .
The pterion is located approximately two finger widths above the zygomatic arch and a thumb ’ s width posterior to the upward portion of the zygomatic bone .
Head and traumatic brain injuries are major causes of immediate death and disability , with bleeding and infections as possible additional complications .
According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ( 2010 ) , approximately 30 percent of all injury-related deaths in the United States are caused by head injuries .
The majority of head injuries involve falls .
They are most common among young children ( ages 0–4 years ) , adolescents ( 15–19 years ) , and the elderly ( over 65 years ) .
Additional causes vary , but prominent among these are automobile and motorcycle accidents .
Strong blows to the brain-case portion of the skull can produce fractures .
These may result in bleeding inside the skull with subsequent injury to the brain .
The most common is a linear skull fracture , in which fracture lines radiate from the point of impact .
Other fracture types include a comminuted fracture , in which the bone is broken into several pieces at the point of impact , or a depressed fracture , in which the fractured bone is pushed inward .
In a contrecoup ( counterblow ) fracture , the bone at the point of impact is not broken , but instead a fracture occurs on the opposite side of the skull .
Fractures of the occipital bone at the base of the skull can occur in this manner , producing a basilar fracture that can damage the artery that passes through the carotid canal .
A blow to the lateral side of the head may fracture the bones of the pterion .
The pterion is an important clinical landmark because located immediately deep to it on the inside of the skull is a major branch of an artery that supplies the skull and covering layers of the brain .
A strong blow to this region can fracture the bones around the pterion .
If the underlying artery is damaged , bleeding can cause the formation of a hematoma ( collection of blood ) between the brain and interior of the skull .
As blood accumulates , it will put pressure on the brain .
Symptoms associated with a hematoma may not be apparent immediately following the injury , but if untreated , blood accumulation will exert increasing pressure on the brain and can result in death within a few hours .
View this animation ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/headblow ) to see how a blow to the head may produce a contrecoup ( counterblow ) fracture of the basilar portion of the occipital bone on the base of the skull .
Why may a basilar fracture be life threatening ?
The facial bones of the skull form the upper and lower jaws , the nose , nasal cavity and nasal septum , and the orbit .
The facial bones include 14 bones , with six paired bones and two unpaired bones .
The paired bones are the maxilla , palatine , zygomatic , nasal , lacrimal , and inferior nasal conchae bones .
The unpaired bones are the vomer and mandible bones .
Although classified with the brain-case bones , the ethmoid bone also contributes to the nasal septum and the walls of the nasal cavity and orbit .
The curved , inferior margin of the maxillary bone that forms the upper jaw and contains the upper teeth is the alveolar process of the maxilla ( Figure 7.14 ) .
Each tooth is anchored into a deep socket called an alveolus .
On the anterior maxilla , just below the orbit , is the infraorbital foramen .
This is the point of exit for a sensory nerve that supplies the nose , upper lip , and anterior cheek .
On the inferior skull , the palatine process from each maxillary bone can be seen joining together at the midline to form the anterior three-quarters of the hard palate ( see Figure 7.8a ) .
The hard palate is the bony plate that forms the roof of the mouth and floor of the nasal cavity , separating the oral and nasal cavities .
The palatine bone is one of a pair of irregularly shaped bones that contribute small areas to the lateral walls of the nasal cavity and the medial wall of each orbit .
The largest region of each of the palatine bone is the horizontal plate .
The plates from the right and left palatine bones join together at the midline to form the posterior quarter of the hard palate ( see Figure 7.8a ) .
Thus , the palatine bones are best seen in an inferior view of the skull and hard palate .
During embryonic development , the right and left maxilla bones come together at the midline to form the upper jaw .
At the same time , the muscle and skin overlying these bones join together to form the upper lip .
Inside the mouth , the palatine processes of the maxilla bones , along with the horizontal plates of the right and left palatine bones , join together to form the hard palate .
If an error occurs in these developmental processes , a birth defect of cleft lip or cleft palate may result .
Cleft lip is a common development defect that affects approximately 1:1000 births , most of which are male .
This defect involves a partial or complete failure of the right and left portions of the upper lip to fuse together , leaving a cleft ( gap ) .
A more severe developmental defect is cleft palate , which affects the hard palate .
The hard palate is the bony structure that separates the nasal cavity from the oral cavity .
It is formed during embryonic development by the midline fusion of the horizontal plates from the right and left palatine bones and the palatine processes of the maxilla bones .
Cleft palate affects approximately 1:2500 births and is more common in females .
It results from a failure of the two halves of the hard palate to completely come together and fuse at the midline , thus leaving a gap between them .
This gap allows for communication between the nasal and oral cavities .
In severe cases , the bony gap continues into the anterior upper jaw where the alveolar processes of the maxilla bones also do not properly join together above the front teeth .
If this occurs , a cleft lip will also be seen .
Because of the communication between the oral and nasal cavities , a cleft palate makes it very difficult for an infant to generate the suckling needed for nursing , thus leaving the infant at risk for malnutrition .
Surgical repair is required to correct cleft palate defects .
The zygomatic bone is also known as the cheekbone .
Each of the paired zygomatic bones forms much of the lateral wall of the orbit and the lateral-inferior margins of the anterior orbital opening ( see Figure 7.4 ) .
The short temporal process of the zygomatic bone projects posteriorly , where it forms the anterior portion of the zygomatic arch ( see Figure 7.5 ) .
The nasal bone is one of two small bones that articulate ( join ) with each other to form the bony base ( bridge ) of the nose .
They also support the cartilages that form the lateral walls of the nose ( see Figure 7.11 ) .
These are the bones that are damaged when the nose is broken .
Each lacrimal bone is a small , rectangular bone that forms the anterior , medial wall of the orbit ( see Figure 7.4 and Figure 7.5 ) .
The anterior portion of the lacrimal bone forms a shallow depression called the lacrimal fossa , and extending inferiorly from this is the nasolacrimal canal .
The lacrimal fluid ( tears of the eye ) , which serves to maintain the moist surface of the eye , drains at the medial corner of the eye into the nasolacrimal canal .
This duct then extends downward to open into the nasal cavity , behind the inferior nasal concha .
In the nasal cavity , the lacrimal fluid normally drains posteriorly , but with an increased flow of tears due to crying or eye irritation , some fluid will also drain anteriorly , thus causing a runny nose .
The right and left inferior nasal conchae form a curved bony plate that projects into the nasal cavity space from the lower lateral wall ( see Figure 7.13 ) .
The inferior concha is the largest of the nasal conchae and can easily be seen when looking into the anterior opening of the nasal cavity .
The unpaired vomer bone , often referred to simply as the vomer , is triangular-shaped and forms the posterior-inferior part of the nasal septum ( see Figure 7.11 ) .
The vomer is best seen when looking from behind into the posterior openings of the nasal cavity ( see Figure 7.8a ) .
In this view , the vomer is seen to form the entire height of the nasal septum .
A much smaller portion of the vomer can also be seen when looking into the anterior opening of the nasal cavity .
The mandible forms the lower jaw and is the only moveable bone of the skull .
At the time of birth , the mandible consists of paired right and left bones , but these fuse together during the first year to form the single U-shaped mandible of the adult skull .
Each side of the mandible consists of a horizontal body and posteriorly , a vertically oriented ramus of the mandible ( ramus = “ branch ” ) .
The outside margin of the mandible , where the body and ramus come together is called the angle of the mandible ( Figure 7.15 ) .
The ramus on each side of the mandible has two upward-going bony projections .
The more anterior projection is the flattened coronoid process of the mandible , which provides attachment for one of the biting muscles .
The posterior projection is the condylar process of the mandible , which is topped by the oval-shaped condyle .
The condyle of the mandible articulates ( joins ) with the mandibular fossa and articular tubercle of the temporal bone .
Together these articulations form the temporomandibular joint , which allows for opening and closing of the mouth ( see Figure 7.5 ) .
The broad U-shaped curve located between the coronoid and condylar processes is the mandibular notch .
Important landmarks for the mandible include the following : Alveolar process of the mandible —This is the upper border of the mandibular body and serves to anchor the lower teeth .
Mental protuberance —The forward projection from the inferior margin of the anterior mandible that forms the chin ( mental = “ chin ” ) .
Mental foramen —The opening located on each side of the anterior-lateral mandible , which is the exit site for a sensory nerve that supplies the chin .
Mylohyoid line —This bony ridge extends along the inner aspect of the mandibular body ( see Figure 7.11 ) .
The muscle that forms the floor of the oral cavity attaches to the mylohyoid lines on both sides of the mandible .
Mandibular foramen —This opening is located on the medial side of the ramus of the mandible .
The opening leads into a tunnel that runs down the length of the mandibular body .
The sensory nerve and blood vessels that supply the lower teeth enter the mandibular foramen and then follow this tunnel .
Thus , to numb the lower teeth prior to dental work , the dentist must inject anesthesia into the lateral wall of the oral cavity at a point prior to where this sensory nerve enters the mandibular foramen .
Lingula —This small flap of bone is named for its shape ( lingula = “ little tongue ” ) .
It is located immediately next to the mandibular foramen , on the medial side of the ramus .
A ligament that anchors the mandible during opening and closing of the mouth extends down from the base of the skull and attaches to the lingula .
The orbit is the bony socket that houses the eyeball and contains the muscles that move the eyeball or open the upper eyelid .
Each orbit is cone-shaped , with a narrow posterior region that widens toward the large anterior opening .
To help protect the eye , the bony margins of the anterior opening are thickened and somewhat constricted .
The medial walls of the two orbits are parallel to each other but each lateral wall diverges away from the midline at a 45° angle .
This divergence provides greater lateral peripheral vision .
The walls of each orbit include contributions from seven skull bones ( Figure 7.16 ) .
The frontal bone forms the roof and the zygomatic bone forms the lateral wall and lateral floor .
The medial floor is primarily formed by the maxilla , with a small contribution from the palatine bone .
The ethmoid bone and lacrimal bone make up much of the medial wall and the sphenoid bone forms the posterior orbit .
At the posterior apex of the orbit is the opening of the optic canal , which allows for passage of the optic nerve from the retina to the brain .
Lateral to this is the elongated and irregularly shaped superior orbital fissure , which provides passage for the artery that supplies the eyeball , sensory nerves , and the nerves that supply the muscles involved in eye movements .
The nasal septum consists of both bone and cartilage components ( Figure 7.17 ; see also Figure 7.11 ) .
The upper portion of the septum is formed by the perpendicular plate of the ethmoid bone .
The lower and posterior parts of the septum are formed by the triangular-shaped vomer bone .
In an anterior view of the skull , the perpendicular plate of the ethmoid bone is easily seen inside the nasal opening as the upper nasal septum , but only a small portion of the vomer is seen as the inferior septum .
A better view of the vomer bone is seen when looking into the posterior nasal cavity with an inferior view of the skull , where the vomer forms the full height of the nasal septum .
The anterior nasal septum is formed by the septal cartilage , a flexible plate that fills in the gap between the perpendicular plate of the ethmoid and vomer bones .
This cartilage also extends outward into the nose where it separates the right and left nostrils .
The septal cartilage is not found in the dry skull .
Attached to the lateral wall on each side of the nasal cavity are the superior , middle , and inferior nasal conchae ( singular = concha ) , which are named for their positions ( see Figure 7.13 ) .
These are bony plates that curve downward as they project into the space of the nasal cavity .
They serve to swirl the incoming air , which helps to warm and moisturize it before the air moves into the delicate air sacs of the lungs .
This also allows mucus , secreted by the tissue lining the nasal cavity , to trap incoming dust , pollen , bacteria , and viruses .
The largest of the conchae is the inferior nasal concha , which is an independent bone of the skull .
The middle concha and the superior conchae , which is the smallest , are both formed by the ethmoid bone .
When looking into the anterior nasal opening of the skull , only the inferior and middle conchae can be seen .
The small superior nasal concha is well hidden above and behind the middle concha .
Inside the skull , the floor of the cranial cavity is subdivided into three cranial fossae ( spaces ) , which increase in depth from anterior to posterior ( see Figure 7.6 , Figure 7.8b , and Figure 7.11 ) .
Since the brain occupies these areas , the shape of each conforms to the shape of the brain regions that it contains .
Each cranial fossa has anterior and posterior boundaries and is divided at the midline into right and left areas by a significant bony structure or opening .
The anterior cranial fossa is the most anterior and the shallowest of the three cranial fossae .
It overlies the orbits and contains the frontal lobes of the brain .
Anteriorly , the anterior fossa is bounded by the frontal bone , which also forms the majority of the floor for this space .
The lesser wings of the sphenoid bone form the prominent ledge that marks the boundary between the anterior and middle cranial fossae .
Located in the floor of the anterior cranial fossa at the midline is a portion of the ethmoid bone , consisting of the upward projecting crista galli and to either side of this , the cribriform plates .
The middle cranial fossa is deeper and situated posterior to the anterior fossa .
It extends from the lesser wings of the sphenoid bone anteriorly , to the petrous ridges ( petrous portion of the temporal bones ) posteriorly .
The large , diagonally positioned petrous ridges give the middle cranial fossa a butterfly shape , making it narrow at the midline and broad laterally .
The temporal lobes of the brain occupy this fossa .
The middle cranial fossa is divided at the midline by the upward bony prominence of the sella turcica , a part of the sphenoid bone .
The middle cranial fossa has several openings for the passage of blood vessels and cranial nerves ( see Figure 7.8 ) .
Openings in the middle cranial fossa are as follows : Optic canal —This opening is located at the anterior lateral corner of the sella turcica .
It provides for passage of the optic nerve into the orbit .
Superior orbital fissure —This large , irregular opening into the posterior orbit is located on the anterior wall of the middle cranial fossa , lateral to the optic canal and under the projecting margin of the lesser wing of the sphenoid bone .
Nerves to the eyeball and associated muscles , and sensory nerves to the forehead pass through this opening .
Foramen rotundum —This rounded opening ( rotundum = “ round ” ) is located in the floor of the middle cranial fossa , just inferior to the superior orbital fissure .
It is the exit point for a major sensory nerve that supplies the cheek , nose , and upper teeth .
Foramen ovale of the middle cranial fossa —This large , oval-shaped opening in the floor of the middle cranial fossa provides passage for a major sensory nerve to the lateral head , cheek , chin , and lower teeth .
Foramen spinosum —This small opening , located posterior-lateral to the foramen ovale , is the entry point for an important artery that supplies the covering layers surrounding the brain .
The branching pattern of this artery forms readily visible grooves on the internal surface of the skull and these grooves can be traced back to their origin at the foramen spinosum .
Carotid canal —This is the zig-zag passageway through which a major artery to the brain enters the skull .
The entrance to the carotid canal is located on the inferior aspect of the skull , anteromedial to the styloid process ( see Figure 7.8a ) .
From here , the canal runs anteromedially within the bony base of the skull .
Just above the foramen lacerum , the carotid canal opens into the middle cranial cavity , near the posterior-lateral base of the sella turcica .
Foramen lacerum —This irregular opening is located in the base of the skull , immediately inferior to the exit of the carotid canal .
This opening is an artifact of the dry skull , because in life it is completely filled with cartilage .
All the openings of the skull that provide for passage of nerves or blood vessels have smooth margins ; the word lacerum ( “ ragged ” or “ torn ” ) tells us that this opening has ragged edges and thus nothing passes through it .
The posterior cranial fossa is the most posterior and deepest portion of the cranial cavity .
It contains the cerebellum of the brain .
The posterior fossa is bounded anteriorly by the petrous ridges , while the occipital bone forms the floor and posterior wall .
It is divided at the midline by the large foramen magnum ( “ great aperture ” ) , the opening that provides for passage of the spinal cord .
Located on the medial wall of the petrous ridge in the posterior cranial fossa is the internal acoustic meatus ( see Figure 7.11 ) .
This opening provides for passage of the nerve from the hearing and equilibrium organs of the inner ear , and the nerve that supplies the muscles of the face .
Located at the anterior-lateral margin of the foramen magnum is the hypoglossal canal .
These emerge on the inferior aspect of the skull at the base of the occipital condyle and provide passage for an important nerve to the tongue .
Immediately inferior to the internal acoustic meatus is the large , irregularly shaped jugular foramen ( see Figure 7.8a ) .
Several cranial nerves from the brain exit the skull via this opening .
It is also the exit point through the base of the skull for all the venous return blood leaving the brain .
The venous structures that carry blood inside the skull form large , curved grooves on the inner walls of the posterior cranial fossa , which terminate at each jugular foramen .
The paranasal sinuses are hollow , air-filled spaces located within certain bones of the skull ( Figure 7.18 ) .
All of the sinuses communicate with the nasal cavity ( paranasal = “ next to nasal cavity ” ) and are lined with nasal mucosa .
They serve to reduce bone mass and thus lighten the skull , and they also add resonance to the voice .
This second feature is most obvious when you have a cold or sinus congestion .
These produce swelling of the mucosa and excess mucus production , which can obstruct the narrow passageways between the sinuses and the nasal cavity , causing your voice to sound different to yourself and others .
This blockage can also allow the sinuses to fill with fluid , with the resulting pressure producing pain and discomfort .
The paranasal sinuses are named for the skull bone that each occupies .
The frontal sinus is located just above the eyebrows , within the frontal bone ( see Figure 7.17 ) .
This irregular space may be divided at the midline into bilateral spaces , or these may be fused into a single sinus space .
The frontal sinus is the most anterior of the paranasal sinuses .
The largest sinus is the maxillary sinus .
These are paired and located within the right and left maxillary bones , where they occupy the area just below the orbits .
The maxillary sinuses are most commonly involved during sinus infections .
Because their connection to the nasal cavity is located high on their medial wall , they are difficult to drain .
The sphenoid sinus is a single , midline sinus .
It is located within the body of the sphenoid bone , just anterior and inferior to the sella turcica , thus making it the most posterior of the paranasal sinuses .
The lateral aspects of the ethmoid bone contain multiple small spaces separated by very thin bony walls .
Each of these spaces is called an ethmoid air cell .
These are located on both sides of the ethmoid bone , between the upper nasal cavity and medial orbit , just behind the superior nasal conchae .
The hyoid bone is an independent bone that does not contact any other bone and thus is not part of the skull ( Figure 7.19 ) .
It is a small U-shaped bone located in the upper neck near the level of the inferior mandible , with the tips of the “ U ” pointing posteriorly .
The hyoid serves as the base for the tongue above , and is attached to the larynx below and the pharynx posteriorly .
The hyoid is held in position by a series of small muscles that attach to it either from above or below .
These muscles act to move the hyoid up/down or forward/back .
Movements of the hyoid are coordinated with movements of the tongue , larynx , and pharynx during swallowing and speaking .
It consists of a sequence of vertebrae ( singular = vertebra ) , each of which is separated and united by an intervertebral disc .
Together , the vertebrae and intervertebral discs form the vertebral column .
It is a flexible column that supports the head , neck , and body and allows for their movements .
It also protects the spinal cord , which passes down the back through openings in the vertebrae .
The vertebral column originally develops as a series of 33 vertebrae , but this number is eventually reduced to 24 vertebrae , plus the sacrum and coccyx .
The vertebral column is subdivided into five regions , with the vertebrae in each area named for that region and numbered in descending order .
In the neck , there are seven cervical vertebrae , each designated with the letter “ C ” followed by its number .
Superiorly , the C1 vertebra articulates ( forms a joint ) with the occipital condyles of the skull .
Inferiorly , C1 articulates with the C2 vertebra , and so on .
Below these are the 12 thoracic vertebrae , designated T1–T12 .
The lower back contains the L1–L5 lumbar vertebrae .
The single sacrum , which is also part of the pelvis , is formed by the fusion of five sacral vertebrae .
Similarly , the coccyx , or tailbone , results from the fusion of four small coccygeal vertebrae .
However , the sacral and coccygeal fusions do not start until age 20 and are not completed until middle age .
An interesting anatomical fact is that almost all mammals have seven cervical vertebrae , regardless of body size .
This means that there are large variations in the size of cervical vertebrae , ranging from the very small cervical vertebrae of a shrew to the greatly elongated vertebrae in the neck of a giraffe .
In a full-grown giraffe , each cervical vertebra is 11 inches tall .
The adult vertebral column does not form a straight line , but instead has four curvatures along its length ( see Figure 7.20 ) .
These curves increase the vertebral column ’ s strength , flexibility , and ability to absorb shock .
When the load on the spine is increased , by carrying a heavy backpack for example , the curvatures increase in depth ( become more curved ) to accommodate the extra weight .
They then spring back when the weight is removed .
The four adult curvatures are classified as either primary or secondary curvatures .
Primary curves are retained from the original fetal curvature , while secondary curvatures develop after birth .
During fetal development , the body is flexed anteriorly into the fetal position , giving the entire vertebral column a single curvature that is concave anteriorly .
In the adult , this fetal curvature is retained in two regions of the vertebral column as the thoracic curve , which involves the thoracic vertebrae , and the sacrococcygeal curve , formed by the sacrum and coccyx .
Each of these is thus called a primary curve because they are retained from the original fetal curvature of the vertebral column .
A secondary curve develops gradually after birth as the child learns to sit upright , stand , and walk .
Secondary curves are concave posteriorly , opposite in direction to the original fetal curvature .
The cervical curve of the neck region develops as the infant begins to hold their head upright when sitting .
Later , as the child begins to stand and then to walk , the lumbar curve of the lower back develops .
In adults , the lumbar curve is generally deeper in females .
Developmental anomalies , pathological changes , or obesity can enhance the normal vertebral column curves , resulting in the development of abnormal or excessive curvatures ( Figure 7.21 ) .
Kyphosis , also referred to as humpback or hunchback , is an excessive posterior curvature of the thoracic region .
This can develop when osteoporosis causes weakening and erosion of the anterior portions of the upper thoracic vertebrae , resulting in their gradual collapse ( Figure 7.22 ) .
Lordosis , or swayback , is an excessive anterior curvature of the lumbar region and is most commonly associated with obesity or late pregnancy .
The accumulation of body weight in the abdominal region results an anterior shift in the line of gravity that carries the weight of the body .
This causes in an anterior tilt of the pelvis and a pronounced enhancement of the lumbar curve .
Scoliosis is an abnormal , lateral curvature , accompanied by twisting of the vertebral column .
Compensatory curves may also develop in other areas of the vertebral column to help maintain the head positioned over the feet .
Scoliosis is the most common vertebral abnormality among girls .
The cause is usually unknown , but it may result from weakness of the back muscles , defects such as differential growth rates in the right and left sides of the vertebral column , or differences in the length of the lower limbs .
When present , scoliosis tends to get worse during adolescent growth spurts .
Although most individuals do not require treatment , a back brace may be recommended for growing children .
In extreme cases , surgery may be required .
Excessive vertebral curves can be identified while an individual stands in the anatomical position .
Observe the vertebral profile from the side and then from behind to check for kyphosis or lordosis .
Then have the person bend forward .
If scoliosis is present , an individual will have difficulty in bending directly forward , and the right and left sides of the back will not be level with each other in the bent position .
Osteoporosis is a common age-related bone disease in which bone density and strength is decreased .
Watch this video ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/osteoporosis ) to get a better understanding of how thoracic vertebrae may become weakened and may fracture due to this disease .
How may vertebral osteoporosis contribute to kyphosis ?
Within the different regions of the vertebral column , vertebrae vary in size and shape , but they all follow a similar structural pattern .
A typical vertebra will consist of a body , a vertebral arch , and seven processes ( Figure 7.23 ) .
The body is the anterior portion of each vertebra and is the part that supports the body weight .
Because of this , the vertebral bodies progressively increase in size and thickness going down the vertebral column .
The bodies of adjacent vertebrae are separated and strongly united by an intervertebral disc .
The vertebral arch forms the posterior portion of each vertebra .
It consists of four parts , the right and left pedicles and the right and left laminae .
Each pedicle forms one of the lateral sides of the vertebral arch .
The pedicles are anchored to the posterior side of the vertebral body .
Each lamina forms part of the posterior roof of the vertebral arch .
The large opening between the vertebral arch and body is the vertebral foramen , which contains the spinal cord .
In the intact vertebral column , the vertebral foramina of all of the vertebrae align to form the vertebral ( spinal ) canal , which serves as the bony protection and passageway for the spinal cord down the back .
When the vertebrae are aligned together in the vertebral column , notches in the margins of the pedicles of adjacent vertebrae together form an intervertebral foramen , the opening through which a spinal nerve exits from the vertebral column ( Figure 7.24 ) .
Seven processes arise from the vertebral arch .
Each paired transverse process projects laterally and arises from the junction point between the pedicle and lamina .
The single spinous process ( vertebral spine ) projects posteriorly at the midline of the back .
The vertebral spines can easily be felt as a series of bumps just under the skin down the middle of the back .
The transverse and spinous processes serve as important muscle attachment sites .
A superior articular process extends or faces upward , and an inferior articular process faces or projects downward on each side of a vertebrae .
The paired superior articular processes of one vertebra join with the corresponding paired inferior articular processes from the next higher vertebra .
These junctions form slightly moveable joints between the adjacent vertebrae .
The shape and orientation of the articular processes vary in different regions of the vertebral column and play a major role in determining the type and range of motion available in each region .
In addition to the general characteristics of a typical vertebra described above , vertebrae also display characteristic size and structural features that vary between the different vertebral column regions .
Thus , cervical vertebrae are smaller than lumbar vertebrae due to differences in the proportion of body weight that each supports .
Thoracic vertebrae have sites for rib attachment , and the vertebrae that give rise to the sacrum and coccyx have fused together into single bones .
Typical cervical vertebrae , such as C4 or C5 , have several characteristic features that differentiate them from thoracic or lumbar vertebrae ( Figure 7.25 ) .
Cervical vertebrae have a small body , reflecting the fact that they carry the least amount of body weight .
Cervical vertebrae usually have a bifid ( Y-shaped ) spinous process .
The spinous processes of the C3–C6 vertebrae are short , but the spine of C7 is much longer .
You can find these vertebrae by running your finger down the midline of the posterior neck until you encounter the prominent C7 spine located at the base of the neck .
The transverse processes of the cervical vertebrae are sharply curved ( U-shaped ) to allow for passage of the cervical spinal nerves .
Each transverse process also has an opening called the transverse foramen .
An important artery that supplies the brain ascends up the neck by passing through these openings .
The superior and inferior articular processes of the cervical vertebrae are flattened and largely face upward or downward , respectively .
The first and second cervical vertebrae are further modified , giving each a distinctive appearance .
The first cervical ( C1 ) vertebra is also called the atlas , because this is the vertebra that supports the skull on top of the vertebral column ( in Greek mythology , Atlas was the god who supported the heavens on his shoulders ) .
The C1 vertebra does not have a body or spinous process .
Instead , it is ring-shaped , consisting of an anterior arch and a posterior arch .
The transverse processes of the atlas are longer and extend more laterally than do the transverse processes of any other cervical vertebrae .
The superior articular processes face upward and are deeply curved for articulation with the occipital condyles on the base of the skull .
The inferior articular processes are flat and face downward to join with the superior articular processes of the C2 vertebra .
The second cervical ( C2 ) vertebra is called the axis , because it serves as the axis for rotation when turning the head toward the right or left .
The axis resembles typical cervical vertebrae in most respects , but is easily distinguished by the dens ( odontoid process ) , a bony projection that extends upward from the vertebral body .
The dens joins with the inner aspect of the anterior arch of the atlas , where it is held in place by transverse ligament .
The bodies of the thoracic vertebrae are larger than those of cervical vertebrae ( Figure 7.26 ) .
The characteristic feature for a typical midthoracic vertebra is the spinous process , which is long and has a pronounced downward angle that causes it to overlap the next inferior vertebra .
The superior articular processes of thoracic vertebrae face anteriorly and the inferior processes face posteriorly .
These orientations are important determinants for the type and range of movements available to the thoracic region of the vertebral column .
Thoracic vertebrae have several additional articulation sites , each of which is called a facet , where a rib is attached .
Most thoracic vertebrae have two facets located on the lateral sides of the body , each of which is called a costal facet ( costal = “ rib ” ) .
These are for articulation with the head ( end ) of a rib .
An additional facet is located on the transverse process for articulation with the tubercle of a rib .
Lumbar vertebrae carry the greatest amount of body weight and are thus characterized by the large size and thickness of the vertebral body ( Figure 7.28 ) .
They have short transverse processes and a short , blunt spinous process that projects posteriorly .
The articular processes are large , with the superior process facing backward and the inferior facing forward .
The sacrum is a triangular-shaped bone that is thick and wide across its superior base where it is weight bearing and then tapers down to an inferior , non-weight bearing apex ( Figure 7.29 ) .
It is formed by the fusion of five sacral vertebrae , a process that does not begin until after the age of 20 .
On the anterior surface of the older adult sacrum , the lines of vertebral fusion can be seen as four transverse ridges .
Similarly , the fused transverse processes of the sacral vertebrae form the lateral sacral crest .
The sacral promontory is the anterior lip of the superior base of the sacrum .
Lateral to this is the roughened auricular surface , which joins with the ilium portion of the hipbone to form the immobile sacroiliac joints of the pelvis .
Passing inferiorly through the sacrum is a bony tunnel called the sacral canal , which terminates at the sacral hiatus near the inferior tip of the sacrum .
The anterior and posterior surfaces of the sacrum have a series of paired openings called sacral foramina ( singular = foramen ) that connect to the sacral canal .
Each of these openings is called a posterior ( dorsal ) sacral foramen or anterior ( ventral ) sacral foramen .
These openings allow for the anterior and posterior branches of the sacral spinal nerves to exit the sacrum .
The superior articular process of the sacrum , one of which is found on either side of the superior opening of the sacral canal , articulates with the inferior articular processes from the L5 vertebra .
The coccyx , or tailbone , is derived from the fusion of four very small coccygeal vertebrae ( see Figure 7.29 ) .
It articulates with the inferior tip of the sacrum .
It is not weight bearing in the standing position , but may receive some body weight when sitting .
The bodies of adjacent vertebrae are strongly anchored to each other by an intervertebral disc .
This structure provides padding between the bones during weight bearing , and because it can change shape , also allows for movement between the vertebrae .
Although the total amount of movement available between any two adjacent vertebrae is small , when these movements are summed together along the entire length of the vertebral column , large body movements can be produced .
Ligaments that extend along the length of the vertebral column also contribute to its overall support and stability .
An intervertebral disc is a fibrocartilaginous pad that fills the gap between adjacent vertebral bodies ( see Figure 7.24 ) .
Each disc is anchored to the bodies of its adjacent vertebrae , thus strongly uniting these .
The discs also provide padding between vertebrae during weight bearing .
Because of this , intervertebral discs are thin in the cervical region and thickest in the lumbar region , which carries the most body weight .
In total , the intervertebral discs account for approximately 25 percent of your body height between the top of the pelvis and the base of the skull .
Intervertebral discs are also flexible and can change shape to allow for movements of the vertebral column .
Each intervertebral disc consists of two parts .
The anulus fibrosus is the tough , fibrous outer layer of the disc .
It forms a circle ( anulus = “ ring ” or “ circle ” ) and is firmly anchored to the outer margins of the adjacent vertebral bodies .
Inside is the nucleus pulposus , consisting of a softer , more gel-like material .
It has a high water content that serves to resist compression and thus is important for weight bearing .
With increasing age , the water content of the nucleus pulposus gradually declines .
This causes the disc to become thinner , decreasing total body height somewhat , and reduces the flexibility and range of motion of the disc , making bending more difficult .
The gel-like nature of the nucleus pulposus also allows the intervertebral disc to change shape as one vertebra rocks side to side or forward and back in relation to its neighbors during movements of the vertebral column .
Thus , bending forward causes compression of the anterior portion of the disc but expansion of the posterior disc .
The posterior bulging of the nucleus pulposus can cause compression of a spinal nerve at the point where it exits through the intervertebral foramen , with resulting pain and/or muscle weakness in those body regions supplied by that nerve .
The most common sites for disc herniation are the L4/L5 or L5/S1 intervertebral discs , which can cause sciatica , a widespread pain that radiates from the lower back down the thigh and into the leg .
Similar injuries of the C5/C6 or C6/C7 intervertebral discs , following forcible hyperflexion of the neck from a collision accident or football injury , can produce pain in the neck , shoulder , and upper limb .
Watch this animation ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/diskslip ) to see what it means to “ slip ” a disk .
Watch this second animation ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/herndisc ) to see one possible treatment for a herniated disc , removing and replacing the damaged disc with an artificial one that allows for movement between the adjacent certebrae .
How could lifting a heavy object produce pain in a lower limb ?
Adjacent vertebrae are united by ligaments that run the length of the vertebral column along both its posterior and anterior aspects ( Figure 7.31 ) .
These serve to resist excess forward or backward bending movements of the vertebral column , respectively .
The anterior longitudinal ligament runs down the anterior side of the entire vertebral column , uniting the vertebral bodies .
It serves to resist excess backward bending of the vertebral column .
Protection against this movement is particularly important in the neck , where extreme posterior bending of the head and neck can stretch or tear this ligament , resulting in a painful whiplash injury .
Prior to the mandatory installation of seat headrests , whiplash injuries were common for passengers involved in a rear-end automobile collision .
The supraspinous ligament is located on the posterior side of the vertebral column , where it interconnects the spinous processes of the thoracic and lumbar vertebrae .
This strong ligament supports the vertebral column during forward bending motions .
In the posterior neck , where the cervical spinous processes are short , the supraspinous ligament expands to become the nuchal ligament ( nuchae = “ nape ” or “ back of the neck ” ) .
The nuchal ligament is attached to the cervical spinous processes and extends upward and posteriorly to attach to the midline base of the skull , out to the external occipital protuberance .
It supports the skull and prevents it from falling forward .
This ligament is much larger and stronger in fourlegged animals such as cows , where the large skull hangs off the front end of the vertebral column .
You can easily feel this ligament by first extending your head backward and pressing down on the posterior midline of your neck .
Then tilt your head forward and you will fill the nuchal ligament popping out as it tightens to limit anterior bending of the head and neck .
Additional ligaments are located inside the vertebral canal , next to the spinal cord , along the length of the vertebral column .
The posterior longitudinal ligament is found anterior to the spinal cord , where it is attached to the posterior sides of the vertebral bodies .
Posterior to the spinal cord is the ligamentum flavum ( “ yellow ligament ” ) .
This consists of a series of short , paired ligaments , each of which interconnects the lamina regions of adjacent vertebrae .
The ligamentum flavum has large numbers of elastic fibers , which have a yellowish color , allowing it to stretch and then pull back .
Both of these ligaments provide important support for the vertebral column when bending forward .
Use this tool ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/vertcolumn ) to identify the bones , intervertebral discs , and ligaments of the vertebral column .
The thickest portions of the anterior longitudinal ligament and the supraspinous ligament are found in which regions of the vertebral column ?
Chiropractors are health professionals who use nonsurgical techniques to help patients with musculoskeletal system problems that involve the bones , muscles , ligaments , tendons , or nervous system .
They treat problems such as neck pain , back pain , joint pain , or headaches .
Chiropractors focus on the patient ’ s overall health and can also provide counseling related to lifestyle issues , such as diet , exercise , or sleep problems .
If needed , they will refer the patient to other medical specialists .
Chiropractors use a drug-free , hands-on approach for patient diagnosis and treatment .
They will perform a physical exam , assess the patient ’ s posture and spine , and may perform additional diagnostic tests , including taking X-ray images .
They primarily use manual techniques , such as spinal manipulation , to adjust the patient ’ s spine or other joints .
They can recommend therapeutic or rehabilitative exercises , and some also include acupuncture , massage therapy , or ultrasound as part of the treatment program .
In addition to those in general practice , some chiropractors specialize in sport injuries , neurology , orthopaedics , pediatrics , nutrition , internal disorders , or diagnostic imaging .
To become a chiropractor , students must have 3–4 years of undergraduate education , attend an accredited , four-year Doctor of Chiropractic ( D.C. ) degree program , and pass a licensure examination to be licensed for practice in their state .
With the aging of the baby-boom generation , employment for chiropractors is expected to increase .
It consists of the 12 pairs of ribs with their costal cartilages and the sternum ( Figure 7.32 ) .
The ribs are anchored posteriorly to the 12 thoracic vertebrae ( T1–T12 ) .
The thoracic cage protects the heart and lungs .
The sternum is the elongated bony structure that anchors the anterior thoracic cage .
It consists of three parts : the manubrium , body , and xiphoid process .
The manubrium is the wider , superior portion of the sternum .
The top of the manubrium has a shallow , U-shaped border called the jugular ( suprasternal ) notch .
This can be easily felt at the anterior base of the neck , between the medial ends of the clavicles .
The clavicular notch is the shallow depression located on either side at the superior-lateral margins of the manubrium .
This is the site of the sternoclavicular joint , between the sternum and clavicle .
The first ribs also attach to the manubrium .
The elongated , central portion of the sternum is the body .
The manubrium and body join together at the sternal angle , so called because the junction between these two components is not flat , but forms a slight bend .
The second rib attaches to the sternum at the sternal angle .
Since the first rib is hidden behind the clavicle , the second rib is the highest rib that can be identified by palpation .
Thus , the sternal angle and second rib are important landmarks for the identification and counting of the lower ribs .
Ribs 3–7 attach to the sternal body .
The inferior tip of the sternum is the xiphoid process .
This small structure is cartilaginous early in life , but gradually becomes ossified starting during middle age .
Each rib is a curved , flattened bone that contributes to the wall of the thorax .
The ribs articulate posteriorly with the T1–T12 thoracic vertebrae , and most attach anteriorly via their costal cartilages to the sternum .
There are 12 pairs of ribs .
The ribs are numbered 1–12 in accordance with the thoracic vertebrae .
The posterior end of a typical rib is called the head of the rib ( see Figure 7.27 ) .
This region articulates primarily with the costal facet located on the body of the same numbered thoracic vertebra and to a lesser degree , with the costal facet located on the body of the next higher vertebra .
Lateral to the head is the narrowed neck of the rib .
A small bump on the posterior rib surface is the tubercle of the rib , which articulates with the facet located on the transverse process of the same numbered vertebra .
The remainder of the rib is the body of the rib ( shaft ) .
Just lateral to the tubercle is the angle of the rib , the point at which the rib has its greatest degree of curvature .
The angles of the ribs form the most posterior extent of the thoracic cage .
In the anatomical position , the angles align with the medial border of the scapula .
A shallow costal groove for the passage of blood vessels and a nerve is found along the inferior margin of each rib .
The bony ribs do not extend anteriorly completely around to the sternum .
Instead , each rib ends in a costal cartilage .
These cartilages are made of hyaline cartilage and can extend for several inches .
Most ribs are then attached , either directly or indirectly , to the sternum via their costal cartilage ( see Figure 7.32 ) .
The ribs are classified into three groups based on their relationship to the sternum .
Ribs 1–7 are classified as true ribs ( vertebrosternal ribs ) .
The costal cartilage from each of these ribs attaches directly to the sternum .
Ribs 8–12 are called false ribs ( vertebrochondral ribs ) .
The costal cartilages from these ribs do not attach directly to the sternum .
For ribs 8–10 , the costal cartilages are attached to the cartilage of the next higher rib .
Thus , the cartilage of rib 10 attaches to the cartilage of rib 9 , rib 9 then attaches to rib 8 , and rib 8 is attached to rib 7 .
The last two false ribs ( 11–12 ) are also called floating ribs ( vertebral ribs ) .
These are short ribs that do not attach to the sternum at all .
Instead , their small costal cartilages terminate within the musculature of the lateral abdominal wall .
By the end of this section , you will be able to : Discuss the two types of embryonic bone development within the skull Describe the development of the vertebral column and thoracic cage The axial skeleton begins to form during early embryonic development .
However , growth , remodeling , and ossification ( bone formation ) continue for several decades after birth before the adult skeleton is fully formed .
Knowledge of the developmental processes that give rise to the skeleton is important for understanding the abnormalities that may arise in skeletal structures .
During the third week of embryonic development , a rod-like structure called the notochord develops dorsally along the length of the embryo .
The tissue overlying the notochord enlarges and forms the neural tube , which will give rise to the brain and spinal cord .
By the fourth week , mesoderm tissue located on either side of the notochord thickens and separates into a repeating series of block-like tissue structures , each of which is called a somite .
As the somites enlarge , each one will split into several parts .
The most medial of these parts is called a sclerotome .
The sclerotomes consist of an embryonic tissue called mesenchyme , which will give rise to the fibrous connective tissues , cartilages , and bones of the body .
The bones of the skull arise from mesenchyme during embryonic development in two different ways .
The first mechanism produces the bones that form the top and sides of the brain case .
This involves the local accumulation of mesenchymal cells at the site of the future bone .
These cells then differentiate directly into bone producing cells , which form the skull bones through the process of intramembranous ossification .
As the brain case bones grow in the fetal skull , they remain separated from each other by large areas of dense connective tissue , each of which is called a fontanelle ( Figure 7.33 ) .
The fontanelles are the soft spots on an infant ’ s head .
They are important during birth because these areas allow the skull to change shape as it squeezes through the birth canal .
After birth , the fontanelles allow for continued growth and expansion of the skull as the brain enlarges .
The largest fontanelle is located on the anterior head , at the junction of the frontal and parietal bones .
The fontanelles decrease in size and disappear by age 2 .
However , the skull bones remained separated from each other at the sutures , which contain dense fibrous connective tissue that unites the adjacent bones .
The connective tissue of the sutures allows for continued growth of the skull bones as the brain enlarges during childhood growth .
The second mechanism for bone development in the skull produces the facial bones and floor of the brain case .
This also begins with the localized accumulation of mesenchymal cells .
However , these cells differentiate into cartilage cells , which produce a hyaline cartilage model of the future bone .
As this cartilage model grows , it is gradually converted into bone through the process of endochondral ossification .
This is a slow process and the cartilage is not completely converted to bone until the skull achieves its full adult size .
At birth , the brain case and orbits of the skull are disproportionally large compared to the bones of the jaws and lower face .
This reflects the relative underdevelopment of the maxilla and mandible , which lack teeth , and the small sizes of the paranasal sinuses and nasal cavity .
During early childhood , the mastoid process enlarges , the two halves of the mandible and frontal bone fuse together to form single bones , and the paranasal sinuses enlarge .
The jaws also expand as the teeth begin to appear .
These changes all contribute to the rapid growth and enlargement of the face during childhood .
Development of the vertebrae begins with the accumulation of mesenchyme cells from each sclerotome around the notochord .
These cells differentiate into a hyaline cartilage model for each vertebra , which then grow and eventually ossify into bone through the process of endochondral ossification .
As the developing vertebrae grow , the notochord largely disappears .
However , small areas of notochord tissue persist between the adjacent vertebrae and this contributes to the formation of each intervertebral disc .
The ribs and sternum also develop from mesenchyme .
The ribs initially develop as part of the cartilage model for each vertebra , but in the thorax region , the rib portion separates from the vertebra by the eighth week .
The cartilage model of the rib then ossifies , except for the anterior portion , which remains as the costal cartilage .
The sternum initially forms as paired hyaline cartilage models on either side of the anterior midline , beginning during the fifth week of development .
The cartilage models of the ribs become attached to the lateral sides of the developing sternum .
Eventually , the two halves of the cartilaginous sternum fuse together along the midline and then ossify into bone .
The manubrium and body of the sternum are converted into bone first , with the xiphoid process remaining as cartilage until late in life .
View this video ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/skullbones ) to review the two processes that give rise to the bones of the skull and body .
What are the two mechanisms by which the bones of the body are formed and which bones are formed by each mechanism ?
The premature closure ( fusion ) of a suture line is a condition called craniosynostosis .
This error in the normal developmental process results in abnormal growth of the skull and deformity of the head .
It is produced either by defects in the ossification process of the skull bones or failure of the brain to properly enlarge .
Genetic factors are involved , but the underlying cause is unknown .
It is a relatively common condition , occurring in approximately 1:2000 births , with males being more commonly affected .
Primary craniosynostosis involves the early fusion of one cranial suture , whereas complex craniosynostosis results from the premature fusion of several sutures .
The early fusion of a suture in primary craniosynostosis prevents any additional enlargement of the cranial bones and skull along this line .
Continued growth of the brain and skull is therefore diverted to other areas of the head , causing an abnormal enlargement of these regions .
For example , the early disappearance of the anterior fontanelle and premature closure of the sagittal suture prevents growth across the top of the head .
This is compensated by upward growth by the bones of the lateral skull , resulting in a long , narrow , wedge-shaped head .
This condition , known as scaphocephaly , accounts for approximately 50 percent of craniosynostosis abnormalities .
Although the skull is misshapen , the brain still has adequate room to grow and thus there is no accompanying abnormal neurological development .
In cases of complex craniosynostosis , several sutures close prematurely .
The amount and degree of skull deformity is determined by the location and extent of the sutures involved .
This results in more severe constraints on skull growth , which can alter or impede proper brain growth and development .
Cases of craniosynostosis are usually treated with surgery .
A team of physicians will open the skull along the fused suture , which will then allow the skull bones to resume their growth in this area .
In some cases , parts of the skull will be removed and replaced with an artificial plate .
The earlier after birth that surgery is performed , the better the outcome .
After treatment , most children continue to grow and develop normally and do not exhibit any neurological problems .
The adult axial skeleton consists of 80 bones that form the head and body trunk .
Attached to this are the limbs , whose 126 bones constitute the appendicular skeleton .
These bones are divided into two groups : the bones that are located within the limbs themselves , and the girdle bones that attach the limbs to the axial skeleton .
The bones of the shoulder region form the pectoral girdle , which anchors the upper limb to the thoracic cage of the axial skeleton .
The lower limb is attached to the vertebral column by the pelvic girdle .
Because of our upright stance , different functional demands are placed upon the upper and lower limbs .
Thus , the bones of the lower limbs are adapted for weight-bearing support and stability , as well as for body locomotion via walking or running .
In contrast , our upper limbs are not required for these functions .
Instead , our upper limbs are highly mobile and can be utilized for a wide variety of activities .
The large range of upper limb movements , coupled with the ability to easily manipulate objects with our hands and opposable thumbs , has allowed humans to construct the modern world in which we live .
The bones that attach each upper limb to the axial skeleton form the pectoral girdle ( shoulder girdle ) .
This consists of two bones , the scapula and clavicle ( Figure 8.3 ) .
The clavicle ( collarbone ) is an S-shaped bone located on the anterior side of the shoulder .
It is attached on its medial end to the sternum of the thoracic cage , which is part of the axial skeleton .
The lateral end of the clavicle articulates ( joins ) with the scapula just above the shoulder joint .
You can easily palpate , or feel with your fingers , the entire length of your clavicle .
The scapula ( shoulder blade ) lies on the posterior aspect of the shoulder .
It is supported by the clavicle , which also articulates with the humerus ( arm bone ) to form the shoulder joint .
The scapula is a flat , triangular-shaped bone with a prominent ridge running across its posterior surface .
This ridge extends out laterally , where it forms the bony tip of the shoulder and joins with the lateral end of the clavicle .
By following along the clavicle , you can palpate out to the bony tip of the shoulder , and from there , you can move back across your posterior shoulder to follow the ridge of the scapula .
Move your shoulder around and feel how the clavicle and scapula move together as a unit .
Both of these bones serve as important attachment sites for muscles that aid with movements of the shoulder and arm .
The right and left pectoral girdles are not joined to each other , allowing each to operate independently .
In addition , the clavicle of each pectoral girdle is anchored to the axial skeleton by a single , highly mobile joint .
This allows for the extensive mobility of the entire pectoral girdle , which in turn enhances movements of the shoulder and upper limb .
The clavicle is the only long bone that lies in a horizontal position in the body ( see Figure 8.3 ) .
The clavicle has several important functions .
First , anchored by muscles from above , it serves as a strut that extends laterally to support the scapula .
This in turn holds the shoulder joint superiorly and laterally from the body trunk , allowing for maximal freedom of motion for the upper limb .
The clavicle also transmits forces acting on the upper limb to the sternum and axial skeleton .
Finally , it serves to protect the underlying nerves and blood vessels as they pass between the trunk of the body and the upper limb .
The clavicle has three regions : the medial end , the lateral end , and the shaft .
The medial end , known as the sternal end of the clavicle , has a triangular shape and articulates with the manubrium portion of the sternum .
This forms the sternoclavicular joint , which is the only bony articulation between the pectoral girdle of the upper limb and the axial skeleton .
This joint allows considerable mobility , enabling the clavicle and scapula to move in upward/downward and anterior/posterior directions during shoulder movements .
The sternoclavicular joint is indirectly supported by the costoclavicular ligament ( costo= “ rib ” ) , which spans the sternal end of the clavicle and the underlying first rib .
The lateral or acromial end of the clavicle articulates with the acromion of the scapula , the portion of the scapula that forms the bony tip of the shoulder .
There are some sex differences in the morphology of the clavicle .
In women , the clavicle tends to be shorter , thinner , and less curved .
In men , the clavicle is heavier and longer , and has a greater curvature and rougher surfaces where muscles attach , features that are more pronounced in manual workers .
The clavicle is the most commonly fractured bone in the body .
Such breaks often occur because of the force exerted on the clavicle when a person falls onto his or her outstretched arms , or when the lateral shoulder receives a strong blow .
Because the sternoclavicular joint is strong and rarely dislocated , excessive force results in the breaking of the clavicle , usually between the middle and lateral portions of the bone .
If the fracture is complete , the shoulder and lateral clavicle fragment will drop due to the weight of the upper limb , causing the person to support the sagging limb with their other hand .
Muscles acting across the shoulder will also pull the shoulder and lateral clavicle anteriorly and medially , causing the clavicle fragments to override .
The clavicle overlies many important blood vessels and nerves for the upper limb , but fortunately , due to the anterior displacement of a broken clavicle , these structures are rarely affected when the clavicle is fractured .
The scapula is also part of the pectoral girdle and thus plays an important role in anchoring the upper limb to the body .
The scapula is located on the posterior side of the shoulder .
It is surrounded by muscles on both its anterior ( deep ) and posterior ( superficial ) sides , and thus does not articulate with the ribs of the thoracic cage .
The scapula has several important landmarks ( Figure 8.4 ) .
The three margins or borders of the scapula , named for their positions within the body , are the superior border of the scapula , the medial border of the scapula , and the lateral border of the scapula .
The suprascapular notch is located lateral to the midpoint of the superior border .
The corners of the triangular scapula , at either end of the medial border , are the superior angle of the scapula , located between the medial and superior borders , and the inferior angle of the scapula , located between the medial and lateral borders .
The inferior angle is the most inferior portion of the scapula , and is particularly important because it serves as the attachment point for several powerful muscles involved in shoulder and upper limb movements .
The remaining corner of the scapula , between the superior and lateral borders , is the location of the glenoid cavity ( glenoid fossa ) .
This shallow depression articulates with the humerus bone of the arm to form the glenohumeral joint ( shoulder joint ) .
The small bony bumps located immediately above and below the glenoid cavity are the supraglenoid tubercle and the infraglenoid tubercle , respectively .
These provide attachments for muscles of the arm .
The scapula also has two prominent projections .
Toward the lateral end of the superior border , between the suprascapular notch and glenoid cavity , is the hook-like coracoid process ( coracoid = “ shaped like a crow ’ s beak ” ) .
This process projects anteriorly and curves laterally .
At the shoulder , the coracoid process is located inferior to the lateral end of the clavicle .
It is anchored to the clavicle by a strong ligament , and serves as the attachment site for muscles of the anterior chest and arm .
On the posterior aspect , the spine of the scapula is a long and prominent ridge that runs across its upper portion .
Extending laterally from the spine is a flattened and expanded region called the acromion or acromial process .
The acromion forms the bony tip of the superior shoulder region and articulates with the lateral end of the clavicle , forming the acromioclavicular joint ( see Figure 8.3 ) .
Together , the clavicle , acromion , and spine of the scapula form a V-shaped bony line that provides for the attachment of neck and back muscles that act on the shoulder , as well as muscles that pass across the shoulder joint to act on the arm .
The scapula has three depressions , each of which is called a fossa ( plural = fossae ) .
Two of these are found on the posterior scapula , above and below the scapular spine .
Superior to the spine is the narrow supraspinous fossa , and inferior to the spine is the broad infraspinous fossa .
The anterior ( deep ) surface of the scapula forms the broad subscapular fossa .
All of these fossae provide large surface areas for the attachment of muscles that cross the shoulder joint to act on the humerus .
The acromioclavicular joint transmits forces from the upper limb to the clavicle .
The ligaments around this joint are relatively weak .
A hard fall onto the elbow or outstretched hand can stretch or tear the acromioclavicular ligaments , resulting in a moderate injury to the joint .
However , the primary support for the acromioclavicular joint comes from a very strong ligament called the coracoclavicular ligament ( see Figure 8.3 ) .
This connective tissue band anchors the coracoid process of the scapula to the inferior surface of the acromial end of the clavicle and thus provides important indirect support for the acromioclavicular joint .
Following a strong blow to the lateral shoulder , such as when a hockey player is driven into the boards , a complete dislocation of the acromioclavicular joint can result .
In this case , the acromion is thrust under the acromial end of the clavicle , resulting in ruptures of both the acromioclavicular and coracoclavicular ligaments .
The scapula then separates from the clavicle , with the weight of the upper limb pulling the shoulder downward .
This dislocation injury of the acromioclavicular joint is known as a “ shoulder separation ” and is common in contact sports such as hockey , football , or martial arts .
These consist of the arm , located between the shoulder and elbow joints ; the forearm , which is between the elbow and wrist joints ; and the hand , which is located distal to the wrist .
There are 30 bones in each upper limb ( see Figure 8.2 ) .
The humerus is the single bone of the upper arm , and the ulna ( medially ) and the radius ( laterally ) are the paired bones of the forearm .
The base of the hand contains eight bones , each called a carpal bone , and the palm of the hand is formed by five bones , each called a metacarpal bone .
The fingers and thumb contain a total of 14 bones , each of which is a phalanx bone of the hand .
The humerus is the single bone of the upper arm region ( Figure 8.5 ) .
At its proximal end is the head of the humerus .
This is the large , round , smooth region that faces medially .
The head articulates with the glenoid cavity of the scapula to form the glenohumeral ( shoulder ) joint .
The margin of the smooth area of the head is the anatomical neck of the humerus .
Located on the lateral side of the proximal humerus is an expanded bony area called the greater tubercle .
The smaller lesser tubercle of the humerus is found on the anterior aspect of the humerus .
Both the greater and lesser tubercles serve as attachment sites for muscles that act across the shoulder joint .
Passing between the greater and lesser tubercles is the narrow intertubercular groove ( sulcus ) , which is also known as the bicipital groove because it provides passage for a tendon of the biceps brachii muscle .
The surgical neck is located at the base of the expanded , proximal end of the humerus , where it joins the narrow shaft of the humerus .
The surgical neck is a common site of arm fractures .
The deltoid tuberosity is a roughened , V-shaped region located on the lateral side in the middle of the humerus shaft .
As its name indicates , it is the site of attachment for the deltoid muscle .
Distally , the humerus becomes flattened .
The prominent bony projection on the medial side is the medial epicondyle of the humerus .
The much smaller lateral epicondyle of the humerus is found on the lateral side of the distal humerus .
The roughened ridge of bone above the lateral epicondyle is the lateral supracondylar ridge .
All of these areas are attachment points for muscles that act on the forearm , wrist , and hand .
The powerful grasping muscles of the anterior forearm arise from the medial epicondyle , which is thus larger and more robust than the lateral epicondyle that gives rise to the weaker posterior forearm muscles .
The distal end of the humerus has two articulation areas , which join the ulna and radius bones of the forearm to form the elbow joint .
The more medial of these areas is the trochlea , a spindleor pulley-shaped region ( trochlea = “ pulley ” ) , which articulates with the ulna bone .
Immediately lateral to the trochlea is the capitulum ( “ small head ” ) , a knob-like structure located on the anterior surface of the distal humerus .
The capitulum articulates with the radius bone of the forearm .
Just above these bony areas are two small depressions .
These spaces accommodate the forearm bones when the elbow is fully bent ( flexed ) .
Superior to the trochlea is the coronoid fossa , which receives the coronoid process of the ulna , and above the capitulum is the radial fossa , which receives the head of the radius when the elbow is flexed .
Similarly , the posterior humerus has the olecranon fossa , a larger depression that receives the olecranon process of the ulna when the forearm is fully extended .
The ulna is the medial bone of the forearm .
It runs parallel to the radius , which is the lateral bone of the forearm ( Figure 8.6 ) .
The proximal end of the ulna resembles a crescent wrench with its large , C-shaped trochlear notch .
This region articulates with the trochlea of the humerus as part of the elbow joint .
The inferior margin of the trochlear notch is formed by a prominent lip of bone called the coronoid process of the ulna .
Just below this on the anterior ulna is a roughened area called the ulnar tuberosity .
To the lateral side and slightly inferior to the trochlear notch is a small , smooth area called the radial notch of the ulna .
This area is the site of articulation between the proximal radius and the ulna , forming the proximal radioulnar joint .
The posterior and superior portions of the proximal ulna make up the olecranon process , which forms the bony tip of the elbow .
More distal is the shaft of the ulna .
The lateral side of the shaft forms a ridge called the interosseous border of the ulna .
This is the line of attachment for the interosseous membrane of the forearm , a sheet of dense connective tissue that unites the ulna and radius bones .
The small , rounded area that forms the distal end is the head of the ulna .
Projecting from the posterior side of the ulnar head is the styloid process of the ulna , a short bony projection .
This serves as an attachment point for a connective tissue structure that unites the distal ends of the ulna and radius .
In the anatomical position , with the elbow fully extended and the palms facing forward , the arm and forearm do not form a straight line .
Instead , the forearm deviates laterally by 5–15 degrees from the line of the arm .
This deviation is called the carrying angle .
It allows the forearm and hand to swing freely or to carry an object without hitting the hip .
The carrying angle is larger in females to accommodate their wider pelvis .
The radius runs parallel to the ulna , on the lateral ( thumb ) side of the forearm ( see Figure 8.6 ) .
The head of the radius is a disc-shaped structure that forms the proximal end .
The small depression on the surface of the head articulates with the capitulum of the humerus as part of the elbow joint , whereas the smooth , outer margin of the head articulates with the radial notch of the ulna at the proximal radioulnar joint .
The neck of the radius is the narrowed region immediately below the expanded head .
Inferior to this point on the medial side is the radial tuberosity , an oval-shaped , bony protuberance that serves as a muscle attachment point .
The shaft of the radius is slightly curved and has a small ridge along its medial side .
This ridge forms the interosseous border of the radius , which , like the similar border of the ulna , is the line of attachment for the interosseous membrane that unites the two forearm bones .
The distal end of the radius has a smooth surface for articulation with two carpal bones to form the radiocarpal joint or wrist joint ( Figure 8.7 and Figure 8.8 ) .
On the medial side of the distal radius is the ulnar notch of the radius .
This shallow depression articulates with the head of the ulna , which together form the distal radioulnar joint .
The lateral end of the radius has a pointed projection called the styloid process of the radius .
This provides attachment for ligaments that support the lateral side of the wrist joint .
Compared to the styloid process of the ulna , the styloid process of the radius projects more distally , thereby limiting the range of movement for lateral deviations of the hand at the wrist joint .
Watch this video ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/fractures ) to see how fractures of the distal radius bone can affect the wrist joint .
Explain the problems that may occur if a fracture of the distal radius involves the joint surface of the radiocarpal joint of the wrist .
The wrist and base of the hand are formed by a series of eight small carpal bones ( see Figure 8.7 ) .
The carpal bones are arranged in two rows , forming a proximal row of four carpal bones and a distal row of four carpal bones .
The small , rounded pisiform bone articulates with the anterior surface of the triquetrum bone .
The pisiform thus projects anteriorly , where it forms the bony bump that can be felt at the medial base of your hand .
The distal bones ( lateral to medial ) are the trapezium ( “ table ” ) , trapezoid ( “ resembles a table ” ) , capitate ( “ head-shaped ” ) , and hamate ( “ hooked bone ” ) bones .
The hamate bone is characterized by a prominent bony extension on its anterior side called the hook of the hamate bone .
Thus , it starts and finishes on the lateral side .
The carpal bones form the base of the hand .
This can be seen in the radiograph ( X-ray image ) of the hand that shows the relationships of the hand bones to the skin creases of the hand ( see Figure 8.8 ) .
Within the carpal bones , the four proximal bones are united to each other by ligaments to form a unit .
Only three of these bones , the scaphoid , lunate , and triquetrum , contribute to the radiocarpal joint .
The scaphoid and lunate bones articulate directly with the distal end of the radius , whereas the triquetrum bone articulates with a fibrocartilaginous pad that spans the radius and styloid process of the ulna .
The distal end of the ulna thus does not directly articulate with any of the carpal bones .
The four distal carpal bones are also held together as a group by ligaments .
The proximal and distal rows of carpal bones articulate with each other to form the midcarpal joint ( see Figure 8.8 ) .
Together , the radiocarpal and midcarpal joints are responsible for all movements of the hand at the wrist .
The distal carpal bones also articulate with the metacarpal bones of the hand .
In the articulated hand , the carpal bones form a U-shaped grouping .
A strong ligament called the flexor retinaculum spans the top of this U-shaped area to maintain this grouping of the carpal bones .
The flexor retinaculum is attached laterally to the trapezium and scaphoid bones , and medially to the hamate and pisiform bones .
Together , the carpal bones and the flexor retinaculum form a passageway called the carpal tunnel , with the carpal bones forming the walls and floor , and the flexor retinaculum forming the roof of this space ( Figure 8.9 ) .
The tendons of nine muscles of the anterior forearm and an important nerve pass through this narrow tunnel to enter the hand .
Overuse of the muscle tendons or wrist injury can produce inflammation and swelling within this space .
This produces compression of the nerve , resulting in carpal tunnel syndrome , which is characterized by pain or numbness , and muscle weakness in those areas of the hand supplied by this nerve .
The palm of the hand contains five elongated metacarpal bones .
These bones lie between the carpal bones of the wrist and the bones of the fingers and thumb ( see Figure 8.7 ) .
The proximal end of each metacarpal bone articulates with one of the distal carpal bones .
Each of these articulations is a carpometacarpal joint ( see Figure 8.8 ) .
The expanded distal end of each metacarpal bone articulates at the metacarpophalangeal joint with the proximal phalanx bone of the thumb or one of the fingers .
The distal end also forms the knuckles of the hand , at the base of the fingers .
The metacarpal bones are numbered 1–5 , beginning at the thumb .
The first metacarpal bone , at the base of the thumb , is separated from the other metacarpal bones .
This allows it a freedom of motion that is independent of the other metacarpal bones , which is very important for thumb mobility .
The remaining metacarpal bones are united together to form the palm of the hand .
The second and third metacarpal bones are firmly anchored in place and are immobile .
However , the fourth and fifth metacarpal bones have limited anterior-posterior mobility , a motion that is greater for the fifth bone .
This mobility is important during power gripping with the hand ( Figure 8.10 ) .
The anterior movement of these bones , particularly the fifth metacarpal bone , increases the strength of contact for the medial hand during gripping actions .
The fingers and thumb contain 14 bones , each of which is called a phalanx bone ( plural = phalanges ) , named after the ancient Greek phalanx ( a rectangular block of soldiers ) .
The thumb ( pollex ) is digit number 1 and has two phalanges , a proximal phalanx , and a distal phalanx bone ( see Figure 8.7 ) .
Digits 2 ( index finger ) through 5 ( little finger ) have three phalanges each , called the proximal , middle , and distal phalanx bones .
An interphalangeal joint is one of the articulations between adjacent phalanges of the digits ( see Figure 8.8 ) .
Visit this site ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/handbone ) to explore the bones and joints of the hand .
What are the three arches of the hand , and what is the importance of these during the gripping of an object ?
Due to our constant use of the hands and the rest of our upper limbs , an injury to any of these areas will cause a significant loss of functional ability .
Many fractures result from a hard fall onto an outstretched hand .
The resulting transmission of force up the limb may result in a fracture of the humerus , radius , or scaphoid bones .
These injuries are especially common in elderly people whose bones are weakened due to osteoporosis .
Falls onto the hand or elbow , or direct blows to the arm , can result in fractures of the humerus ( Figure 8.11 ) .
Following a fall , fractures at the surgical neck , the region at which the expanded proximal end of the humerus joins with the shaft , can result in an impacted fracture , in which the distal portion of the humerus is driven into the proximal portion .
Falls or blows to the arm can also produce transverse or spiral fractures of the humeral shaft .
In children , a fall onto the tip of the elbow frequently results in a distal humerus fracture .
With these injuries , the immediate concern is possible compression of the artery to the forearm due to swelling of the surrounding tissues .
If compression occurs , the resulting ischemia ( lack of oxygen ) due to reduced blood flow can quickly produce irreparable damage to the forearm muscles .
In addition , four major nerves for shoulder and upper limb muscles are closely associated with different regions of the humerus , and thus , humeral fractures may also damage these nerves .
Another frequent injury following a fall onto an outstretched hand is a Colles fracture ( “ col-lees ” ) of the distal radius ( see Figure 8.11 ) .
This involves a complete transverse fracture across the distal radius that drives the separated distal fragment of the radius posteriorly and superiorly .
This injury results in a characteristic “ dinner fork ” bend of the forearm just above the wrist due to the posterior displacement of the hand .
This is the most frequent forearm fracture and is a common injury in persons over the age of 50 , particularly in older women with osteoporosis .
It also commonly occurs following a high-speed fall onto the hand during activities such as snowboarding or skating .
The most commonly fractured carpal bone is the scaphoid , often resulting from a fall onto the hand .
Deep pain at the lateral wrist may yield an initial diagnosis of a wrist sprain , but a radiograph taken several weeks after the injury , after tissue swelling has subsided , will reveal the fracture .
Due to the poor blood supply to the scaphoid bone , healing will be slow and there is the danger of bone necrosis and subsequent degenerative joint disease of the wrist .
Watch this video ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/colles ) to learn about a Colles fracture , a break of the distal radius , usually caused by falling onto an outstretched hand .
When would surgery be required and how would the fracture be repaired in this case ?
Each hip bone , in turn , is firmly joined to the axial skeleton via its attachment to the sacrum of the vertebral column .
The right and left hip bones also converge anteriorly to attach to each other .
The bony pelvis is the entire structure formed by the two hip bones , the sacrum , and , attached inferiorly to the sacrum , the coccyx ( Figure 8.12 ) .
Unlike the bones of the pectoral girdle , which are highly mobile to enhance the range of upper limb movements , the bones of the pelvis are strongly united to each other to form a largely immobile , weight-bearing structure .
This is important for stability because it enables the weight of the body to be easily transferred laterally from the vertebral column , through the pelvic girdle and hip joints , and into either lower limb whenever the other limb is not bearing weight .
Thus , the immobility of the pelvis provides a strong foundation for the upper body as it rests on top of the mobile lower limbs .
The hip bone , or coxal bone , forms the pelvic girdle portion of the pelvis .
The paired hip bones are the large , curved bones that form the lateral and anterior aspects of the pelvis .
Each adult hip bone is formed by three separate bones that fuse together during the late teenage years .
These bony components are the ilium , ischium , and pubis ( Figure 8.13 ) .
These names are retained and used to define the three regions of the adult hip bone .
The ilium is the fan-like , superior region that forms the largest part of the hip bone .
It is firmly united to the sacrum at the largely immobile sacroiliac joint ( see Figure 8.12 ) .
The ischium forms the posteroinferior region of each hip bone .
It supports the body when sitting .
The pubis forms the anterior portion of the hip bone .
The pubis curves medially , where it joins to the pubis of the opposite hip bone at a specialized joint called the pubic symphysis .
When you place your hands on your waist , you can feel the arching , superior margin of the ilium along your waistline ( see Figure 8.13 ) .
This curved , superior margin of the ilium is the iliac crest .
The rounded , anterior termination of the iliac crest is the anterior superior iliac spine .
This important bony landmark can be felt at your anterolateral hip .
Inferior to the anterior superior iliac spine is a rounded protuberance called the anterior inferior iliac spine .
Both of these iliac spines serve as attachment points for muscles of the thigh .
Posteriorly , the iliac crest curves downward to terminate as the posterior superior iliac spine .
Muscles and ligaments surround but do not cover this bony landmark , thus sometimes producing a depression seen as a “ dimple ” located on the lower back .
More inferiorly is the posterior inferior iliac spine .
This is located at the inferior end of a large , roughened area called the auricular surface of the ilium .
The auricular surface articulates with the auricular surface of the sacrum to form the sacroiliac joint .
Both the posterior superior and posterior inferior iliac spines serve as attachment points for the muscles and very strong ligaments that support the sacroiliac joint .
The shallow depression located on the anteromedial ( internal ) surface of the upper ilium is called the iliac fossa .
The inferior margin of this space is formed by the arcuate line of the ilium , the ridge formed by the pronounced change in curvature between the upper and lower portions of the ilium .
The large , inverted U-shaped indentation located on the posterior margin of the lower ilium is called the greater sciatic notch .
The ischium forms the posterolateral portion of the hip bone ( see Figure 8.13 ) .
The large , roughened area of the inferior ischium is the ischial tuberosity .
This serves as the attachment for the posterior thigh muscles and also carries the weight of the body when sitting .
You can feel the ischial tuberosity if you wiggle your pelvis against the seat of a chair .
Projecting superiorly and anteriorly from the ischial tuberosity is a narrow segment of bone called the ischial ramus .
The slightly curved posterior margin of the ischium above the ischial tuberosity is the lesser sciatic notch .
The bony projection separating the lesser sciatic notch and greater sciatic notch is the ischial spine .
The pubis forms the anterior portion of the hip bone ( see Figure 8.13 ) .
The enlarged medial portion of the pubis is the pubic body .
Located superiorly on the pubic body is a small bump called the pubic tubercle .
The superior pubic ramus is the segment of bone that passes laterally from the pubic body to join the ilium .
The narrow ridge running along the superior margin of the superior pubic ramus is the pectineal line of the pubis .
The pubic body is joined to the pubic body of the opposite hip bone by the pubic symphysis .
Extending downward and laterally from the body is the inferior pubic ramus .
The pubic arch is the bony structure formed by the pubic symphysis , and the bodies and inferior pubic rami of the adjacent pubic bones .
The inferior pubic ramus extends downward to join the ischial ramus .
Together , these form the single ischiopubic ramus , which extends from the pubic body to the ischial tuberosity .
The inverted V-shape formed as the ischiopubic rami from both sides come together at the pubic symphysis is called the subpubic angle .
The pelvis consists of four bones : the right and left hip bones , the sacrum , and the coccyx ( see Figure 8.12 ) .
The pelvis has several important functions .
Its primary role is to support the weight of the upper body when sitting and to transfer this weight to the lower limbs when standing .
It serves as an attachment point for trunk and lower limb muscles , and also protects the internal pelvic organs .
When standing in the anatomical position , the pelvis is tilted anteriorly .
In this position , the anterior superior iliac spines and the pubic tubercles lie in the same vertical plane , and the anterior ( internal ) surface of the sacrum faces forward and downward .
The three areas of each hip bone , the ilium , pubis , and ischium , converge centrally to form a deep , cup-shaped cavity called the acetabulum .
This is located on the lateral side of the hip bone and is part of the hip joint .
The large opening in the anteroinferior hip bone between the ischium and pubis is the obturator foramen .
This space is largely filled in by a layer of connective tissue and serves for the attachment of muscles on both its internal and external surfaces .
Several ligaments unite the bones of the pelvis ( Figure 8.14 ) .
The largely immobile sacroiliac joint is supported by a pair of strong ligaments that are attached between the sacrum and ilium portions of the hip bone .
These are the anterior sacroiliac ligament on the anterior side of the joint and the posterior sacroiliac ligament on the posterior side .
Also spanning the sacrum and hip bone are two additional ligaments .
The sacrospinous ligament runs from the sacrum to the ischial spine , and the sacrotuberous ligament runs from the sacrum to the ischial tuberosity .
These ligaments help to support and immobilize the sacrum as it carries the weight of the body .
Watch this video ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/3Dpelvis ) for a 3-D view of the pelvis and its associated ligaments .
What is the large opening in the bony pelvis , located between the ischium and pubic regions , and what two parts of the pubis contribute to the formation of this opening ?
The sacrospinous and sacrotuberous ligaments also help to define two openings on the posterolateral sides of the pelvis through which muscles , nerves , and blood vessels for the lower limb exit .
The superior opening is the greater sciatic foramen .
This large opening is formed by the greater sciatic notch of the hip bone , the sacrum , and the sacrospinous ligament .
The smaller , more inferior lesser sciatic foramen is formed by the lesser sciatic notch of the hip bone , together with the sacrospinous and sacrotuberous ligaments .
The space enclosed by the bony pelvis is divided into two regions ( Figure 8.15 ) .
The broad , superior region , defined laterally by the large , fan-like portion of the upper hip bone , is called the greater pelvis ( greater pelvic cavity ; false pelvis ) .
This broad area is occupied by portions of the small and large intestines , and because it is more closely associated with the abdominal cavity , it is sometimes referred to as the false pelvis .
More inferiorly , the narrow , rounded space of the lesser pelvis ( lesser pelvic cavity ; true pelvis ) contains the bladder and other pelvic organs , and thus is also known as the true pelvis .
The pelvic brim ( also known as the pelvic inlet ) forms the superior margin of the lesser pelvis , separating it from the greater pelvis .
The pelvic brim is defined by a line formed by the upper margin of the pubic symphysis anteriorly , and the pectineal line of the pubis , the arcuate line of the ilium , and the sacral promontory ( the anterior margin of the superior sacrum ) posteriorly .
The inferior limit of the lesser pelvic cavity is called the pelvic outlet .
This large opening is defined by the inferior margin of the pubic symphysis anteriorly , and the ischiopubic ramus , the ischial tuberosity , the sacrotuberous ligament , and the inferior tip of the coccyx posteriorly .
Because of the anterior tilt of the pelvis , the lesser pelvis is also angled , giving it an anterosuperior ( pelvic inlet ) to posteroinferior ( pelvic outlet ) orientation .
The differences between the adult female and male pelvis relate to function and body size .
In general , the bones of the male pelvis are thicker and heavier , adapted for support of the male ’ s heavier physical build and stronger muscles .
The greater sciatic notch of the male hip bone is narrower and deeper than the broader notch of females .
Because the female pelvis is adapted for childbirth , it is wider than the male pelvis , as evidenced by the distance between the anterior superior iliac spines ( see Figure 8.15 ) .
The ischial tuberosities of females are also farther apart , which increases the size of the pelvic outlet .
Because of this increased pelvic width , the subpubic angle is larger in females ( greater than 80 degrees ) than it is in males ( less than 70 degrees ) .
The female sacrum is wider , shorter , and less curved , and the sacral promontory projects less into the pelvic cavity , thus giving the female pelvic inlet ( pelvic brim ) a more rounded or oval shape compared to males .
The lesser pelvic cavity of females is also wider and more shallow than the narrower , deeper , and tapering lesser pelvis of males .
Because of the obvious differences between female and male hip bones , this is the one bone of the body that allows for the most accurate sex determination .
Table 8.1 provides an overview of the general differences between the female and male pelvis .
A forensic pathologist ( also known as a medical examiner ) is a medically trained physician who has been specifically trained in pathology to examine the bodies of the deceased to determine the cause of death .
A forensic pathologist applies his or her understanding of disease as well as toxins , blood and DNA analysis , firearms and ballistics , and other factors to assess the cause and manner of death .
At times , a forensic pathologist will be called to testify under oath in situations that involve a possible crime .
Forensic pathology is a field that has received much media attention on television shows or following a high-profile death .
While forensic pathologists are responsible for determining whether the cause of someone ’ s death was natural , a suicide , accidental , or a homicide , there are times when uncovering the cause of death is more complex , and other skills are needed .
Forensic anthropology brings the tools and knowledge of physical anthropology and human osteology ( the study of the skeleton ) to the task of investigating a death .
A forensic anthropologist assists medical and legal professionals in identifying human remains .
Due to the extensive knowledge and understanding of excavation techniques , a forensic anthropologist is an integral and invaluable team member to have on-site when investigating a crime scene , especially when the recovery of human skeletal remains is involved .
When remains are bought to a forensic anthropologist for examination , he or she must first determine whether the remains are in fact human .
Once the remains have been identified as belonging to a person and not to an animal , the next step is to approximate the individual ’ s age , sex , race , and height .
The forensic anthropologist does not determine the cause of death , but rather provides information to the forensic pathologist , who will use all of the data collected to make a final determination regarding the cause of death .
The thigh is that portion of the lower limb located between the hip joint and knee joint .
The leg is specifically the region between the knee joint and the ankle joint .
Distal to the ankle is the foot .
The lower limb contains 30 bones .
These are the femur , patella , tibia , fibula , tarsal bones , metatarsal bones , and phalanges ( see Figure 8.2 ) .
The femur is the single bone of the thigh .
The patella is the kneecap and articulates with the distal femur .
The tibia is the larger , weight-bearing bone located on the medial side of the leg , and the fibula is the thin bone of the lateral leg .
The bones of the foot are divided into three groups .
The posterior portion of the foot is formed by a group of seven bones , each of which is known as a tarsal bone , whereas the mid-foot contains five elongated bones , each of which is a metatarsal bone .
The toes contain 14 small bones , each of which is a phalanx bone of the foot .
The femur , or thigh bone , is the single bone of the thigh region ( Figure 8.16 ) .
It is the longest and strongest bone of the body , and accounts for approximately one-quarter of a person ’ s total height .
The rounded , proximal end is the head of the femur , which articulates with the acetabulum of the hip bone to form the hip joint .
The fovea capitis is a minor indentation on the medial side of the femoral head that serves as the site of attachment for the ligament of the head of the femur .
This ligament spans the femur and acetabulum , but is weak and provides little support for the hip joint .
It does , however , carry an important artery that supplies the head of the femur .
The narrowed region below the head is the neck of the femur .
This is a common area for fractures of the femur .
The greater trochanter is the large , upward , bony projection located above the base of the neck .
Multiple muscles that act across the hip joint attach to the greater trochanter , which , because of its projection from the femur , gives additional leverage to these muscles .
The greater trochanter can be felt just under the skin on the lateral side of your upper thigh .
The lesser trochanter is a small , bony prominence that lies on the medial aspect of the femur , just below the neck .
A single , powerful muscle attaches to the lesser trochanter .
Running between the greater and lesser trochanters on the anterior side of the femur is the roughened intertrochanteric line .
The trochanters are also connected on the posterior side of the femur by the larger intertrochanteric crest .
The elongated shaft of the femur has a slight anterior bowing or curvature .
At its proximal end , the posterior shaft has the gluteal tuberosity , a roughened area extending inferiorly from the greater trochanter .
More inferiorly , the gluteal tuberosity becomes continuous with the linea aspera ( “ rough line ” ) .
This is the roughened ridge that passes distally along the posterior side of the mid-femur .
Multiple muscles of the hip and thigh regions make long , thin attachments to the femur along the linea aspera .
The distal end of the femur has medial and lateral bony expansions .
On the lateral side , the smooth portion that covers the distal and posterior aspects of the lateral expansion is the lateral condyle of the femur .
The roughened area on the outer , lateral side of the condyle is the lateral epicondyle of the femur .
Similarly , the smooth region of the distal and posterior medial femur is the medial condyle of the femur , and the irregular outer , medial side of this is the medial epicondyle of the femur .
The lateral and medial condyles articulate with the tibia to form the knee joint .
The epicondyles provide attachment for muscles and supporting ligaments of the knee .
The adductor tubercle is a small bump located at the superior margin of the medial epicondyle .
Posteriorly , the medial and lateral condyles are separated by a deep depression called the intercondylar fossa .
Anteriorly , the smooth surfaces of the condyles join together to form a wide groove called the patellar surface , which provides for articulation with the patella bone .
The combination of the medial and lateral condyles with the patellar surface gives the distal end of the femur a horseshoe ( U ) shape .
Watch this video ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/midfemur ) to view how a fracture of the mid-femur is surgically repaired .
How are the two portions of the broken femur stabilized during surgical repair of a fractured femur ?
The patella ( kneecap ) is largest sesamoid bone of the body ( see Figure 8.16 ) .
A sesamoid bone is a bone that is incorporated into the tendon of a muscle where that tendon crosses a joint .
The sesamoid bone articulates with the underlying bones to prevent damage to the muscle tendon due to rubbing against the bones during movements of the joint .
The patella is found in the tendon of the quadriceps femoris muscle , the large muscle of the anterior thigh that passes across the anterior knee to attach to the tibia .
The patella articulates with the patellar surface of the femur and thus prevents rubbing of the muscle tendon against the distal femur .
The patella also lifts the tendon away from the knee joint , which increases the leverage power of the quadriceps femoris muscle as it acts across the knee .
The patella does not articulate with the tibia .
this site ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/kneesurgery ) to perform a virtual knee replacement surgery .
The Visit prosthetic knee components must be properly aligned to function properly .
How is this alignment ensured ?
Runner ’ s knee , also known as patellofemoral syndrome , is the most common overuse injury among runners .
It is most frequent in adolescents and young adults , and is more common in females .
It often results from excessive running , particularly downhill , but may also occur in athletes who do a lot of knee bending , such as jumpers , skiers , cyclists , weight lifters , and soccer players .
It is felt as a dull , aching pain around the front of the knee and deep to the patella .
The pain may be felt when walking or running , going up or down stairs , kneeling or squatting , or after sitting with the knee bent for an extended period .
Patellofemoral syndrome may be initiated by a variety of causes , including individual variations in the shape and movement of the patella , a direct blow to the patella , or flat feet or improper shoes that cause excessive turning in or out of the feet or leg .
These factors may cause in an imbalance in the muscle pull that acts on the patella , resulting in an abnormal tracking of the patella that allows it to deviate too far toward the lateral side of the patellar surface on the distal femur .
Because the hips are wider than the knee region , the femur has a diagonal orientation within the thigh , in contrast to the vertically oriented tibia of the leg ( Figure 8.17 ) .
The Q-angle is a measure of how far the femur is angled laterally away from vertical .
The Q-angle is normally 10–15 degrees , with females typically having a larger Q-angle due to their wider pelvis .
During extension of the knee , the quadriceps femoris muscle pulls the patella both superiorly and laterally , with the lateral pull greater in women due to their large Q-angle .
This makes women more vulnerable to developing patellofemoral syndrome than men .
Normally , the large lip on the lateral side of the patellar surface of the femur compensates for the lateral pull on the patella , and thus helps to maintain its proper tracking .
However , if the pull produced by the medial and lateral sides of the quadriceps femoris muscle is not properly balanced , abnormal tracking of the patella toward the lateral side may occur .
With continued use , this produces pain and could result in damage to the articulating surfaces of the patella and femur , and the possible future development of arthritis .
Treatment generally involves stopping the activity that produces knee pain for a period of time , followed by a gradual resumption of activity .
Proper strengthening of the quadriceps femoris muscle to correct for imbalances is also important to help prevent reoccurrence .
The tibia ( shin bone ) is the medial bone of the leg and is larger than the fibula , with which it is paired ( Figure 8.18 ) .
The tibia is the main weight-bearing bone of the lower leg and the second longest bone of the body , after the femur .
The medial side of the tibia is located immediately under the skin , allowing it to be easily palpated down the entire length of the medial leg .
The proximal end of the tibia is greatly expanded .
The two sides of this expansion form the medial condyle of the tibia and the lateral condyle of the tibia .
The tibia does not have epicondyles .
The top surface of each condyle is smooth and flattened .
These areas articulate with the medial and lateral condyles of the femur to form the knee joint .
Between the articulating surfaces of the tibial condyles is the intercondylar eminence , an irregular , elevated area that serves as the inferior attachment point for two supporting ligaments of the knee .
The tibial tuberosity is an elevated area on the anterior side of the tibia , near its proximal end .
It is the final site of attachment for the muscle tendon associated with the patella .
More inferiorly , the shaft of the tibia becomes triangular in shape .
The anterior apex of MH this triangle forms the anterior border of the tibia , which begins at the tibial tuberosity and runs inferiorly along the length of the tibia .
Both the anterior border and the medial side of the triangular shaft are located immediately under the skin and can be easily palpated along the entire length of the tibia .
A small ridge running down the lateral side of the tibial shaft is the interosseous border of the tibia .
This is for the attachment of the interosseous membrane of the leg , the sheet of dense connective tissue that unites the tibia and fibula bones .
Located on the posterior side of the tibia is the soleal line , a diagonally running , roughened ridge that begins below the base of the lateral condyle , and runs down and medially across the proximal third of the posterior tibia .
Muscles of the posterior leg attach to this line .
The large expansion found on the medial side of the distal tibia is the medial malleolus ( “ little hammer ” ) .
This forms the large bony bump found on the medial side of the ankle region .
Both the smooth surface on the inside of the medial malleolus and the smooth area at the distal end of the tibia articulate with the talus bone of the foot as part of the ankle joint .
On the lateral side of the distal tibia is a wide groove called the fibular notch .
This area articulates with the distal end of the fibula , forming the distal tibiofibular joint .
The fibula is the slender bone located on the lateral side of the leg ( see Figure 8.18 ) .
The fibula does not bear weight .
It serves primarily for muscle attachments and thus is largely surrounded by muscles .
Only the proximal and distal ends of the fibula can be palpated .
The head of the fibula is the small , knob-like , proximal end of the fibula .
It articulates with the inferior aspect of the lateral tibial condyle , forming the proximal tibiofibular joint .
The thin shaft of the fibula has the interosseous border of the fibula , a narrow ridge running down its medial side for the attachment of the interosseous membrane that spans the fibula and tibia .
The distal end of the fibula forms the lateral malleolus , which forms the easily palpated bony bump on the lateral side of the ankle .
The deep ( medial ) side of the lateral malleolus articulates with the talus bone of the foot as part of the ankle joint .
The distal fibula also articulates with the fibular notch of the tibia .
The posterior half of the foot is formed by seven tarsal bones ( Figure 8.19 ) .
The most superior bone is the talus .
This has a relatively square-shaped , upper surface that articulates with the tibia and fibula to form the ankle joint .
Inferiorly , the talus articulates with the calcaneus ( heel bone ) , the largest bone of the foot , which forms the heel .
Body weight is transferred from the tibia to the talus to the calcaneus , which rests on the ground .
The medial calcaneus has a prominent bony extension called the sustentaculum tali ( “ support for the talus ” ) that supports the medial side of the talus bone .
The cuboid bone articulates with the anterior end of the calcaneus bone .
The cuboid has a deep groove running across its inferior surface , which provides passage for a muscle tendon .
The talus bone articulates anteriorly with the navicular bone , which in turn articulates anteriorly with the three cuneiform ( “ wedge-shaped ” ) bones .
These bones are the medial cuneiform , the intermediate cuneiform , and the lateral cuneiform .
Each of these bones has a broad superior surface and a narrow inferior surface , which together produce the transverse ( medial-lateral ) curvature of the foot .
The navicular and lateral cuneiform bones also articulate with the medial side of the cuboid bone .
Use this tutorial ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/footbones ) to review the bones of the foot .
Which tarsal bones are in the proximal , intermediate , and distal groups ?
The anterior half of the foot is formed by the five metatarsal bones , which are located between the tarsal bones of the posterior foot and the phalanges of the toes ( see Figure 8.19 ) .
These elongated bones are numbered 1–5 , starting with the medial side of the foot .
The first metatarsal bone is shorter and thicker than the others .
The second metatarsal is the longest .
The base of the metatarsal bone is the proximal end of each metatarsal bone .
These articulate with the cuboid or cuneiform bones .
The base of the fifth metatarsal has a large , lateral expansion that provides for muscle attachments .
This expanded base of the fifth metatarsal can be felt as a bony bump at the midpoint along the lateral border of the foot .
The expanded distal end of each metatarsal is the head of the metatarsal bone .
Each metatarsal bone articulates with the proximal phalanx of a toe to form a metatarsophalangeal joint .
The heads of the metatarsal bones also rest on the ground and form the ball ( anterior end ) of the foot .
The toes contain a total of 14 phalanx bones ( phalanges ) , arranged in a similar manner as the phalanges of the fingers ( see Figure 8.19 ) .
The toes are numbered 1–5 , starting with the big toe ( hallux ) .
The big toe has two phalanx bones , the proximal and distal phalanges .
The remaining toes all have proximal , middle , and distal phalanges .
A joint between adjacent phalanx bones is called an interphalangeal joint .
View this link ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/bunion ) to learn about a bunion , a localized swelling on the medial side of the foot , next to the first metatarsophalangeal joint , at the base of the big toe .
What is a bunion and what type of shoe is most likely to cause this to develop ?
When the foot comes into contact with the ground during walking , running , or jumping activities , the impact of the body weight puts a tremendous amount of pressure and force on the foot .
During running , the force applied to each foot as it contacts the ground can be up to 2.5 times your body weight .
The bones , joints , ligaments , and muscles of the foot absorb this force , thus greatly reducing the amount of shock that is passed superiorly into the lower limb and body .
The arches of the foot play an important role in this shock-absorbing ability .
When weight is applied to the foot , these arches will flatten somewhat , thus absorbing energy .
When the weight is removed , the arch rebounds , giving “ spring ” to the step .
The arches also serve to distribute body weight side to side and to either end of the foot .
The foot has a transverse arch , a medial longitudinal arch , and a lateral longitudinal arch ( see Figure 8.19 ) .
The transverse arch forms the medial-lateral curvature of the mid-foot .
It is formed by the wedge shapes of the cuneiform bones and bases ( proximal ends ) of the first to fourth metatarsal bones .
This arch helps to distribute body weight from side to side within the foot , thus allowing the foot to accommodate uneven terrain .
The longitudinal arches run down the length of the foot .
The lateral longitudinal arch is relatively flat , whereas the medial longitudinal arch is larger ( taller ) .
The longitudinal arches are formed by the tarsal bones posteriorly and the metatarsal bones anteriorly .
These arches are supported at either end , where they contact the ground .
Posteriorly , this support is provided by the calcaneus bone and anteriorly by the heads ( distal ends ) of the metatarsal bones .
The talus bone , which receives the weight of the body , is located at the top of the longitudinal arches .
Body weight is then conveyed from the talus to the ground by the anterior and posterior ends of these arches .
Strong ligaments unite the adjacent foot bones to prevent disruption of the arches during weight bearing .
On the bottom of the foot , additional ligaments tie together the anterior and posterior ends of the arches .
These ligaments have elasticity , which allows them to stretch somewhat during weight bearing , thus allowing the longitudinal arches to spread .
The stretching of these ligaments stores energy within the foot , rather than passing these forces into the leg .
Contraction of the foot muscles also plays an important role in this energy absorption .
When the weight is removed , the elastic ligaments recoil and pull the ends of the arches closer together .
This recovery of the arches releases the stored energy and improves the energy efficiency of walking .
Stretching of the ligaments that support the longitudinal arches can lead to pain .
This can occur in overweight individuals , with people who have jobs that involve standing for long periods of time ( such as a waitress ) , or walking or running long distances .
If stretching of the ligaments is prolonged , excessive , or repeated , it can result in a gradual lengthening of the supporting ligaments , with subsequent depression or collapse of the longitudinal arches , particularly on the medial side of the foot .
This condition is called pes planus ( “ flat foot ” or “ fallen arches ” ) .
Mesenchyme gives rise to the bones of the upper and lower limbs , as well as to the pectoral and pelvic girdles .
Development of the limbs begins near the end of the fourth embryonic week , with the upper limbs appearing first .
Thereafter , the development of the upper and lower limbs follows similar patterns , with the lower limbs lagging behind the upper limbs by a few days .
Each upper and lower limb initially develops as a small bulge called a limb bud , which appears on the lateral side of the early embryo .
The upper limb bud appears near the end of the fourth week of development , with the lower limb bud appearing shortly after ( Figure 8.20 ) .
Initially , the limb buds consist of a core of mesenchyme covered by a layer of ectoderm .
The ectoderm at the end of the limb bud thickens to form a narrow crest called the apical ectodermal ridge .
This ridge stimulates the underlying mesenchyme to rapidly proliferate , producing the outgrowth of the developing limb .
As the limb bud elongates , cells located farther from the apical ectodermal ridge slow their rates of cell division and begin to differentiate .
In this way , the limb develops along a proximal-to-distal axis .
During the sixth week of development , the distal ends of the upper and lower limb buds expand and flatten into a paddle shape .
This region will become the hand or foot .
The wrist or ankle areas then appear as a constriction that develops at the base of the paddle .
Shortly after this , a second constriction on the limb bud appears at the future site of the elbow or knee .
Within the paddle , areas of tissue undergo cell death , producing separations between the growing fingers and toes .
Also during the sixth week of development , mesenchyme within the limb buds begins to differentiate into hyaline cartilage that will form models of the future limb bones .
During the seventh week of development , the upper limb rotates laterally by 90 degrees , so that the palm of the hand faces anteriorly and the thumb points laterally .
In contrast , the lower limb undergoes a 90-degree medial rotation , thus bringing the big toe to the medial side of the foot .
Watch this animation ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/limbbuds ) to follow the development and growth of the upper and lower limb buds .
All of the girdle and limb bones , except for the clavicle , develop by the process of endochondral ossification .
This process begins as the mesenchyme within the limb bud differentiates into hyaline cartilage to form cartilage models for future bones .
By the twelfth week , a primary ossification center will have appeared in the diaphysis ( shaft ) region of the long bones , initiating the process that converts the cartilage model into bone .
A secondary ossification center will appear in each epiphysis ( expanded end ) of these bones at a later time , usually after birth .
The primary and secondary ossification centers are separated by the epiphyseal plate , a layer of growing hyaline cartilage .
This plate is located between the diaphysis and each epiphysis .
It continues to grow and is responsible for the lengthening of the bone .
The epiphyseal plate is retained for many years , until the bone reaches its final , adult size , at which time the epiphyseal plate disappears and the epiphysis fuses to the diaphysis .
( Seek additional content on ossification in the chapter on bone tissue . )
Small bones , such as the phalanges , will develop only one secondary ossification center and will thus have only a single epiphyseal plate .
Large bones , such as the femur , will develop several secondary ossification centers , with an epiphyseal plate associated with each secondary center .
Thus , ossification of the femur begins at the end of the seventh week with the appearance of the primary ossification center in the diaphysis , which rapidly expands to ossify the shaft of the bone prior to birth .
Secondary ossification centers develop at later times .
Ossification of the distal end of the femur , to form the condyles and epicondyles , begins shortly before birth .
Secondary ossification centers also appear in the femoral head late in the first year after birth , in the greater trochanter during the fourth year , and in the lesser trochanter between the ages of 9 and 10 years .
Once these areas have ossified , their fusion to the diaphysis and the disappearance of each epiphyseal plate follow a reversed sequence .
Thus , the lesser trochanter is the first to fuse , doing so at the onset of puberty ( around 11 years of age ) , followed by the greater trochanter approximately 1 year later .
The femoral head fuses between the ages of 14–17 years , whereas the distal condyles of the femur are the last to fuse , between the ages of 16–19 years .
Knowledge of the age at which different epiphyseal plates disappear is important when interpreting radiographs taken of children .
Since the cartilage of an epiphyseal plate is less dense than bone , the plate will appear dark in a radiograph image .
Thus , a normal epiphyseal plate may be mistaken for a bone fracture .
The clavicle is the one appendicular skeleton bone that does not develop via endochondral ossification .
Instead , the clavicle develops through the process of intramembranous ossification .
During this process , mesenchymal cells differentiate directly into bone-producing cells , which produce the clavicle directly , without first making a cartilage model .
Because of this early production of bone , the clavicle is the first bone of the body to begin ossification , with ossification centers appearing during the fifth week of development .
However , ossification of the clavicle is not complete until age 25 .
Clubfoot , also known as talipes , is a congenital ( present at birth ) disorder of unknown cause and is the most common deformity of the lower limb .
It affects the foot and ankle , causing the foot to be twisted inward at a sharp angle , like the head of a golf club ( Figure 8.21 ) .
Clubfoot has a frequency of about 1 out of every 1,000 births , and is twice as likely to occur in a male child as in a female child .
In 50 percent of cases , both feet are affected .
At birth , children with a clubfoot have the heel turned inward and the anterior foot twisted so that the lateral side of the foot is facing inferiorly , commonly due to ligaments or leg muscles attached to the foot that are shortened or abnormally tight .
These pull the foot into an abnormal position , resulting in bone deformities .
Other symptoms may include bending of the ankle that lifts the heel of the foot and an extremely high foot arch .
Due to the limited range of motion in the affected foot , it is difficult to place the foot into the correct position .
Additionally , the affected foot may be shorter than normal , and the calf muscles are usually underdeveloped on the affected side .
Despite the appearance , this is not a painful condition for newborns .
However , it must be treated early to avoid future pain and impaired walking ability .
Although the cause of clubfoot is idiopathic ( unknown ) , evidence indicates that fetal position within the uterus is not a contributing factor .
Genetic factors are involved , because clubfoot tends to run within families .
Cigarette smoking during pregnancy has been linked to the development of clubfoot , particularly in families with a history of clubfoot .
Previously , clubfoot required extensive surgery .
Today , 90 percent of cases are successfully treated without surgery using new corrective casting techniques .
The best chance for a full recovery requires that clubfoot treatment begin during the first 2 weeks after birth .
Corrective casting gently stretches the foot , which is followed by the application of a holding cast to keep the foot in the proper position .
This stretching and casting is repeated weekly for several weeks .
In severe cases , surgery may also be required , after which the foot typically remains in a cast for 6 to 8 weeks .
After the cast is removed following either surgical or nonsurgical treatment , the child will be required to wear a brace part-time ( at night ) for up to 4 years .
In addition , special exercises will be prescribed , and the child must also wear special shoes .
Close monitoring by the parents and adherence to postoperative instructions are imperative in minimizing the risk of relapse .
Despite these difficulties , treatment for clubfoot is usually successful , and the child will grow up to lead a normal , active life .
Joints are the location where bones come together .
Many joints allow for movement between the bones .
At these joints , the articulating surfaces of the adjacent bones can move smoothly against each other .
However , the bones of other joints may be joined to each other by connective tissue or cartilage .
These joints are designed for stability and provide for little or no movement .
Importantly , joint stability and movement are related to each other .
This means that stable joints allow for little or no mobility between the adjacent bones .
Conversely , joints that provide the most movement between bones are the least stable .
Understanding the relationship between joint structure and function will help to explain why particular types of joints are found in certain areas of the body .
The articulating surfaces of bones at stable types of joints , with little or no mobility , are strongly united to each other .
For example , most of the joints of the skull are held together by fibrous connective tissue and do not allow for movement between the adjacent bones .
This lack of mobility is important , because the skull bones serve to protect the brain .
Similarly , other joints united by fibrous connective tissue allow for very little movement , which provides stability and weight-bearing support for the body .
For example , the tibia and fibula of the leg are tightly united to give stability to the body when standing .
At other joints , the bones are held together by cartilage , which permits limited movements between the bones .
Thus , the joints of the vertebral column only allow for small movements between adjacent vertebrae , but when added together , these movements provide the flexibility that allows your body to twist , or bend to the front , back , or side .
In contrast , at joints that allow for wide ranges of motion , the articulating surfaces of the bones are not directly united to each other .
Instead , these surfaces are enclosed within a space filled with lubricating fluid , which allows the bones to move smoothly against each other .
These joints provide greater mobility , but since the bones are free to move in relation to each other , the joint is less stable .
Most of the joints between the bones of the appendicular skeleton are this freely moveable type of joint .
These joints allow the muscles of the body to pull on a bone and thereby produce movement of that body region .
Your ability to kick a soccer ball , pick up a fork , and dance the tango depend on mobility at these types of joints .
Joints are classified both structurally and functionally .
Structural classifications of joints take into account whether the adjacent bones are strongly anchored to each other by fibrous connective tissue or cartilage , or whether the adjacent bones articulate with each other within a fluid-filled space called a joint cavity .
Functional classifications describe the degree of movement available between the bones , ranging from immobile , to slightly mobile , to freely moveable joints .
The amount of movement available at a particular joint of the body is related to the functional requirements for that joint .
Thus immobile or slightly moveable joints serve to protect internal organs , give stability to the body , and allow for limited body movement .
In contrast , freely moveable joints allow for much more extensive movements of the body and limbs .
The structural classification of joints is based on whether the articulating surfaces of the adjacent bones are directly connected by fibrous connective tissue or cartilage , or whether the articulating surfaces contact each other within a fluidfilled joint cavity .
These differences serve to divide the joints of the body into three structural classifications .
A fibrous joint is where the adjacent bones are united by fibrous connective tissue .
At a cartilaginous joint , the bones are joined by hyaline cartilage or fibrocartilage .
At a synovial joint , the articulating surfaces of the bones are not directly connected , but instead come into contact with each other within a joint cavity that is filled with a lubricating fluid .
Synovial joints allow for free movement between the bones and are the most common joints of the body .
The functional classification of joints is determined by the amount of mobility found between the adjacent bones .
Joints are thus functionally classified as a synarthrosis or immobile joint , an amphiarthrosis or slightly moveable joint , or as a diarthrosis , which is a freely moveable joint ( arthroun = “ to fasten by a joint ” ) .
Depending on their location , fibrous joints may be functionally classified as a synarthrosis ( immobile joint ) or an amphiarthrosis ( slightly mobile joint ) .
Cartilaginous joints are also functionally classified as either a synarthrosis or an amphiarthrosis joint .
All synovial joints are functionally classified as a diarthrosis joint .
An immobile or nearly immobile joint is called a synarthrosis .
The immobile nature of these joints provide for a strong union between the articulating bones .
This is important at locations where the bones provide protection for internal organs .
Examples include sutures , the fibrous joints between the bones of the skull that surround and protect the brain ( Figure 9.2 ) , and the manubriosternal joint , the cartilaginous joint that unites the manubrium and body of the sternum for protection of the heart .
An amphiarthrosis is a joint that has limited mobility .
An example of this type of joint is the cartilaginous joint that unites the bodies of adjacent vertebrae .
Filling the gap between the vertebrae is a thick pad of fibrocartilage called an intervertebral disc ( Figure 9.3 ) .
Each intervertebral disc strongly unites the vertebrae but still allows for a limited amount of movement between them .
However , the small movements available between adjacent vertebrae can sum together along the length of the vertebral column to provide for large ranges of body movements .
Another example of an amphiarthrosis is the pubic symphysis of the pelvis .
This is a cartilaginous joint in which the pubic regions of the right and left hip bones are strongly anchored to each other by fibrocartilage .
This joint normally has very little mobility .
The strength of the pubic symphysis is important in conferring weight-bearing stability to the pelvis .
A freely mobile joint is classified as a diarthrosis .
These types of joints include all synovial joints of the body , which provide the majority of body movements .
Most diarthrotic joints are found in the appendicular skeleton and thus give the limbs a wide range of motion .
These joints are divided into three categories , based on the number of axes of motion provided by each .
An axis in anatomy is described as the movements in reference to the three anatomical planes : transverse , frontal , and sagittal .
Thus , diarthroses are classified as uniaxial ( for movement in one plane ) , biaxial ( for movement in two planes ) , or multiaxial joints ( for movement in all three anatomical planes ) .
A uniaxial joint only allows for a motion in a single plane ( around a single axis ) .
The elbow joint , which only allows for bending or straightening , is an example of a uniaxial joint .
A biaxial joint allows for motions within two planes .
An example of a biaxial joint is a metacarpophalangeal joint ( knuckle joint ) of the hand .
The joint allows for movement along one axis to produce bending or straightening of the finger , and movement along a second axis , which allows for spreading of the fingers away from each other and bringing them together .
A joint that allows for the several directions of movement is called a multiaxial joint ( polyaxial or triaxial joint ) .
This type of diarthrotic joint allows for movement along three axes ( Figure 9.4 ) .
The shoulder and hip joints are multiaxial joints .
They allow the upper or lower limb to move in an anteriorposterior direction and a medial-lateral direction .
In addition , the limb can also be rotated around its long axis .
This third movement results in rotation of the limb so that its anterior surface is moved either toward or away from the midline of the body .
The gap between the bones may be narrow or wide .
There are three types of fibrous joints .
A suture is the narrow fibrous joint found between most bones of the skull .
At a syndesmosis joint , the bones are more widely separated but are held together by a narrow band of fibrous connective tissue called a ligament or a wide sheet of connective tissue called an interosseous membrane .
This type of fibrous joint is found between the shaft regions of the long bones in the forearm and in the leg .
Lastly , a gomphosis is the narrow fibrous joint between the roots of a tooth and the bony socket in the jaw into which the tooth fits .
All the bones of the skull , except for the mandible , are joined to each other by a fibrous joint called a suture .
The fibrous connective tissue found at a suture ( “ to bind or sew ” ) strongly unites the adjacent skull bones and thus helps to protect the brain and form the face .
In adults , the skull bones are closely opposed and fibrous connective tissue fills the narrow gap between the bones .
The suture is frequently convoluted , forming a tight union that prevents most movement between the bones .
( See Figure 9.5a . )
Thus , skull sutures are functionally classified as a synarthrosis , although some sutures may allow for slight movements between the cranial bones .
In newborns and infants , the areas of connective tissue between the bones are much wider , especially in those areas on the top and sides of the skull that will become the sagittal , coronal , squamous , and lambdoid sutures .
These broad areas of connective tissue are called fontanelles ( Figure 9.6 ) .
During birth , the fontanelles provide flexibility to the skull , allowing the bones to push closer together or to overlap slightly , thus aiding movement of the infant ’ s head through the birth canal .
After birth , these expanded regions of connective tissue allow for rapid growth of the skull and enlargement of the brain .
The fontanelles greatly decrease in width during the first year after birth as the skull bones enlarge .
When the connective tissue between the adjacent bones is reduced to a narrow layer , these fibrous joints are now called sutures .
At some sutures , the connective tissue will ossify and be converted into bone , causing the adjacent bones to fuse to each other .
This fusion between bones is called a synostosis ( “ joined by bone ” ) .
Examples of synostosis fusions between cranial bones are found both early and late in life .
At the time of birth , the frontal and maxillary bones consist of right and left halves joined together by sutures , which disappear by the eighth year as the halves fuse together to form a single bone .
Late in life , the sagittal , coronal , and lambdoid sutures of the skull will begin to ossify and fuse , causing the suture line to gradually disappear .
A syndesmosis ( “ fastened with a band ” ) is a type of fibrous joint in which two parallel bones are united to each other by fibrous connective tissue .
The gap between the bones may be narrow , with the bones joined by ligaments , or the gap may be wide and filled in by a broad sheet of connective tissue called an interosseous membrane .
In the forearm , the wide gap between the shaft portions of the radius and ulna bones are strongly united by an interosseous membrane ( see Figure 9.5b ) .
Similarly , in the leg , the shafts of the tibia and fibula are also united by an interosseous membrane .
In addition , at the distal tibiofibular joint , the articulating surfaces of the bones lack cartilage and the narrow gap between the bones is anchored by fibrous connective tissue and ligaments on both the anterior and posterior aspects of the joint .
Together , the interosseous membrane and these ligaments form the tibiofibular syndesmosis .
The syndesmoses found in the forearm and leg serve to unite parallel bones and prevent their separation .
However , a syndesmosis does not prevent all movement between the bones , and thus this type of fibrous joint is functionally classified as an amphiarthrosis .
In the leg , the syndesmosis between the tibia and fibula strongly unites the bones , allows for little movement , and firmly locks the talus bone in place between the tibia and fibula at the ankle joint .
This provides strength and stability to the leg and ankle , which are important during weight bearing .
In the forearm , the interosseous membrane is flexible enough to allow for rotation of the radius bone during forearm movements .
Thus in contrast to the stability provided by the tibiofibular syndesmosis , the flexibility of the antebrachial interosseous membrane allows for the much greater mobility of the forearm .
The interosseous membranes of the leg and forearm also provide areas for muscle attachment .
Damage to a syndesmotic joint , which usually results from a fracture of the bone with an accompanying tear of the interosseous membrane , will produce pain , loss of stability of the bones , and may damage the muscles attached to the interosseous membrane .
If the fracture site is not properly immobilized with a cast or splint , contractile activity by these muscles can cause improper alignment of the broken bones during healing .
A gomphosis ( “ fastened with bolts ” ) is the specialized fibrous joint that anchors the root of a tooth into its bony socket within the maxillary bone ( upper jaw ) or mandible bone ( lower jaw ) of the skull .
A gomphosis is also known as a peg-andsocket joint .
Spanning between the bony walls of the socket and the root of the tooth are numerous short bands of dense connective tissue , each of which is called a periodontal ligament ( see Figure 9.5c ) .
Due to the immobility of a gomphosis , this type of joint is functionally classified as a synarthrosis .
These types of joints lack a joint cavity and involve bones that are joined together by either hyaline cartilage or fibrocartilage ( Figure 9.7 ) .
There are two types of cartilaginous joints .
A synchondrosis is a cartilaginous joint where the bones are joined by hyaline cartilage .
Also classified as a synchondrosis are places where bone is united to a cartilage structure , such as between the anterior end of a rib and the costal cartilage of the thoracic cage .
The second type of cartilaginous joint is a symphysis , where the bones are joined by fibrocartilage .
A synchondrosis ( “ joined by cartilage ” ) is a cartilaginous joint where bones are joined together by hyaline cartilage , or where bone is united to hyaline cartilage .
A synchondrosis may be temporary or permanent .
A temporary synchondrosis is the epiphyseal plate ( growth plate ) of a growing long bone .
The epiphyseal plate is the region of growing hyaline cartilage that unites the diaphysis ( shaft ) of the bone to the epiphysis ( end of the bone ) .
Bone lengthening involves growth of the epiphyseal plate cartilage and its replacement by bone , which adds to the diaphysis .
For many years during childhood growth , the rates of cartilage growth and bone formation are equal and thus the epiphyseal plate does not change in overall thickness as the bone lengthens .
During the late teens and early 20s , growth of the cartilage slows and eventually stops .
The epiphyseal plate is then completely replaced by bone , and the diaphysis and epiphysis portions of the bone fuse together to form a single adult bone .
This fusion of the diaphysis and epiphysis is a synostosis .
Once this occurs , bone lengthening ceases .
For this reason , the epiphyseal plate is considered to be a temporary synchondrosis .
Because cartilage is softer than bone tissue , injury to a growing long bone can damage the epiphyseal plate cartilage , thus stopping bone growth and preventing additional bone lengthening .
Growing layers of cartilage also form synchondroses that join together the ilium , ischium , and pubic portions of the hip bone during childhood and adolescence .
When body growth stops , the cartilage disappears and is replaced by bone , forming synostoses and fusing the bony components together into the single hip bone of the adult .
Similarly , synostoses unite the sacral vertebrae that fuse together to form the adult sacrum .
Visit this website ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/childhand ) to view a radiograph ( X-ray image ) of a child ’ s hand and wrist .
The growing bones of child have an epiphyseal plate that forms a synchondrosis between the shaft and end of a long bone .
Being less dense than bone , the area of epiphyseal cartilage is seen on this radiograph as the dark epiphyseal gaps located near the ends of the long bones , including the radius , ulna , metacarpal , and phalanx bones .
Which of the bones in this image do not show an epiphyseal plate ( epiphyseal gap ) ?
Examples of permanent synchondroses are found in the thoracic cage .
One example is the first sternocostal joint , where the first rib is anchored to the manubrium by its costal cartilage .
( The articulations of the remaining costal cartilages to the sternum are all synovial joints . )
Additional synchondroses are formed where the anterior end of the other 11 ribs is joined to its costal cartilage .
Unlike the temporary synchondroses of the epiphyseal plate , these permanent synchondroses retain their hyaline cartilage and thus do not ossify with age .
Due to the lack of movement between the bone and cartilage , both temporary and permanent synchondroses are functionally classified as a synarthrosis .
A cartilaginous joint where the bones are joined by fibrocartilage is called a symphysis ( “ growing together ” ) .
Fibrocartilage is very strong because it contains numerous bundles of thick collagen fibers , thus giving it a much greater ability to resist pulling and bending forces when compared with hyaline cartilage .
This gives symphyses the ability to strongly unite the adjacent bones , but can still allow for limited movement to occur .
Thus , a symphysis is functionally classified as an amphiarthrosis .
The gap separating the bones at a symphysis may be narrow or wide .
Examples in which the gap between the bones is narrow include the pubic symphysis and the manubriosternal joint .
At the pubic symphysis , the pubic portions of the right and left hip bones of the pelvis are joined together by fibrocartilage across a narrow gap .
Similarly , at the manubriosternal joint , fibrocartilage unites the manubrium and body portions of the sternum .
The intervertebral symphysis is a wide symphysis located between the bodies of adjacent vertebrae of the vertebral column .
Here a thick pad of fibrocartilage called an intervertebral disc strongly unites the adjacent vertebrae by filling the gap between them .
The width of the intervertebral symphysis is important because it allows for small movements between the adjacent vertebrae .
In addition , the thick intervertebral disc provides cushioning between the vertebrae , which is important when carrying heavy objects or during high-impact activities such as running or jumping .
A key structural characteristic for a synovial joint that is not seen at fibrous or cartilaginous joints is the presence of a joint cavity .
This fluid-filled space is the site at which the articulating surfaces of the bones contact each other .
Also unlike fibrous or cartilaginous joints , the articulating bone surfaces at a synovial joint are not directly connected to each other with fibrous connective tissue or cartilage .
This gives the bones of a synovial joint the ability to move smoothly against each other , allowing for increased joint mobility .
Synovial joints are characterized by the presence of a joint cavity .
The walls of this space are formed by the articular capsule , a fibrous connective tissue structure that is attached to each bone just outside the area of the bone ’ s articulating surface .
The bones of the joint articulate with each other within the joint cavity .
Friction between the bones at a synovial joint is prevented by the presence of the articular cartilage , a thin layer of hyaline cartilage that covers the entire articulating surface of each bone .
However , unlike at a cartilaginous joint , the articular cartilages of each bone are not continuous with each other .
Instead , the articular cartilage acts like a Teflon coating over the bone surface , allowing the articulating bones to move smoothly against each other without damaging the underlying bone tissue .
Lining the inner surface of the articular capsule is a thin synovial membrane .
The cells of this membrane secrete synovial fluid ( synovia = “ a thick fluid ” ) , a thick , slimy fluid that provides lubrication to further reduce friction between the bones of the joint .
This fluid also provides nourishment to the articular cartilage , which does not contain blood vessels .
The ability of the bones to move smoothly against each other within the joint cavity , and the freedom of joint movement this provides , means that each synovial joint is functionally classified as a diarthrosis .
Outside of their articulating surfaces , the bones are connected together by ligaments , which are strong bands of fibrous connective tissue .
These strengthen and support the joint by anchoring the bones together and preventing their separation .
Ligaments allow for normal movements at a joint , but limit the range of these motions , thus preventing excessive or abnormal joint movements .
Ligaments are classified based on their relationship to the fibrous articular capsule .
An extrinsic ligament is located outside of the articular capsule , an intrinsic ligament is fused to or incorporated into the wall of the articular capsule , and an intracapsular ligament is located inside of the articular capsule .
At many synovial joints , additional support is provided by the muscles and their tendons that act across the joint .
A tendon is the dense connective tissue structure that attaches a muscle to bone .
As forces acting on a joint increase , the body will automatically increase the overall strength of contraction of the muscles crossing that joint , thus allowing the muscle and its tendon to serve as a “ dynamic ligament ” to resist forces and support the joint .
This type of indirect support by muscles is very important at the shoulder joint , for example , where the ligaments are relatively weak .
A few synovial joints of the body have a fibrocartilage structure located between the articulating bones .
This is called an articular disc , which is generally small and oval-shaped , or a meniscus , which is larger and C-shaped .
These structures can serve several functions , depending on the specific joint .
In some places , an articular disc may act to strongly unite the bones of the joint to each other .
Examples of this include the articular discs found at the sternoclavicular joint or between the distal ends of the radius and ulna bones .
At other synovial joints , the disc can provide shock absorption and cushioning between the bones , which is the function of each meniscus within the knee joint .
Finally , an articular disc can serve to smooth the movements between the articulating bones , as seen at the temporomandibular joint .
Some synovial joints also have a fat pad , which can serve as a cushion between the bones .
Additional structures located outside of a synovial joint serve to prevent friction between the bones of the joint and the overlying muscle tendons or skin .
A bursa ( plural = bursae ) is a thin connective tissue sac filled with lubricating liquid .
They are located in regions where skin , ligaments , muscles , or muscle tendons can rub against each other , usually near a body joint ( Figure 9.9 ) .
Bursae reduce friction by separating the adjacent structures , preventing them from rubbing directly against each other .
Bursae are classified by their location .
A subcutaneous bursa is located between the skin and an underlying bone .
It allows skin to move smoothly over the bone .
Examples include the prepatellar bursa located over the kneecap and the olecranon bursa at the tip of the elbow .
A submuscular bursa is found between a muscle and an underlying bone , or between adjacent muscles .
These prevent rubbing of the muscle during movements .
A large submuscular bursa , the trochanteric bursa , is found at the lateral hip , between the greater trochanter of the femur and the overlying gluteus maximus muscle .
A subtendinous bursa is found between a tendon and a bone .
Examples include the subacromial bursa that protects the tendon of shoulder muscle as it passes under the acromion of the scapula , and the suprapatellar bursa that separates the tendon of the large anterior thigh muscle from the distal femur just above the knee .
A tendon sheath is similar in structure to a bursa , but smaller .
It is a connective tissue sac that surrounds a muscle tendon at places where the tendon crosses a joint .
It contains a lubricating fluid that allows for smooth motions of the tendon during muscle contraction and joint movements .
Bursitis is the inflammation of a bursa near a joint .
This will cause pain , swelling , or tenderness of the bursa and surrounding area , and may also result in joint stiffness .
Bursitis is most commonly associated with the bursae found at or near the shoulder , hip , knee , or elbow joints .
At the shoulder , subacromial bursitis may occur in the bursa that separates the acromion of the scapula from the tendon of a shoulder muscle as it passes deep to the acromion .
In the hip region , trochanteric bursitis can occur in the bursa that overlies the greater trochanter of the femur , just below the lateral side of the hip .
Ischial bursitis occurs in the bursa that separates the skin from the ischial tuberosity of the pelvis , the bony structure that is weight bearing when sitting .
At the knee , inflammation and swelling of the bursa located between the skin and patella bone is prepatellar bursitis ( “ housemaid ’ s knee ” ) , a condition more commonly seen today in roofers or floor and carpet installers who do not use knee pads .
At the elbow , olecranon bursitis is inflammation of the bursa between the skin and olecranon process of the ulna .
The olecranon forms the bony tip of the elbow , and bursitis here is also known as “ student ’ s elbow. ” Bursitis can be either acute ( lasting only a few days ) or chronic .
It can arise from muscle overuse , trauma , excessive or prolonged pressure on the skin , rheumatoid arthritis , gout , or infection of the joint .
Repeated acute episodes of bursitis can result in a chronic condition .
Treatments for the disorder include antibiotics if the bursitis is caused by an infection , or anti-inflammatory agents , such as nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs ( NSAIDs ) or corticosteroids if the bursitis is due to trauma or overuse .
Chronic bursitis may require that fluid be drained , but additional surgery is usually not required .
Synovial joints are subdivided based on the shapes of the articulating surfaces of the bones that form each joint .
The six types of synovial joints are pivot , hinge , condyloid , saddle , plane , and ball-and socket-joints ( Figure 9.10 ) .
At a pivot joint , a rounded portion of a bone is enclosed within a ring formed partially by the articulation with another bone and partially by a ligament ( see Figure 9.10a ) .
The bone rotates within this ring .
Since the rotation is around a single axis , pivot joints are functionally classified as a uniaxial diarthrosis type of joint .
An example of a pivot joint is the atlantoaxial joint , found between the C1 ( atlas ) and C2 ( axis ) vertebrae .
Here , the upward projecting dens of the axis articulates with the inner aspect of the atlas , where it is held in place by a ligament .
Rotation at this joint allows you to turn your head from side to side .
A second pivot joint is found at the proximal radioulnar joint .
Here , the head of the radius is largely encircled by a ligament that holds it in place as it articulates with the radial notch of the ulna .
Rotation of the radius allows for forearm movements .
In a hinge joint , the convex end of one bone articulates with the concave end of the adjoining bone ( see Figure 9.10b ) .
This type of joint allows only for bending and straightening motions along a single axis , and thus hinge joints are functionally classified as uniaxial joints .
A good example is the elbow joint , with the articulation between the trochlea of the humerus and the trochlear notch of the ulna .
Other hinge joints of the body include the knee , ankle , and interphalangeal joints between the phalanx bones of the fingers and toes .
At a condyloid joint ( ellipsoid joint ) , the shallow depression at the end of one bone articulates with a rounded structure from an adjacent bone or bones ( see Figure 9.10e ) .
The knuckle ( metacarpophalangeal ) joints of the hand between the distal end of a metacarpal bone and the proximal phalanx bone are condyloid joints .
Another example is the radiocarpal joint of the wrist , between the shallow depression at the distal end of the radius bone and the rounded scaphoid , lunate , and triquetrum carpal bones .
In this case , the articulation area has a more oval ( elliptical ) shape .
Functionally , condyloid joints are biaxial joints that allow for two planes of movement .
One movement involves the bending and straightening of the fingers or the anterior-posterior movements of the hand .
The second movement is a side-to-side movement , which allows you to spread your fingers apart and bring them together , or to move your hand in a medial-going or lateral-going direction .
At a saddle joint , both of the articulating surfaces for the bones have a saddle shape , which is concave in one direction and convex in the other ( see Figure 9.10c ) .
This allows the two bones to fit together like a rider sitting on a saddle .
Saddle joints are functionally classified as biaxial joints .
The primary example is the first carpometacarpal joint , between the trapezium ( a carpal bone ) and the first metacarpal bone at the base of the thumb .
This joint provides the thumb the ability to move away from the palm of the hand along two planes .
Thus , the thumb can move within the same plane as the palm of the hand , or it can jut out anteriorly , perpendicular to the palm .
This movement of the first carpometacarpal joint is what gives humans their distinctive “ opposable ” thumbs .
The sternoclavicular joint is also classified as a saddle joint .
At a plane joint ( gliding joint ) , the articulating surfaces of the bones are flat or slightly curved and of approximately the same size , which allows the bones to slide against each other ( see Figure 9.10d ) .
The motion at this type of joint is usually small and tightly constrained by surrounding ligaments .
Based only on their shape , plane joints can allow multiple movements , including rotation .
Thus plane joints can be functionally classified as a multiaxial joint .
However , not all of these movements are available to every plane joint due to limitations placed on it by ligaments or neighboring bones .
Thus , depending upon the specific joint of the body , a plane joint may exhibit only a single type of movement or several movements .
The joint with the greatest range of motion is the ball-and-socket joint .
At these joints , the rounded head of one bone ( the ball ) fits into the concave articulation ( the socket ) of the adjacent bone ( see Figure 9.10f ) .
The hip joint and the glenohumeral ( shoulder ) joint are the only ball-and-socket joints of the body .
At the hip joint , the head of the femur articulates with the acetabulum of the hip bone , and at the shoulder joint , the head of the humerus articulates with the glenoid cavity of the scapula .
Ball-and-socket joints are classified functionally as multiaxial joints .
The femur and the humerus are able to move in both anterior-posterior and medial-lateral directions and they can also rotate around their long axis .
The shallow socket formed by the glenoid cavity allows the shoulder joint an extensive range of motion .
In contrast , the deep socket of the acetabulum and the strong supporting ligaments of the hip joint serve to constrain movements of the femur , reflecting the need for stability and weight-bearing ability at the hip .
Watch this video ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/synjoints ) to see an animation of synovial joints in action .
Synovial joints are places where bones articulate with each other inside of a joint cavity .
Which type of synovial joint allows for the widest range of motion ?
Arthritis is a common disorder of synovial joints that involves inflammation of the joint .
This often results in significant joint pain , along with swelling , stiffness , and reduced joint mobility .
There are more than 100 different forms of arthritis .
Arthritis may arise from aging , damage to the articular cartilage , autoimmune diseases , bacterial or viral infections , or unknown ( probably genetic ) causes .
The most common type of arthritis is osteoarthritis , which is associated with aging and “ wear and tear ” of the articular cartilage ( Figure 9.11 ) .
Risk factors that may lead to osteoarthritis later in life include injury to a joint ; jobs that involve physical labor ; sports with running , twisting , or throwing actions ; and being overweight .
These factors put stress on the articular cartilage that covers the surfaces of bones at synovial joints , causing the cartilage to gradually become thinner .
As the articular cartilage layer wears down , more pressure is placed on the bones .
The joint responds by increasing production of the lubricating synovial fluid , but this can lead to swelling of the joint cavity , causing pain and joint stiffness as the articular capsule is stretched .
The bone tissue underlying the damaged articular cartilage also responds by thickening , producing irregularities and causing the articulating surface of the bone to become rough or bumpy .
Joint movement then results in pain and inflammation .
In its early stages , symptoms of osteoarthritis may be reduced by mild activity that “ warms up ” the joint , but the symptoms may worsen following exercise .
In individuals with more advanced osteoarthritis , the affected joints can become more painful and therefore are difficult to use effectively , resulting in increased immobility .
There is no cure for osteoarthritis , but several treatments can help alleviate the pain .
Treatments may include lifestyle changes , such as weight loss and low-impact exercise , and over-the-counter or prescription medications that help to alleviate the pain and inflammation .
For severe cases , joint replacement surgery ( arthroplasty ) may be required .
Joint replacement is a very invasive procedure , so other treatments are always tried before surgery .
However arthroplasty can provide relief from chronic pain and can enhance mobility within a few months following the surgery .
This type of surgery involves replacing the articular surfaces of the bones with prosthesis ( artificial components ) .
For example , in hip arthroplasty , the worn or damaged parts of the hip joint , including the head and neck of the femur and the acetabulum of the pelvis , are removed and replaced with artificial joint components .
The replacement head for the femur consists of a rounded ball attached to the end of a shaft that is inserted inside the diaphysis of the femur .
The acetabulum of the pelvis is reshaped and a replacement socket is fitted into its place .
The parts , which are always built in advance of the surgery , are sometimes custom made to produce the best possible fit for a patient .
Gout is a form of arthritis that results from the deposition of uric acid crystals within a body joint .
Usually only one or a few joints are affected , such as the big toe , knee , or ankle .
The attack may only last a few days , but may return to the same or another joint .
Gout occurs when the body makes too much uric acid or the kidneys do not properly excrete it .
A diet with excessive fructose has been implicated in raising the chances of a susceptible individual developing gout .
Other forms of arthritis are associated with various autoimmune diseases , bacterial infections of the joint , or unknown genetic causes .
Autoimmune diseases , including rheumatoid arthritis , scleroderma , or systemic lupus erythematosus , produce arthritis because the immune system of the body attacks the body joints .
In rheumatoid arthritis , the joint capsule and synovial membrane become inflamed .
As the disease progresses , the articular cartilage is severely damaged or destroyed , resulting in joint deformation , loss of movement , and severe disability .
The most commonly involved joints are the hands , feet , and cervical spine , with corresponding joints on both sides of the body usually affected , though not always to the same extent .
Rheumatoid arthritis is also associated with lung fibrosis , vasculitis ( inflammation of blood vessels ) , coronary heart disease , and premature mortality .
With no known cure , treatments are aimed at alleviating symptoms .
Exercise , anti-inflammatory and pain medications , various specific disease-modifying anti-rheumatic drugs , or surgery are used to treat rheumatoid arthritis .
Visit this website ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/gout ) to learn about a patient who arrives at the hospital with joint pain and weakness in his legs .
What caused this patient ’ s weakness ?
Watch this animation ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/hipreplace ) to observe hip replacement surgery ( total hip arthroplasty ) , which can be used to alleviate the pain and loss of joint mobility associated with osteoarthritis of the hip joint .
What is the most common cause of hip disability ?
Watch this video ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/rheuarthritis ) to learn about the symptoms and treatments for rheumatoid arthritis .
Which system of the body malfunctions in rheumatoid arthritis and what does this cause ?
By the end of this section , you will be able to : Define the different types of body movements Identify the joints that allow for these motions Synovial joints allow the body a tremendous range of movements .
Each movement at a synovial joint results from the contraction or relaxation of the muscles that are attached to the bones on either side of the articulation .
The type of movement that can be produced at a synovial joint is determined by its structural type .
While the ball-and-socket joint gives the greatest range of movement at an individual joint , in other regions of the body , several joints may work together to produce a particular movement .
Overall , each type of synovial joint is necessary to provide the body with its great flexibility and mobility .
There are many types of movement that can occur at synovial joints ( Table 9.1 ) .
Movement types are generally paired , with one being the opposite of the other .
Body movements are always described in relation to the anatomical position of the body : upright stance , with upper limbs to the side of body and palms facing forward .
Refer to Figure 9.12 as you go through this section .
Watch this video ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/anatomical ) to learn about anatomical motions .
What motions involve increasing or decreasing the angle of the foot at the ankle ?
Flexion and extension are movements that take place within the sagittal plane and involve anterior or posterior movements of the body or limbs .
For the vertebral column , flexion ( anterior flexion ) is an anterior ( forward ) bending of the neck or body , while extension involves a posterior-directed motion , such as straightening from a flexed position or bending backward .
Lateral flexion is the bending of the neck or body toward the right or left side .
These movements of the vertebral column involve both the symphysis joint formed by each intervertebral disc , as well as the plane type of synovial joint formed between the inferior articular processes of one vertebra and the superior articular processes of the next lower vertebra .
In the limbs , flexion decreases the angle between the bones ( bending of the joint ) , while extension increases the angle and straightens the joint .
For the upper limb , all anterior-going motions are flexion and all posterior-going motions are extension .
These include anterior-posterior movements of the arm at the shoulder , the forearm at the elbow , the hand at the wrist , and the fingers at the metacarpophalangeal and interphalangeal joints .
For the thumb , extension moves the thumb away from the palm of the hand , within the same plane as the palm , while flexion brings the thumb back against the index finger or into the palm .
These motions take place at the first carpometacarpal joint .
In the lower limb , bringing the thigh forward and upward is flexion at the hip joint , while any posterior-going motion of the thigh is extension .
Note that extension of the thigh beyond the anatomical ( standing ) position is greatly limited by the ligaments that support the hip joint .
Knee flexion is the bending of the knee to bring the foot toward the posterior thigh , and extension is the straightening of the knee .
Flexion and extension movements are seen at the hinge , condyloid , saddle , and ball-and-socket joints of the limbs ( see Figure 9.12a-d ) .
Hyperextension is the abnormal or excessive extension of a joint beyond its normal range of motion , thus resulting in injury .
Similarly , hyperflexion is excessive flexion at a joint .
Hyperextension injuries are common at hinge joints such as the knee or elbow .
In cases of “ whiplash ” in which the head is suddenly moved backward and then forward , a patient may experience both hyperextension and hyperflexion of the cervical region .
Abduction and adduction motions occur within the coronal plane and involve medial-lateral motions of the limbs , fingers , toes , or thumb .
Abduction moves the limb laterally away from the midline of the body , while adduction is the opposing movement that brings the limb toward the body or across the midline .
For example , abduction is raising the arm at the shoulder joint , moving it laterally away from the body , while adduction brings the arm down to the side of the body .
Similarly , abduction and adduction at the wrist moves the hand away from or toward the midline of the body .
Spreading the fingers or toes apart is also abduction , while bringing the fingers or toes together is adduction .
For the thumb , abduction is the anterior movement that brings the thumb to a 90° perpendicular position , pointing straight out from the palm .
Adduction moves the thumb back to the anatomical position , next to the index finger .
Abduction and adduction movements are seen at condyloid , saddle , and ball-and-socket joints ( see Figure 9.12e ) .
Circumduction is the movement of a body region in a circular manner , in which one end of the body region being moved stays relatively stationary while the other end describes a circle .
It involves the sequential combination of flexion , adduction , extension , and abduction at a joint .
This type of motion is found at biaxial condyloid and saddle joints , and at multiaxial ball-and-sockets joints ( see Figure 9.12e ) .
Rotation can occur within the vertebral column , at a pivot joint , or at a ball-and-socket joint .
Rotation of the neck or body is the twisting movement produced by the summation of the small rotational movements available between adjacent vertebrae .
At a pivot joint , one bone rotates in relation to another bone .
This is a uniaxial joint , and thus rotation is the only motion allowed at a pivot joint .
For example , at the atlantoaxial joint , the first cervical ( C1 ) vertebra ( atlas ) rotates around the dens , the upward projection from the second cervical ( C2 ) vertebra ( axis ) .
This allows the head to rotate from side to side as when shaking the head “ no. ” The proximal radioulnar joint is a pivot joint formed by the head of the radius and its articulation with the ulna .
This joint allows for the radius to rotate along its length during pronation and supination movements of the forearm .
Rotation can also occur at the ball-and-socket joints of the shoulder and hip .
Here , the humerus and femur rotate around their long axis , which moves the anterior surface of the arm or thigh either toward or away from the midline of the body .
Movement that brings the anterior surface of the limb toward the midline of the body is called medial ( internal ) rotation .
Conversely , rotation of the limb so that the anterior surface moves away from the midline is lateral ( external ) rotation ( see Figure 9.12f ) .
Be sure to distinguish medial and lateral rotation , which can only occur at the multiaxial shoulder and hip joints , from circumduction , which can occur at either biaxial or multiaxial joints .
Supination and pronation are movements of the forearm .
In the anatomical position , the upper limb is held next to the body with the palm facing forward .
This is the supinated position of the forearm .
In this position , the radius and ulna are parallel to each other .
When the palm of the hand faces backward , the forearm is in the pronated position , and the radius and ulna form an X-shape .
Supination and pronation are the movements of the forearm that go between these two positions .
Pronation is the motion that moves the forearm from the supinated ( anatomical ) position to the pronated ( palm backward ) position .
This motion is produced by rotation of the radius at the proximal radioulnar joint , accompanied by movement of the radius at the distal radioulnar joint .
The proximal radioulnar joint is a pivot joint that allows for rotation of the head of the radius .
Because of the slight curvature of the shaft of the radius , this rotation causes the distal end of the radius to cross over the distal ulna at the distal radioulnar joint .
This crossing over brings the radius and ulna into an X-shape position .
Supination is the opposite motion , in which rotation of the radius returns the bones to their parallel positions and moves the palm to the anterior facing ( supinated ) position .
It helps to remember that supination is the motion you use when scooping up soup with a spoon ( see Figure 9.13g ) .
Dorsiflexion and plantar flexion are movements at the ankle joint , which is a hinge joint .
Lifting the front of the foot , so that the top of the foot moves toward the anterior leg is dorsiflexion , while lifting the heel of the foot from the ground or pointing the toes downward is plantar flexion .
These are the only movements available at the ankle joint ( see Figure 9.13h ) .
Inversion and eversion are complex movements that involve the multiple plane joints among the tarsal bones of the posterior foot ( intertarsal joints ) and thus are not motions that take place at the ankle joint .
Inversion is the turning of the foot to angle the bottom of the foot toward the midline , while eversion turns the bottom of the foot away from the midline .
The foot has a greater range of inversion than eversion motion .
These are important motions that help to stabilize the foot when walking or running on an uneven surface and aid in the quick side-to-side changes in direction used during active sports such as basketball , racquetball , or soccer ( see Figure 9.13i ) .
Protraction and retraction are anterior-posterior movements of the scapula or mandible .
Protraction of the scapula occurs when the shoulder is moved forward , as when pushing against something or throwing a ball .
Retraction is the opposite motion , with the scapula being pulled posteriorly and medially , toward the vertebral column .
For the mandible , protraction occurs when the lower jaw is pushed forward , to stick out the chin , while retraction pulls the lower jaw backward .
( See Figure 9.13j . )
Depression and elevation are downward and upward movements of the scapula or mandible .
The upward movement of the scapula and shoulder is elevation , while a downward movement is depression .
These movements are used to shrug your shoulders .
Similarly , elevation of the mandible is the upward movement of the lower jaw used to close the mouth or bite on something , and depression is the downward movement that produces opening of the mouth ( see Figure 9.13k ) .
Excursion is the side to side movement of the mandible .
Lateral excursion moves the mandible away from the midline , toward either the right or left side .
Medial excursion returns the mandible to its resting position at the midline .
Superior and inferior rotation are movements of the scapula and are defined by the direction of movement of the glenoid cavity .
These motions involve rotation of the scapula around a point inferior to the scapular spine and are produced by combinations of muscles acting on the scapula .
During superior rotation , the glenoid cavity moves upward as the medial end of the scapular spine moves downward .
This is a very important motion that contributes to upper limb abduction .
Without superior rotation of the scapula , the greater tubercle of the humerus would hit the acromion of the scapula , thus preventing any abduction of the arm above shoulder height .
Superior rotation of the scapula is thus required for full abduction of the upper limb .
Superior rotation is also used without arm abduction when carrying a heavy load with your hand or on your shoulder .
You can feel this rotation when you pick up a load , such as a heavy book bag and carry it on only one shoulder .
To increase its weight-bearing support for the bag , the shoulder lifts as the scapula superiorly rotates .
Inferior rotation occurs during limb adduction and involves the downward motion of the glenoid cavity with upward movement of the medial end of the scapular spine .
Opposition is the thumb movement that brings the tip of the thumb in contact with the tip of a finger .
This movement is produced at the first carpometacarpal joint , which is a saddle joint formed between the trapezium carpal bone and the first metacarpal bone .
Thumb opposition is produced by a combination of flexion and abduction of the thumb at this joint .
Returning the thumb to its anatomical position next to the index finger is called reposition ( see Figure 9.13l ) .
The movements that are allowed are determined by the structural classification for each joint .
For example , a multiaxial ball-and-socket joint has much more mobility than a uniaxial hinge joint .
However , the ligaments and muscles that support a joint may place restrictions on the total range of motion available .
Thus , the ball-and-socket joint of the shoulder has little in the way of ligament support , which gives the shoulder a very large range of motion .
In contrast , movements at the hip joint are restricted by strong ligaments , which reduce its range of motion but confer stability during standing and weight bearing .
This section will examine the anatomy of selected synovial joints of the body .
Anatomical names for most joints are derived from the names of the bones that articulate at that joint , although some joints , such as the elbow , hip , and knee joints are exceptions to this general naming scheme .
In addition to being held together by the intervertebral discs , adjacent vertebrae also articulate with each other at synovial joints formed between the superior and inferior articular processes called zygapophysial joints ( facet joints ) ( see Figure 9.3 ) .
These are plane joints that provide for only limited motions between the vertebrae .
The orientation of the articular processes at these joints varies in different regions of the vertebral column and serves to determine the types of motions available in each vertebral region .
The cervical and lumbar regions have the greatest ranges of motions .
In the neck , the articular processes of cervical vertebrae are flattened and generally face upward or downward .
This orientation provides the cervical vertebral column with extensive ranges of motion for flexion , extension , lateral flexion , and rotation .
In the thoracic region , the downward projecting and overlapping spinous processes , along with the attached thoracic cage , greatly limit flexion , extension , and lateral flexion .
However , the flattened and vertically positioned thoracic articular processes allow for the greatest range of rotation within the vertebral column .
The lumbar region allows for considerable extension , flexion , and lateral flexion , but the orientation of the articular processes largely prohibits rotation .
The articulations formed between the skull , the atlas ( C1 vertebra ) , and the axis ( C2 vertebra ) differ from the articulations in other vertebral areas and play important roles in movement of the head .
The atlanto-occipital joint is formed by the articulations between the superior articular processes of the atlas and the occipital condyles on the base of the skull .
This articulation has a pronounced U-shaped curvature , oriented along the anterior-posterior axis .
This allows the skull to rock forward and backward , producing flexion and extension of the head .
This moves the head up and down , as when shaking your head “ yes. ” The atlantoaxial joint , between the atlas and axis , consists of three articulations .
The paired superior articular processes of the axis articulate with the inferior articular processes of the atlas .
These articulating surfaces are relatively flat and oriented horizontally .
The third articulation is the pivot joint formed between the dens , which projects upward from the body of the axis , and the inner aspect of the anterior arch of the atlas ( Figure 9.14 ) .
A strong ligament passes posterior to the dens to hold it in position against the anterior arch .
This joint involves the articulation between the mandibular fossa and articular tubercle of the temporal bone , with the condyle ( head ) of the mandible .
Located between these bony structures , filling the gap between the skull and mandible , is a flexible articular disc ( Figure 9.15 ) .
This disc serves to smooth the movements between the temporal bone and mandibular condyle .
Movement at the TMJ during opening and closing of the mouth involves both gliding and hinge motions of the mandible .
With the mouth closed , the mandibular condyle and articular disc are located within the mandibular fossa of the temporal bone .
During opening of the mouth , the mandible hinges downward and at the same time is pulled anteriorly , causing both the condyle and the articular disc to glide forward from the mandibular fossa onto the downward projecting articular tubercle .
The net result is a forward and downward motion of the condyle and mandibular depression .
The temporomandibular joint is supported by an extrinsic ligament that anchors the mandible to the skull .
This ligament spans the distance between the base of the skull and the lingula on the medial side of the mandibular ramus .
Dislocation of the TMJ may occur when opening the mouth too wide ( such as when taking a large bite ) or following a blow to the jaw , resulting in the mandibular condyle moving beyond ( anterior to ) the articular tubercle .
In this case , the individual would not be able to close his or her mouth .
Temporomandibular joint disorders can also cause headache , difficulty chewing , or even the inability to move the jaw ( lock jaw ) .
Pharmacologic agents for pain or other therapies , including bite guards , are used as treatments .
Watch this video ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/TMJ ) to learn about TMJ .
Opening of the mouth requires the combination of two motions at the temporomandibular joint , an anterior gliding motion of the articular disc and mandible and the downward hinging of the mandible .
What is the initial movement of the mandible during opening and how much mouth opening does this produce ?
The shoulder joint is called the glenohumeral joint .
This is a ball-and-socket joint formed by the articulation between the head of the humerus and the glenoid cavity of the scapula ( Figure 9.16 ) .
This joint has the largest range of motion of any joint in the body .
However , this freedom of movement is due to the lack of structural support and thus the enhanced mobility is offset by a loss of stability .
The large range of motions at the shoulder joint is provided by the articulation of the large , rounded humeral head with the small and shallow glenoid cavity , which is only about one third of the size of the humeral head .
The socket formed by the glenoid cavity is deepened slightly by a small lip of fibrocartilage called the glenoid labrum , which extends around the outer margin of the cavity .
The articular capsule that surrounds the glenohumeral joint is relatively thin and loose to allow for large motions of the upper limb .
Some structural support for the joint is provided by thickenings of the articular capsule wall that form weak intrinsic ligaments .
These include the coracohumeral ligament , running from the coracoid process of the scapula to the anterior humerus , and three ligaments , each called a glenohumeral ligament , located on the anterior side of the articular capsule .
These ligaments help to strengthen the superior and anterior capsule walls .
However , the primary support for the shoulder joint is provided by muscles crossing the joint , particularly the four rotator cuff muscles .
These muscles ( supraspinatus , infraspinatus , teres minor , and subscapularis ) arise from the scapula and attach to the greater or lesser tubercles of the humerus .
As these muscles cross the shoulder joint , their tendons encircle the head of the humerus and become fused to the anterior , superior , and posterior walls of the articular capsule .
The thickening of the capsule formed by the fusion of these four muscle tendons is called the rotator cuff .
Two bursae , the subacromial bursa and the subscapular bursa , help to prevent friction between the rotator cuff muscle tendons and the scapula as these tendons cross the glenohumeral joint .
In addition to their individual actions of moving the upper limb , the rotator cuff muscles also serve to hold the head of the humerus in position within the glenoid cavity .
By constantly adjusting their strength of contraction to resist forces acting on the shoulder , these muscles serve as “ dynamic ligaments ” and thus provide the primary structural support for the glenohumeral joint .
Injuries to the shoulder joint are common .
Because the humeral head is strongly supported by muscles and ligaments around its anterior , superior , and posterior aspects , most dislocations of the humerus occur in an inferior direction .
This can occur when force is applied to the humerus when the upper limb is fully abducted , as when diving to catch a baseball and landing on your hand or elbow .
Inflammatory responses to any shoulder injury can lead to the formation of scar tissue between the articular capsule and surrounding structures , thus reducing shoulder mobility , a condition called adhesive capsulitis ( “ frozen shoulder ” ) .
Watch this video ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/shoulderjoint1 ) for a tutorial on the anatomy of the shoulder joint .
What movements are available at the shoulder joint ?
Watch this video ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/shoulderjoint2 ) to learn more about the anatomy of the shoulder joint , including bones , joints , muscles , nerves , and blood vessels .
What is the shape of the glenoid labrum in cross-section , and what is the importance of this shape ?
The elbow joint is a uniaxial hinge joint formed by the humeroulnar joint , the articulation between the trochlea of the humerus and the trochlear notch of the ulna .
Also associated with the elbow are the humeroradial joint and the proximal radioulnar joint .
All three of these joints are enclosed within a single articular capsule ( Figure 9.17 ) .
The articular capsule of the elbow is thin on its anterior and posterior aspects , but is thickened along its outside margins by strong intrinsic ligaments .
These ligaments prevent side-to-side movements and hyperextension .
On the medial side is the triangular ulnar collateral ligament .
This arises from the medial epicondyle of the humerus and attaches to the medial side of the proximal ulna .
The strongest part of this ligament is the anterior portion , which resists hyperextension of the elbow .
The ulnar collateral ligament may be injured by frequent , forceful extensions of the forearm , as is seen in baseball pitchers .
Reconstructive surgical repair of this ligament is referred to as Tommy John surgery , named for the former major league pitcher who was the first person to have this treatment .
The lateral side of the elbow is supported by the radial collateral ligament .
This arises from the lateral epicondyle of the humerus and then blends into the lateral side of the annular ligament .
The annular ligament encircles the head of the radius .
This ligament supports the head of the radius as it articulates with the radial notch of the ulna at the proximal radioulnar joint .
This is a pivot joint that allows for rotation of the radius during supination and pronation of the forearm .
Watch this animation ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/elbowjoint1 ) to learn more about the anatomy of the elbow joint .
Which structures provide the main stability for the elbow ?
Watch this video ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/elbowjoint2 ) to learn more about the anatomy of the elbow joint , including bones , joints , muscles , nerves , and blood vessels .
What are the functions of the articular cartilage ?
The hip joint is a multiaxial ball-and-socket joint between the head of the femur and the acetabulum of the hip bone ( Figure 9.18 ) .
The hip carries the weight of the body and thus requires strength and stability during standing and walking .
For these reasons , its range of motion is more limited than at the shoulder joint .
The acetabulum is the socket portion of the hip joint .
This space is deep and has a large articulation area for the femoral head , thus giving stability and weight bearing ability to the joint .
The acetabulum is further deepened by the acetabular labrum , a fibrocartilage lip attached to the outer margin of the acetabulum .
The surrounding articular capsule is strong , with several thickened areas forming intrinsic ligaments .
These ligaments arise from the hip bone , at the margins of the acetabulum , and attach to the femur at the base of the neck .
The ligaments are the iliofemoral ligament , pubofemoral ligament , and ischiofemoral ligament , all of which spiral around the head and neck of the femur .
The ligaments are tightened by extension at the hip , thus pulling the head of the femur tightly into the acetabulum when in the upright , standing position .
Very little additional extension of the thigh is permitted beyond this vertical position .
These ligaments thus stabilize the hip joint and allow you to maintain an upright standing position with only minimal muscle contraction .
Inside of the articular capsule , the ligament of the head of the femur ( ligamentum teres ) spans between the acetabulum and femoral head .
This intracapsular ligament is normally slack and does not provide any significant joint support , but it does provide a pathway for an important artery that supplies the head of the femur .
The hip is prone to osteoarthritis , and thus was the first joint for which a replacement prosthesis was developed .
A common injury in elderly individuals , particularly those with weakened bones due to osteoporosis , is a “ broken hip , ” which is actually a fracture of the femoral neck .
This may result from a fall , or it may cause the fall .
This can happen as one lower limb is taking a step and all of the body weight is placed on the other limb , causing the femoral neck to break and producing a fall .
Any accompanying disruption of the blood supply to the femoral neck or head can lead to necrosis of these areas , resulting in bone and cartilage death .
Femoral fractures usually require surgical treatment , after which the patient will need mobility assistance for a prolonged period , either from family members or in a long-term care facility .
Consequentially , the associated health care costs of “ broken hips ” are substantial .
In addition , hip fractures are associated with increased rates of morbidity ( incidences of disease ) and mortality ( death ) .
Watch this video ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/hipjoint1 ) for a tutorial on the anatomy of the hip joint .
What is a possible consequence following a fracture of the femoral neck within the capsule of the hip joint ?
Watch this video ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/hipjoint2 ) to learn more about the anatomy of the hip joint , including bones , joints , muscles , nerves , and blood vessels .
Where is the articular cartilage thickest within the hip joint ?
The knee joint is the largest joint of the body ( Figure 9.19 ) .
It actually consists of three articulations .
The femoropatellar joint is found between the patella and the distal femur .
The medial tibiofemoral joint and lateral tibiofemoral joint are located between the medial and lateral condyles of the femur and the medial and lateral condyles of the tibia .
All of these articulations are enclosed within a single articular capsule .
The knee functions as a hinge joint , allowing flexion and extension of the leg .
This action is generated by both rolling and gliding motions of the femur on the tibia .
In addition , some rotation of the leg is available when the knee is flexed , but not when extended .
The knee is well constructed for weight bearing in its extended position , but is vulnerable to injuries associated with hyperextension , twisting , or blows to the medial or lateral side of the joint , particularly while weight bearing .
At the femoropatellar joint , the patella slides vertically within a groove on the distal femur .
The patella is a sesamoid bone incorporated into the tendon of the quadriceps femoris muscle , the large muscle of the anterior thigh .
The patella serves to protect the quadriceps tendon from friction against the distal femur .
Continuing from the patella to the anterior tibia just below the knee is the patellar ligament .
Acting via the patella and patellar ligament , the quadriceps femoris is a powerful muscle that acts to extend the leg at the knee .
It also serves as a “ dynamic ligament ” to provide very important support and stabilization for the knee joint .
The medial and lateral tibiofemoral joints are the articulations between the rounded condyles of the femur and the relatively flat condyles of the tibia .
During flexion and extension motions , the condyles of the femur both roll and glide over the surfaces of the tibia .
The rolling action produces flexion or extension , while the gliding action serves to maintain the femoral condyles centered over the tibial condyles , thus ensuring maximal bony , weight-bearing support for the femur in all knee positions .
As the knee comes into full extension , the femur undergoes a slight medial rotation in relation to tibia .
The rotation results because the lateral condyle of the femur is slightly smaller than the medial condyle .
Thus , the lateral condyle finishes its rolling motion first , followed by the medial condyle .
The resulting small medial rotation of the femur serves to “ lock ” the knee into its fully extended and most stable position .
Flexion of the knee is initiated by a slight lateral rotation of the femur on the tibia , which “ unlocks ” the knee .
This lateral rotation motion is produced by the popliteus muscle of the posterior leg .
Located between the articulating surfaces of the femur and tibia are two articular discs , the medial meniscus and lateral meniscus ( see Figure 9.19b ) .
Each is a C-shaped fibrocartilage structure that is thin along its inside margin and thick along the outer margin .
They are attached to their tibial condyles , but do not attach to the femur .
While both menisci are free to move during knee motions , the medial meniscus shows less movement because it is anchored at its outer margin to the articular capsule and tibial collateral ligament .
The menisci provide padding between the bones and help to fill the gap between the round femoral condyles and flattened tibial condyles .
Some areas of each meniscus lack an arterial blood supply and thus these areas heal poorly if damaged .
The knee joint has multiple ligaments that provide support , particularly in the extended position ( see Figure 9.19c ) .
Outside of the articular capsule , located at the sides of the knee , are two extrinsic ligaments .
The fibular collateral ligament ( lateral collateral ligament ) is on the lateral side and spans from the lateral epicondyle of the femur to the head of the fibula .
The tibial collateral ligament ( medial collateral ligament ) of the medial knee runs from the medial epicondyle of the femur to the medial tibia .
As it crosses the knee , the tibial collateral ligament is firmly attached on its deep side to the articular capsule and to the medial meniscus , an important factor when considering knee injuries .
In the fully extended knee position , both collateral ligaments are taut ( tight ) , thus serving to stabilize and support the extended knee and preventing side-to-side or rotational motions between the femur and tibia .
The articular capsule of the posterior knee is thickened by intrinsic ligaments that help to resist knee hyperextension .
Inside the knee are two intracapsular ligaments , the anterior cruciate ligament and posterior cruciate ligament .
These ligaments are anchored inferiorly to the tibia at the intercondylar eminence , the roughened area between the tibial condyles .
The cruciate ligaments are named for whether they are attached anteriorly or posteriorly to this tibial region .
Each ligament runs diagonally upward to attach to the inner aspect of a femoral condyle .
The cruciate ligaments are named for the X-shape formed as they pass each other ( cruciate means “ cross ” ) .
The posterior cruciate ligament is the stronger ligament .
It serves to support the knee when it is flexed and weight bearing , as when walking downhill .
In this position , the posterior cruciate ligament prevents the femur from sliding anteriorly off the top of the tibia .
The anterior cruciate ligament becomes tight when the knee is extended , and thus resists hyperextension .
Watch this video ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/flexext ) to learn more about the flexion and extension of the knee , as the femur both rolls and glides on the tibia to maintain stable contact between the bones in all knee positions .
The patella glides along a groove on the anterior side of the distal femur .
The collateral ligaments on the sides of the knee become tight in the fully extended position to help stabilize the knee .
The posterior cruciate ligament supports the knee when flexed and the anterior cruciate ligament becomes tight when the knee comes into full extension to resist hyperextension .
What are the ligaments that support the knee joint ?
Watch this video ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/kneejoint1 ) to learn more about the anatomy of the knee joint , including bones , joints , muscles , nerves , and blood vessels .
Which ligament of the knee keeps the tibia from sliding too far forward in relation to the femur and which ligament keeps the tibia from sliding too far backward ?
Injuries to the knee are common .
Since this joint is primarily supported by muscles and ligaments , injuries to any of these structures will result in pain or knee instability .
Injury to the posterior cruciate ligament occurs when the knee is flexed and the tibia is driven posteriorly , such as falling and landing on the tibial tuberosity or hitting the tibia on the dashboard when not wearing a seatbelt during an automobile accident .
More commonly , injuries occur when forces are applied to the extended knee , particularly when the foot is planted and unable to move .
Anterior cruciate ligament injuries can result with a forceful blow to the anterior knee , producing hyperextension , or when a runner makes a quick change of direction that produces both twisting and hyperextension of the knee .
A worse combination of injuries can occur with a hit to the lateral side of the extended knee ( Figure 9.20 ) .
A moderate blow to the lateral knee will cause the medial side of the joint to open , resulting in stretching or damage to the tibial collateral ligament .
Because the medial meniscus is attached to the tibial collateral ligament , a stronger blow can tear the ligament and also damage the medial meniscus .
This is one reason that the medial meniscus is 20 times more likely to be injured than the lateral meniscus .
A powerful blow to the lateral knee produces a “ terrible triad ” injury , in which there is a sequential injury to the tibial collateral ligament , medial meniscus , and anterior cruciate ligament .
Arthroscopic surgery has greatly improved the surgical treatment of knee injuries and reduced subsequent recovery times .
This procedure involves a small incision and the insertion into the joint of an arthroscope , a pencil-thin instrument that allows for visualization of the joint interior .
Small surgical instruments are also inserted via additional incisions .
These tools allow a surgeon to remove or repair a torn meniscus or to reconstruct a ruptured cruciate ligament .
The current method for anterior cruciate ligament replacement involves using a portion of the patellar ligament .
Holes are drilled into the cruciate ligament attachment points on the tibia and femur , and the patellar ligament graft , with small areas of attached bone still intact at each end , is inserted into these holes .
The bone-to-bone sites at each end of the graft heal rapidly and strongly , thus enabling a rapid recovery .
Watch this video ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/kneeinjury ) to learn more about different knee injuries and diagnostic testing of the knee .
What are the most common causes of anterior cruciate ligament injury ?
The ankle is formed by the talocrural joint ( Figure 9.21 ) .
It consists of the articulations between the talus bone of the foot and the distal ends of the tibia and fibula of the leg ( crural = “ leg ” ) .
The superior aspect of the talus bone is square-shaped and has three areas of articulation .
The top of the talus articulates with the inferior tibia .
This is the portion of the ankle joint that carries the body weight between the leg and foot .
The sides of the talus are firmly held in position by the articulations with the medial malleolus of the tibia and the lateral malleolus of the fibula , which prevent any side-to-side motion of the talus .
The ankle is thus a uniaxial hinge joint that allows only for dorsiflexion and plantar flexion of the foot .
Additional joints between the tarsal bones of the posterior foot allow for the movements of foot inversion and eversion .
Most important for these movements is the subtalar joint , located between the talus and calcaneus bones .
The joints between the talus and navicular bones and the calcaneus and cuboid bones are also important contributors to these movements .
All of the joints between tarsal bones are plane joints .
Together , the small motions that take place at these joints all contribute to the production of inversion and eversion foot motions .
Like the hinge joints of the elbow and knee , the talocrural joint of the ankle is supported by several strong ligaments located on the sides of the joint .
These ligaments extend from the medial malleolus of the tibia or lateral malleolus of the fibula and anchor to the talus and calcaneus bones .
Since they are located on the sides of the ankle joint , they allow for dorsiflexion and plantar flexion of the foot .
They also prevent abnormal side-to-side and twisting movements of the talus and calcaneus bones during eversion and inversion of the foot .
On the medial side is the broad deltoid ligament .
The deltoid ligament supports the ankle joint and also resists excessive eversion of the foot .
The lateral side of the ankle has several smaller ligaments .
These include the anterior talofibular ligament and the posterior talofibular ligament , both of which span between the talus bone and the lateral malleolus of the fibula , and the calcaneofibular ligament , located between the calcaneus bone and fibula .
These ligaments support the ankle and also resist excess inversion of the foot .
Watch this video ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/anklejoint1 ) for a tutorial on the anatomy of the ankle joint .
What are the three ligaments found on the lateral side of the ankle joint ?
Watch this video ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/anklejoint2 ) to learn more about the anatomy of the ankle joint , including bones , joints , muscles , nerves , and blood vessels .
Which type of joint used in woodworking does the ankle joint resemble ?
The ankle is the most frequently injured joint in the body , with the most common injury being an inversion ankle sprain .
A sprain is the stretching or tearing of the supporting ligaments .
Excess inversion causes the talus bone to tilt laterally , thus damaging the ligaments on the lateral side of the ankle .
The anterior talofibular ligament is most commonly injured , followed by the calcaneofibular ligament .
In severe inversion injuries , the forceful lateral movement of the talus not only ruptures the lateral ankle ligaments , but also fractures the distal fibula .
Less common are eversion sprains of the ankle , which involve stretching of the deltoid ligament on the medial side of the ankle .
Forcible eversion of the foot , for example , with an awkward landing from a jump or when a football player has a foot planted and is hit on the lateral ankle , can result in a Pott ’ s fracture and dislocation of the ankle joint .
In this injury , the very strong deltoid ligament does not tear , but instead shears off the medial malleolus of the tibia .
This frees the talus , which moves laterally and fractures the distal fibula .
In extreme cases , the posterior margin of the tibia may also be sheared off .
Above the ankle , the distal ends of the tibia and fibula are united by a strong syndesmosis formed by the interosseous membrane and ligaments at the distal tibiofibular joint .
These connections prevent separation between the distal ends of the tibia and fibula and maintain the talus locked into position between the medial malleolus and lateral malleolus .
Reducing joint mobility using a brace or cast may be required for a period of time .
More severe injuries involving ligament tears or bone fractures may require surgery .
Watch this video ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/anklejoint3 ) to learn more about the ligaments of the ankle joint , ankle sprains , and treatment .
During an inversion ankle sprain injury , all three ligaments that resist excessive inversion of the foot may be injured .
What is the sequence in which these three ligaments are injured ?
The embryonic tissue that gives rise to all bones , cartilages , and connective tissues of the body is called mesenchyme .
In the head , mesenchyme will accumulate at those areas that will become the bones that form the top and sides of the skull .
The mesenchyme in these areas will develop directly into bone through the process of intramembranous ossification , in which mesenchymal cells differentiate into bone-producing cells that then generate bone tissue .
The mesenchyme between the areas of bone production will become the fibrous connective tissue that fills the spaces between the developing bones .
Initially , the connective tissue-filled gaps between the bones are wide , and are called fontanelles .
After birth , as the skull bones grow and enlarge , the gaps between them decrease in width and the fontanelles are reduced to suture joints in which the bones are united by a narrow layer of fibrous connective tissue .
The bones that form the base and facial regions of the skull develop through the process of endochondral ossification .
In this process , mesenchyme accumulates and differentiates into hyaline cartilage , which forms a model of the future bone .
The hyaline cartilage model is then gradually , over a period of many years , displaced by bone .
The mesenchyme between these developing bones becomes the fibrous connective tissue of the suture joints between the bones in these regions of the skull .
A similar process of endochondral ossification gives rises to the bones and joints of the limbs .
The limbs initially develop as small limb buds that appear on the sides of the embryo around the end of the fourth week of development .
Starting during the sixth week , as each limb bud continues to grow and elongate , areas of mesenchyme within the bud begin to differentiate into the hyaline cartilage that will form models for of each of the future bones .
The synovial joints will form between the adjacent cartilage models , in an area called the joint interzone .
Cells at the center of this interzone region undergo cell death to form the joint cavity , while surrounding mesenchyme cells will form the articular capsule and supporting ligaments .
The process of endochondral ossification , which converts the cartilage models into bone , begins by the twelfth week of embryonic development .
At birth , ossification of much of the bone has occurred , but the hyaline cartilage of the epiphyseal plate will remain throughout childhood and adolescence to allow for bone lengthening .
Hyaline cartilage is also retained as the articular cartilage that covers the surfaces of the bones at synovial joints .
These are skeletal muscles , so-named because most of them move the skeleton .
But there are two other types of muscle in the body , with distinctly different jobs .
Cardiac muscle , found in the heart , is concerned with pumping blood through the circulatory system .
Smooth muscle is concerned with various involuntary movements , such as having one ’ s hair stand on end when cold or frightened , or moving food through the digestive system .
This chapter will examine the structure and function of these three types of muscles .
All three muscle tissues have some properties in common ; they all exhibit a quality called excitability as their plasma membranes can change their electrical states ( from polarized to depolarized ) and send an electrical wave called an action potential along the entire length of the membrane .
While the nervous system can influence the excitability of cardiac and smooth muscle to some degree , skeletal muscle completely depends on signaling from the nervous system to work properly .
On the other hand , both cardiac muscle and smooth muscle can respond to other stimuli , such as hormones and local stimuli .
The muscles all begin the actual process of contracting ( shortening ) when a protein called actin is pulled by a protein called myosin .
This occurs in striated muscle ( skeletal and cardiac ) after specific binding sites on the actin have been exposed in response to the interaction between calcium ions ( Ca ) and proteins ( troponin and tropomyosin ) that “ shield ” the actinbinding sites .
Ca also is required for the contraction of smooth muscle , although its role is different : here Ca activates enzymes , which in turn activate myosin heads .
All muscles require adenosine triphosphate ( ATP ) to continue the process of contracting , and they all relax when the Ca is removed and the actin-binding sites are re-shielded .
A muscle can return to its original length when relaxed due to a quality of muscle tissue called elasticity .
It can recoil back to its original length due to elastic fibers .
Muscle tissue also has the quality of extensibility ; it can stretch or extend .
Contractility allows muscle tissue to pull on its attachment points and shorten with force .
Differences among the three muscle types include the microscopic organization of their contractile proteins—actin and myosin .
The actin and myosin proteins are arranged very regularly in the cytoplasm of individual muscle cells ( referred to as fibers ) in both skeletal muscle and cardiac muscle , which creates a pattern , or stripes , called striations .
The striations are visible with a light microscope under high magnification ( see Figure 10.2 ) .
Skeletal muscle fibers are multinucleated structures that compose the skeletal muscle .
Cardiac muscle fibers each have one to two nuclei and are physically and electrically connected to each other so that the entire heart contracts as one unit ( called a syncytium ) .
Because the actin and myosin are not arranged in such regular fashion in smooth muscle , the cytoplasm of a smooth muscle fiber ( which has only a single nucleus ) has a uniform , nonstriated appearance ( resulting in the name smooth muscle ) .
However , the less organized appearance of smooth muscle should not be interpreted as less efficient .
Smooth muscle in the walls of arteries is a critical component that regulates blood pressure necessary to push blood through the circulatory system ; and smooth muscle in the skin , visceral organs , and internal passageways is essential for moving all materials through the body .
Skeletal muscles act not only to produce movement but also to stop movement , such as resisting gravity to maintain posture .
Small , constant adjustments of the skeletal muscles are needed to hold a body upright or balanced in any position .
Muscles also prevent excess movement of the bones and joints , maintaining skeletal stability and preventing skeletal structure damage or deformation .
Joints can become misaligned or dislocated entirely by pulling on the associated bones ; muscles work to keep joints stable .
Skeletal muscles are located throughout the body at the openings of internal tracts to control the movement of various substances .
These muscles allow functions , such as swallowing , urination , and defecation , to be under voluntary control .
Skeletal muscles also protect internal organs ( particularly abdominal and pelvic organs ) by acting as an external barrier or shield to external trauma and by supporting the weight of the organs .
Skeletal muscles contribute to the maintenance of homeostasis in the body by generating heat .
Muscle contraction requires energy , and when ATP is broken down , heat is produced .
This heat is very noticeable during exercise , when sustained muscle movement causes body temperature to rise , and in cases of extreme cold , when shivering produces random skeletal muscle contractions to generate heat .
Each skeletal muscle is an organ that consists of various integrated tissues .
These tissues include the skeletal muscle fibers , blood vessels , nerve fibers , and connective tissue .
Each skeletal muscle has three layers of connective tissue ( called “ mysia ” ) that enclose it and provide structure to the muscle as a whole , and also compartmentalize the muscle fibers within the muscle ( Figure 10.3 ) .
Each muscle is wrapped in a sheath of dense , irregular connective tissue called the epimysium , which allows a muscle to contract and move powerfully while maintaining its structural integrity .
The epimysium also separates muscle from other tissues and organs in the area , allowing the muscle to move independently .
Inside each skeletal muscle , muscle fibers are organized into individual bundles , each called a fascicle , by a middle layer of connective tissue called the perimysium .
This fascicular organization is common in muscles of the limbs ; it allows the nervous system to trigger a specific movement of a muscle by activating a subset of muscle fibers within a bundle , or fascicle of the muscle .
Inside each fascicle , each muscle fiber is encased in a thin connective tissue layer of collagen and reticular fibers called the endomysium .
The endomysium contains the extracellular fluid and nutrients to support the muscle fiber .
These nutrients are supplied via blood to the muscle tissue .
In skeletal muscles that work with tendons to pull on bones , the collagen in the three tissue layers ( the mysia ) intertwines with the collagen of a tendon .
At the other end of the tendon , it fuses with the periosteum coating the bone .
The tension created by contraction of the muscle fibers is then transferred though the mysia , to the tendon , and then to the periosteum to pull on the bone for movement of the skeleton .
In other places , the mysia may fuse with a broad , tendon-like sheet called an aponeurosis , or to fascia , the connective tissue between skin and bones .
The broad sheet of connective tissue in the lower back that the latissimus dorsi muscles ( the “ lats ” ) fuse into is an example of an aponeurosis .
Every skeletal muscle is also richly supplied by blood vessels for nourishment , oxygen delivery , and waste removal .
In addition , every muscle fiber in a skeletal muscle is supplied by the axon branch of a somatic motor neuron , which signals the fiber to contract .
Unlike cardiac and smooth muscle , the only way to functionally contract a skeletal muscle is through signaling from the nervous system .
Because skeletal muscle cells are long and cylindrical , they are commonly referred to as muscle fibers .
Skeletal muscle fibers can be quite large for human cells , with diameters up to 100 μ m and lengths up to 30 cm ( 11.8 in ) in the Sartorius of the upper leg .
During early development , embryonic myoblasts , each with its own nucleus , fuse with up to hundreds of other myoblasts to form the multinucleated skeletal muscle fibers .
Multiple nuclei mean multiple copies of genes , permitting the production of the large amounts of proteins and enzymes needed for muscle contraction .
As will soon be described , the functional unit of a skeletal muscle fiber is the sarcomere , a highly organized arrangement of the contractile myofilaments actin ( thin filament ) and myosin ( thick filament ) , along with other support proteins .
The striated appearance of skeletal muscle fibers is due to the arrangement of the myofilaments of actin and myosin in sequential order from one end of the muscle fiber to the other .
Each packet of these microfilaments and their regulatory proteins , troponin and tropomyosin ( along with other proteins ) is called a sarcomere .
Watch this video ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/micromacro ) to learn more about macroand microstructures of skeletal muscles .
( a ) What are the names of the “ junction points ” between sarcomeres ?
( b ) What are the names of the “ subunits ” within the myofibrils that run the length of skeletal muscle fibers ?
( c ) What is the “ double strand of pearls ” described in the video ?
( d ) What gives a skeletal muscle fiber its striated appearance ?
The sarcomere is the functional unit of the muscle fiber .
The sarcomere itself is bundled within the myofibril that runs the entire length of the muscle fiber and attaches to the sarcolemma at its end .
As myofibrils contract , the entire muscle cell contracts .
Because myofibrils are only approximately 1.2 μ m in diameter , hundreds to thousands ( each with thousands of sarcomeres ) can be found inside one muscle fiber .
Each sarcomere is approximately 2 μ m in length with a threedimensional cylinder-like arrangement and is bordered by structures called Z-discs ( also called Z-lines , because pictures are two-dimensional ) , to which the actin myofilaments are anchored ( Figure 10.5 ) .
Because the actin and its troponintropomyosin complex ( projecting from the Z-discs toward the center of the sarcomere ) form strands that are thinner than the myosin , it is called the thin filament of the sarcomere .
Likewise , because the myosin strands and their multiple heads ( projecting from the center of the sarcomere , toward but not all to way to , the Z-discs ) have more mass and are thicker , they are called the thick filament of the sarcomere .
Another specialization of the skeletal muscle is the site where a motor neuron ’ s terminal meets the muscle fiber—called the neuromuscular junction ( NMJ ) .
This is where the muscle fiber first responds to signaling by the motor neuron .
Every skeletal muscle fiber in every skeletal muscle is innervated by a motor neuron at the NMJ .
Excitation signals from the neuron are the only way to functionally activate the fiber to contract .
Every skeletal muscle fiber is supplied by a motor neuron at the NMJ .
Watch this video ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/ l/skelmuscfiber ) to learn more about what happens at the NMJ .
( a ) What is the definition of a motor unit ?
( b ) What is the structural and functional difference between a large motor unit and a small motor unit ?
( c ) Can you give an example of each ?
( d ) Why is the neurotransmitter acetylcholine degraded after binding to its receptor ?
All living cells have membrane potentials , or electrical gradients across their membranes .
The inside of the membrane is usually around -60 to -90 mV , relative to the outside .
This is referred to as a cell ’ s membrane potential .
Neurons and muscle cells can use their membrane potentials to generate electrical signals .
They do this by controlling the movement of charged particles , called ions , across their membranes to create electrical currents .
This is achieved by opening and closing specialized proteins in the membrane called ion channels .
Although the currents generated by ions moving through these channel proteins are very small , they form the basis of both neural signaling and muscle contraction .
Both neurons and skeletal muscle cells are electrically excitable , meaning that they are able to generate action potentials .
An action potential is a special type of electrical signal that can travel along a cell membrane as a wave .
This allows a signal to be transmitted quickly and faithfully over long distances .
Although the term excitation-contraction coupling confuses or scares some students , it comes down to this : for a skeletal muscle fiber to contract , its membrane must first be “ excited ” —in other words , it must be stimulated to fire an action potential .
The myosin then pulls the actin filaments toward the center , shortening the muscle fiber .
In skeletal muscle , this sequence begins with signals from the somatic motor division of the nervous system .
In other words , the “ excitation ” step in skeletal muscles is always triggered by signaling from the nervous system ( Figure 10.6 ) .
The motor neurons that tell the skeletal muscle fibers to contract originate in the spinal cord , with a smaller number located in the brainstem for activation of skeletal muscles of the face , head , and neck .
These neurons have long processes , called axons , which are specialized to transmit action potentials long distances— in this case , all the way from the spinal cord to the muscle itself ( which may be up to three feet away ) .
The axons of multiple neurons bundle together to form nerves , like wires bundled together in a cable .
Signaling begins when a neuronal action potential travels along the axon of a motor neuron , and then along the individual branches to terminate at the NMJ .
At the NMJ , the axon terminal releases a chemical messenger , or neurotransmitter , called acetylcholine ( ACh ) .
The ACh molecules diffuse across a minute space called the synaptic cleft and bind to ACh receptors located within the motor end-plate of the sarcolemma on the other side of the synapse .
Once ACh binds , a channel in the ACh receptor opens and positively charged ions can pass through into the muscle fiber , causing it to depolarize , meaning that the membrane potential of the muscle fiber becomes less negative ( closer to zero . )
As the membrane depolarizes , another set of ion channels called voltage-gated sodium channels are triggered to open .
Sodium ions enter the muscle fiber , and an action potential rapidly spreads ( or “ fires ” ) along the entire membrane to initiate excitation-contraction coupling .
Things happen very quickly in the world of excitable membranes ( just think about how quickly you can snap your fingers as soon as you decide to do it ) .
Immediately following depolarization of the membrane , it repolarizes , re-establishing the negative membrane potential .
Meanwhile , the ACh in the synaptic cleft is degraded by the enzyme acetylcholinesterase ( AChE ) so that the ACh can not rebind to a receptor and reopen its channel , which would cause unwanted extended muscle excitation and contraction .
Propagation of an action potential along the sarcolemma is the excitation portion of excitation-contraction coupling .
You will recall that the diameter of a muscle fiber can be up to 100 μ m , so these T-tubules ensure that the membrane can get close to the SR in the sarcoplasm .
The arrangement of a T-tubule with the membranes of SR on either side is called a triad ( Figure 10.7 ) .
The triad surrounds the cylindrical structure called a myofibril , which contains actin and myosin .
The T-tubules carry the action potential into the interior of the cell , which triggers the opening of calcium channels in the membrane of the adjacent SR , causing Ca to diffuse out of the SR and into the sarcoplasm .
It is the arrival of Ca in the sarcoplasm that initiates contraction of the muscle fiber by its contractile units , or sarcomeres .
The local membrane of the fiber will depolarize as positively charged sodium ions ( Na ) enter , triggering an action potential that spreads to the rest of the membrane will depolarize , including the T-tubules .
This triggers the release of calcium ions ( Ca ) from storage in the sarcoplasmic reticulum ( SR ) .
The Ca then initiates contraction , which is sustained by ATP ( Figure 10.8 ) .
A muscle also can stop contracting when it runs out of ATP and becomes fatigued ( Figure 10.9 ) .
The release of calcium ions initiates muscle contractions .
Watch this video ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/calciumrole ) to learn more about the role of calcium .
( a ) What are “ T-tubules ” and what is their role ?
( b ) Please describe how actinbinding sites are made available for cross-bridging with myosin heads during contraction .
The molecular events of muscle fiber shortening occur within the fiber ’ s sarcomeres ( see Figure 10.10 ) .
The contraction of a striated muscle fiber occurs as the sarcomeres , linearly arranged within myofibrils , shorten as myosin heads pull on the actin filaments .
The region where thick and thin filaments overlap has a dense appearance , as there is little space between the filaments .
This zone where thin and thick filaments overlap is very important to muscle contraction , as it is the site where filament movement starts .
Thin filaments , anchored at their ends by the Z-discs , do not extend completely into the central region that only contains thick filaments , anchored at their bases at a spot called the M-line .
A myofibril is composed of many sarcomeres running along its length ; thus , myofibrils and muscle cells contract as the sarcomeres contract .
When signaled by a motor neuron , a skeletal muscle fiber contracts as the thin filaments are pulled and then slide past the thick filaments within the fiber ’ s sarcomeres .
This process is known as the sliding filament model of muscle contraction ( Figure 10.10 ) .
The sliding can only occur when myosin-binding sites on the actin filaments are exposed by a series of steps that begins with Ca entry into the sarcoplasm .
Tropomyosin is a protein that winds around the chains of the actin filament and covers the myosin-binding sites to prevent actin from binding to myosin .
Tropomyosin binds to troponin to form a troponin-tropomyosin complex .
The troponintropomyosin complex prevents the myosin “ heads ” from binding to the active sites on the actin microfilaments .
Troponin also has a binding site for Ca ions .
To initiate muscle contraction , tropomyosin has to expose the myosin-binding site on an actin filament to allow cross-bridge formation between the actin and myosin microfilaments .
The first step in the process of contraction is for Ca to bind to troponin so that tropomyosin can slide away from the binding sites on the actin strands .
This allows the myosin heads to bind to these exposed binding sites and form cross-bridges .
The thin filaments are then pulled by the myosin heads to slide past the thick filaments toward the center of the sarcomere .
But each head can only pull a very short distance before it has reached its limit and must be “ re-cocked ” before it can pull again , a step that requires ATP .
For thin filaments to continue to slide past thick filaments during muscle contraction , myosin heads must pull the actin at the binding sites , detach , re-cock , attach to more binding sites , pull , detach , re-cock , etc .
This repeated movement is known as the cross-bridge cycle .
Each cycle requires energy , and the action of the myosin heads in the sarcomeres repetitively pulling on the thin filaments also requires energy , which is provided by ATP .
Cross-bridge formation occurs when the myosin head attaches to the actin while adenosine diphosphate ( ADP ) and inorganic phosphate ( P ) are still bound to myosin ( Figure 10.11a , b ) .
P is then released , causing myosin to form a stronger attachment to the actin , after which the myosin head moves toward the M-line , pulling the actin along with it .
As actin is pulled , the filaments move approximately 10 nm toward the M-line .
This movement is called the power stroke , as movement of the thin filament occurs at this step ( Figure 10.11c ) .
In the absence of ATP , the myosin head will not detach from actin .
One part of the myosin head attaches to the binding site on the actin , but the head has another binding site for ATP .
ATP binding causes the myosin head to detach from the actin ( Figure 10.11d ) .
After this occurs , ATP is converted to ADP and P by the intrinsic ATPase activity of myosin .
The energy released during ATP hydrolysis changes the angle of the myosin head into a cocked position ( Figure 10.11e ) .
The myosin head is now in position for further movement .
When the myosin head is cocked , myosin is in a high-energy configuration .
This energy is expended as the myosin head moves through the power stroke , and at the end of the power stroke , the myosin head is in a low-energy position .
After the power stroke , ADP is released ; however , the formed cross-bridge is still in place , and actin and myosin are bound together .
As long as ATP is available , it readily attaches to myosin , the cross-bridge cycle can recur , and muscle contraction can continue .
Note that each thick filament of roughly 300 myosin molecules has multiple myosin heads , and many cross-bridges form and break continuously during muscle contraction .
Multiply this by all of the sarcomeres in one myofibril , all the myofibrils in one muscle fiber , and all of the muscle fibers in one skeletal muscle , and you can understand why so much energy ( ATP ) is needed to keep skeletal muscles working .
In fact , it is the loss of ATP that results in the rigor mortis observed soon after someone dies .
With no further ATP production possible , there is no ATP available for myosin heads to detach from the actin-binding sites , so the cross-bridges stay in place , causing the rigidity in the skeletal muscles .
ATP supplies the energy for muscle contraction to take place .
In addition to its direct role in the cross-bridge cycle , ATP also provides the energy for the active-transport Ca pumps in the SR .
Muscle contraction does not occur without sufficient amounts of ATP .
The amount of ATP stored in muscle is very low , only sufficient to power a few seconds worth of contractions .
As it is broken down , ATP must therefore be regenerated and replaced quickly to allow for sustained contraction .
There are three mechanisms by which ATP can be regenerated : creatine phosphate metabolism , anaerobic glycolysis , and fermentation and aerobic respiration .
Creatine phosphate is a molecule that can store energy in its phosphate bonds .
In a resting muscle , excess ATP transfers its energy to creatine , producing ADP and creatine phosphate .
This acts as an energy reserve that can be used to quickly create more ATP .
When the muscle starts to contract and needs energy , creatine phosphate transfers its phosphate back to ADP to form ATP and creatine .
This reaction is catalyzed by the enzyme creatine kinase and occurs very quickly ; thus , creatine phosphate-derived ATP powers the first few seconds of muscle contraction .
However , creatine phosphate can only provide approximately 15 seconds worth of energy , at which point another energy source has to be used ( Figure 10.12 ) .
As the ATP produced by creatine phosphate is depleted , muscles turn to glycolysis as an ATP source .
Glycolysis is an anaerobic ( non-oxygen-dependent ) process that breaks down glucose ( sugar ) to produce ATP ; however , glycolysis can not generate ATP as quickly as creatine phosphate .
Thus , the switch to glycolysis results in a slower rate of ATP availability to the muscle .
The sugar used in glycolysis can be provided by blood glucose or by metabolizing glycogen that is stored in the muscle .
The breakdown of one glucose molecule produces two ATP and two molecules of pyruvic acid , which can be used in aerobic respiration or when oxygen levels are low , converted to lactic acid ( Figure 10.12b ) .
If oxygen is available , pyruvic acid is used in aerobic respiration .
However , if oxygen is not available , pyruvic acid is converted to lactic acid , which may contribute to muscle fatigue .
This conversion allows the recycling of the enzyme NAD from NADH , which is needed for glycolysis to continue .
This occurs during strenuous exercise when high amounts of energy are needed but oxygen can not be sufficiently delivered to muscle .
Glycolysis itself can not be sustained for very long ( approximately 1 minute of muscle activity ) , but it is useful in facilitating short bursts of high-intensity output .
This is because glycolysis does not utilize glucose very efficiently , producing a net gain of two ATPs per molecule of glucose , and the end product of lactic acid , which may contribute to muscle fatigue as it accumulates .
Aerobic respiration is the breakdown of glucose or other nutrients in the presence of oxygen ( O ) to produce carbon dioxide , water , and ATP .
Approximately 95 percent of the ATP required for resting or moderately active muscles is provided by aerobic respiration , which takes place in mitochondria .
The inputs for aerobic respiration include glucose circulating in the bloodstream , pyruvic acid , and fatty acids .
Aerobic respiration is much more efficient than anaerobic glycolysis , producing approximately 36 ATPs per molecule of glucose versus four from glycolysis .
However , aerobic respiration can not be sustained without a steady supply of O to the skeletal muscle and is much slower ( Figure 10.12c ) .
To compensate , muscles store small amount of excess oxygen in proteins call myoglobin , allowing for more efficient muscle contractions and less fatigue .
Aerobic training also increases the efficiency of the circulatory system so that O can be supplied to the muscles for longer periods of time .
Muscle fatigue occurs when a muscle can no longer contract in response to signals from the nervous system .
The exact causes of muscle fatigue are not fully known , although certain factors have been correlated with the decreased muscle contraction that occurs during fatigue .
ATP is needed for normal muscle contraction , and as ATP reserves are reduced , muscle function may decline .
This may be more of a factor in brief , intense muscle output rather than sustained , lower intensity efforts .
Lactic acid buildup may lower intracellular pH , affecting enzyme and protein activity .
Imbalances in Na and K levels as a result of membrane depolarization may disrupt Ca flow out of the SR. Long periods of sustained exercise may damage the SR and the sarcolemma , resulting in impaired Ca regulation .
Intense muscle activity results in an oxygen debt , which is the amount of oxygen needed to compensate for ATP produced without oxygen during muscle contraction .
Oxygen is required to restore ATP and creatine phosphate levels , convert lactic acid to pyruvic acid , and , in the liver , to convert lactic acid into glucose or glycogen .
Other systems used during exercise also require oxygen , and all of these combined processes result in the increased breathing rate that occurs after exercise .
Until the oxygen debt has been met , oxygen intake is elevated , even after exercise has stopped .
Relaxing skeletal muscle fibers , and ultimately , the skeletal muscle , begins with the motor neuron , which stops releasing its chemical signal , ACh , into the synapse at the NMJ .
The muscle fiber will repolarize , which closes the gates in the SR where Ca was being released .
ATP-driven pumps will move Ca out of the sarcoplasm back into the SR .
This results in the “ reshielding ” of the actin-binding sites on the thin filaments .
Without the ability to form cross-bridges between the thin and thick filaments , the muscle fiber loses its tension and relaxes .
The number of skeletal muscle fibers in a given muscle is genetically determined and does not change .
Muscle strength is directly related to the amount of myofibrils and sarcomeres within each fiber .
Factors , such as hormones and stress ( and artificial anabolic steroids ) , acting on the muscle can increase the production of sarcomeres and myofibrils within the muscle fibers , a change called hypertrophy , which results in the increased mass and bulk in a skeletal muscle .
Likewise , decreased use of a skeletal muscle results in atrophy , where the number of sarcomeres and myofibrils disappear ( but not the number of muscle fibers ) .
It is common for a limb in a cast to show atrophied muscles when the cast is removed , and certain diseases , such as polio , show atrophied muscles .
Duchenne muscular dystrophy ( DMD ) is a progressive weakening of the skeletal muscles .
It is one of several diseases collectively referred to as “ muscular dystrophy. ” DMD is caused by a lack of the protein dystrophin , which helps the thin filaments of myofibrils bind to the sarcolemma .
Without sufficient dystrophin , muscle contractions cause the sarcolemma to tear , causing an influx of Ca , leading to cellular damage and muscle fiber degradation .
Over time , as muscle damage accumulates , muscle mass is lost , and greater functional impairments develop .
DMD is an inherited disorder caused by an abnormal X chromosome .
It primarily affects males , and it is usually diagnosed in early childhood .
DMD usually first appears as difficulty with balance and motion , and then progresses to an inability to walk .
It continues progressing upward in the body from the lower extremities to the upper body , where it affects the muscles responsible for breathing and circulation .
It ultimately causes death due to respiratory failure , and those afflicted do not usually live past their 20s .
Because DMD is caused by a mutation in the gene that codes for dystrophin , it was thought that introducing healthy myoblasts into patients might be an effective treatment .
Myoblasts are the embryonic cells responsible for muscle development , and ideally , they would carry healthy genes that could produce the dystrophin needed for normal muscle contraction .
This approach has been largely unsuccessful in humans .
A recent approach has involved attempting to boost the muscle ’ s production of utrophin , a protein similar to dystrophin that may be able to assume the role of dystrophin and prevent cellular damage from occurring .
The force generated by the contraction of the muscle ( or shortening of the sarcomeres ) is called muscle tension .
However , muscle tension also is generated when the muscle is contracting against a load that does not move , resulting in two main types of skeletal muscle contractions : isotonic contractions and isometric contractions .
In isotonic contractions , where the tension in the muscle stays constant , a load is moved as the length of the muscle changes ( shortens ) .
There are two types of isotonic contractions : concentric and eccentric .
A concentric contraction involves the muscle shortening to move a load .
An example of this is the biceps brachii muscle contracting when a hand weight is brought upward with increasing muscle tension .
As the biceps brachii contract , the angle of the elbow joint decreases as the forearm is brought toward the body .
Here , the biceps brachii contracts as sarcomeres in its muscle fibers are shortening and cross-bridges form ; the myosin heads pull the actin .
An eccentric contraction occurs as the muscle tension diminishes and the muscle lengthens .
In this case , the hand weight is lowered in a slow and controlled manner as the amount of crossbridges being activated by nervous system stimulation decreases .
In this case , as tension is released from the biceps brachii , the angle of the elbow joint increases .
Eccentric contractions are also used for movement and balance of the body .
An isometric contraction occurs as the muscle produces tension without changing the angle of a skeletal joint .
Isometric contractions involve sarcomere shortening and increasing muscle tension , but do not move a load , as the force produced can not overcome the resistance provided by the load .
For example , if one attempts to lift a hand weight that is too heavy , there will be sarcomere activation and shortening to a point , and ever-increasing muscle tension , but no change in the angle of the elbow joint .
In everyday living , isometric contractions are active in maintaining posture and maintaining bone and joint stability .
However , holding your head in an upright position occurs not because the muscles can not move the head , but because the goal is to remain stationary and not produce movement .
Most actions of the body are the result of a combination of isotonic and isometric contractions working together to produce a wide range of outcomes ( Figure 10.13 ) .
All of these muscle activities are under the exquisite control of the nervous system .
Neural control regulates concentric , eccentric and isometric contractions , muscle fiber recruitment , and muscle tone .
A crucial aspect of nervous system control of skeletal muscles is the role of motor units .
As you have learned , every skeletal muscle fiber must be innervated by the axon terminal of a motor neuron in order to contract .
Each muscle fiber is innervated by only one motor neuron .
The actual group of muscle fibers in a muscle innervated by a single motor neuron is called a motor unit .
The size of a motor unit is variable depending on the nature of the muscle .
A small motor unit is an arrangement where a single motor neuron supplies a small number of muscle fibers in a muscle .
Small motor units permit very fine motor control of the muscle .
The best example in humans is the small motor units of the extraocular eye muscles that move the eyeballs .
There are thousands of muscle fibers in each muscle , but every six or so fibers are supplied by a single motor neuron , as the axons branch to form synaptic connections at their individual NMJs .
This allows for exquisite control of eye movements so that both eyes can quickly focus on the same object .
Small motor units are also involved in the many fine movements of the fingers and thumb of the hand for grasping , texting , etc .
A large motor unit is an arrangement where a single motor neuron supplies a large number of muscle fibers in a muscle .
Large motor units are concerned with simple , or “ gross , ” movements , such as powerfully extending the knee joint .
The best example is the large motor units of the thigh muscles or back muscles , where a single motor neuron will supply thousands of muscle fibers in a muscle , as its axon splits into thousands of branches .
There is a wide range of motor units within many skeletal muscles , which gives the nervous system a wide range of control over the muscle .
The small motor units in the muscle will have smaller , lower-threshold motor neurons that are more excitable , firing first to their skeletal muscle fibers , which also tend to be the smallest .
Activation of these smaller motor units , results in a relatively small degree of contractile strength ( tension ) generated in the muscle .
As more strength is needed , larger motor units , with bigger , higher-threshold motor neurons are enlisted to activate larger muscle fibers .
This increasing activation of motor units produces an increase in muscle contraction known as recruitment .
As more motor units are recruited , the muscle contraction grows progressively stronger .
In some muscles , the largest motor units may generate a contractile force of 50 times more than the smallest motor units in the muscle .
This allows a feather to be picked up using the biceps brachii arm muscle with minimal force , and a heavy weight to be lifted by the same muscle by recruiting the largest motor units .
When necessary , the maximal number of motor units in a muscle can be recruited simultaneously , producing the maximum force of contraction for that muscle , but this can not last for very long because of the energy requirements to sustain the contraction .
To prevent complete muscle fatigue , motor units are generally not all simultaneously active , but instead some motor units rest while others are active , which allows for longer muscle contractions .
The nervous system uses recruitment as a mechanism to efficiently utilize a skeletal muscle .
When a skeletal muscle fiber contracts , myosin heads attach to actin to form cross-bridges followed by the thin filaments sliding over the thick filaments as the heads pull the actin , and this results in sarcomere shortening , creating the tension of the muscle contraction .
The cross-bridges can only form where thin and thick filaments already overlap , so that the length of the sarcomere has a direct influence on the force generated when the sarcomere shortens .
This is called the length-tension relationship .
This length maximizes the overlap of actin-binding sites and myosin heads .
If a sarcomere is stretched past this ideal length ( beyond 120 percent ) , thick and thin filaments do not overlap sufficiently , which results in less tension produced .
If a sarcomere is shortened beyond 80 percent , the zone of overlap is reduced with the thin filaments jutting beyond the last of the myosin heads and shrinks the H zone , which is normally composed of myosin tails .
Eventually , there is nowhere else for the thin filaments to go and the amount of tension is diminished .
If the muscle is stretched to the point where thick and thin filaments do not overlap at all , no cross-bridges can be formed , and no tension is produced in that sarcomere .
This amount of stretching does not usually occur , as accessory proteins and connective tissue oppose extreme stretching .
A single action potential from a motor neuron will produce a single contraction in the muscle fibers of its motor unit .
This isolated contraction is called a twitch .
A twitch can last for a few milliseconds or 100 milliseconds , depending on the muscle type .
The tension produced by a single twitch can be measured by a myogram , an instrument that measures the amount of tension produced over time ( Figure 10.15 ) .
Each twitch undergoes three phases .
The first phase is the latent period , during which the action potential is being propagated along the sarcolemma and Ca ions are released from the SR .
This is the phase during which excitation and contraction are being coupled but contraction has yet to occur .
The contraction phase occurs next .
The Ca ions in the sarcoplasm have bound to troponin , tropomyosin has shifted away from actinbinding sites , cross-bridges formed , and sarcomeres are actively shortening to the point of peak tension .
The last phase is the relaxation phase , when tension decreases as contraction stops .
Ca ions are pumped out of the sarcoplasm into the SR , and cross-bridge cycling stops , returning the muscle fibers to their resting state .
Although a person can experience a muscle “ twitch , ” a single twitch does not produce any significant muscle activity in a living body .
A series of action potentials to the muscle fibers is necessary to produce a muscle contraction that can produce work .
Normal muscle contraction is more sustained , and it can be modified by input from the nervous system to produce varying amounts of force ; this is called a graded muscle response .
The frequency of action potentials ( nerve impulses ) from a motor neuron and the number of motor neurons transmitting action potentials both affect the tension produced in skeletal muscle .
The rate at which a motor neuron fires action potentials affects the tension produced in the skeletal muscle .
If the fibers are stimulated while a previous twitch is still occurring , the second twitch will be stronger .
This response is called wave summation , because the excitation-contraction coupling effects of successive motor neuron signaling is summed , or added together ( Figure 10.16a ) .
At the molecular level , summation occurs because the second stimulus triggers the release of more Ca ions , which become available to activate additional sarcomeres while the muscle is still contracting from the first stimulus .
Summation results in greater contraction of the motor unit .
If the frequency of motor neuron signaling increases , summation and subsequent muscle tension in the motor unit continues to rise until it reaches a peak point .
The tension at this point is about three to four times greater than the tension of a single twitch , a state referred to as incomplete tetanus .
During incomplete tetanus , the muscle goes through quick cycles of contraction with a short relaxation phase for each .
If the stimulus frequency is so high that the relaxation phase disappears completely , contractions become continuous in a process called complete tetanus ( Figure 10.16b ) .
During tetanus , the concentration of Ca ions in the sarcoplasm allows virtually all of the sarcomeres to form cross-bridges and shorten , so that a contraction can continue uninterrupted ( until the muscle fatigues and can no longer produce tension ) .
When a skeletal muscle has been dormant for an extended period and then activated to contract , with all other things being equal , the initial contractions generate about one-half the force of later contractions .
The muscle tension increases in a graded manner that to some looks like a set of stairs .
This tension increase is called treppe , a condition where muscle contractions become more efficient .
It ’ s also known as the “ staircase effect ” ( Figure 10.17 ) .
It is believed that treppe results from a higher concentration of Ca in the sarcoplasm resulting from the steady stream of signals from the motor neuron .
It can only be maintained with adequate ATP .
Skeletal muscles are rarely completely relaxed , or flaccid .
Even if a muscle is not producing movement , it is contracted a small amount to maintain its contractile proteins and produce muscle tone .
The tension produced by muscle tone allows muscles to continually stabilize joints and maintain posture .
Muscle tone is accomplished by a complex interaction between the nervous system and skeletal muscles that results in the activation of a few motor units at a time , most likely in a cyclical manner .
In this manner , muscles never fatigue completely , as some motor units can recover while others are active .
Hypotonic muscles have a flaccid appearance and display functional impairments , such as weak reflexes .
Conversely , excessive muscle tone is referred to as hypertonia , accompanied by hyperreflexia ( excessive reflex responses ) , often the result of damage to upper motor neurons in the CNS .
Hypertonia can present with muscle rigidity ( as seen in Parkinson ’ s disease ) or spasticity , a phasic change in muscle tone , where a limb will “ snap ” back from passive stretching ( as seen in some strokes ) .
Using these criteria , there are three main types of skeletal muscle fibers .
Slow oxidative ( SO ) fibers contract relatively slowly and use aerobic respiration ( oxygen and glucose ) to produce ATP .
Fast oxidative ( FO ) fibers have fast contractions and primarily use aerobic respiration , but because they may switch to anaerobic respiration ( glycolysis ) , can fatigue more quickly than SO fibers .
Lastly , fast glycolytic ( FG ) fibers have fast contractions and primarily use anaerobic glycolysis .
The FG fibers fatigue more quickly than the others .
Most skeletal muscles in a human contain ( s ) all three types , although in varying proportions .
The speed of contraction is dependent on how quickly myosin ’ s ATPase hydrolyzes ATP to produce cross-bridge action .
Fast fibers hydrolyze ATP approximately twice as quickly as slow fibers , resulting in much quicker cross-bridge cycling ( which pulls the thin filaments toward the center of the sarcomeres at a faster rate ) .
The primary metabolic pathway used by a muscle fiber determines whether the fiber is classified as oxidative or glycolytic .
If a fiber primarily produces ATP through aerobic pathways it is oxidative .
More ATP can be produced during each metabolic cycle , making the fiber more resistant to fatigue .
Glycolytic fibers primarily create ATP through anaerobic glycolysis , which produces less ATP per cycle .
As a result , glycolytic fibers fatigue at a quicker rate .
The oxidative fibers contain many more mitochondria than the glycolytic fibers , because aerobic metabolism , which uses oxygen ( O ) in the metabolic pathway , occurs in the mitochondria .
The SO fibers possess a large number of mitochondria and are capable of contracting for longer periods because of the large amount of ATP they can produce , but they have a relatively small diameter and do not produce a large amount of tension .
SO fibers are extensively supplied with blood capillaries to supply O from the red blood cells in the bloodstream .
The SO fibers also possess myoglobin , an O -carrying molecule similar to O -carrying hemoglobin in the red blood cells .
The myoglobin stores some of the needed O within the fibers themselves ( and gives SO fibers their red color ) .
All of these features allow SO fibers to produce large quantities of ATP , which can sustain muscle activity without fatiguing for long periods of time .
The fact that SO fibers can function for long periods without fatiguing makes them useful in maintaining posture , producing isometric contractions , stabilizing bones and joints , and making small movements that happen often but do not require large amounts of energy .
They do not produce high tension , and thus they are not used for powerful , fast movements that require high amounts of energy and rapid cross-bridge cycling .
FO fibers are sometimes called intermediate fibers because they possess characteristics that are intermediate between fast fibers and slow fibers .
They produce ATP relatively quickly , more quickly than SO fibers , and thus can produce relatively high amounts of tension .
They are oxidative because they produce ATP aerobically , possess high amounts of mitochondria , and do not fatigue quickly .
However , FO fibers do not possess significant myoglobin , giving them a lighter color than the red SO fibers .
FO fibers are used primarily for movements , such as walking , that require more energy than postural control but less energy than an explosive movement , such as sprinting .
FO fibers are useful for this type of movement because they produce more tension than SO fibers but they are more fatigue-resistant than FG fibers .
FG fibers primarily use anaerobic glycolysis as their ATP source .
They have a large diameter and possess high amounts of glycogen , which is used in glycolysis to generate ATP quickly to produce high levels of tension .
Because they do not primarily use aerobic metabolism , they do not possess substantial numbers of mitochondria or significant amounts of myoglobin and therefore have a white color .
FG fibers are used to produce rapid , forceful contractions to make quick , powerful movements .
These fibers fatigue quickly , permitting them to only be used for short periods .
Most muscles possess a mixture of each fiber type .
The predominant fiber type in a muscle is determined by the primary function of the muscle .
By the end of this section , you will be able to : Describe hypertrophy and atrophy Explain how resistance exercise builds muscle Explain how performance-enhancing substances affect muscle Physical training alters the appearance of skeletal muscles and can produce changes in muscle performance .
Conversely , a lack of use can result in decreased performance and muscle appearance .
Although muscle cells can change in size , new cells are not formed when muscles grow .
Instead , structural proteins are added to muscle fibers in a process called hypertrophy , so cell diameter increases .
The reverse , when structural proteins are lost and muscle mass decreases , is called atrophy .
Age-related muscle atrophy is called sarcopenia .
Cellular components of muscles can also undergo changes in response to changes in muscle use .
Slow fibers are predominantly used in endurance exercises that require little force but involve numerous repetitions .
The aerobic metabolism used by slow-twitch fibers allows them to maintain contractions over long periods .
Endurance training modifies these slow fibers to make them even more efficient by producing more mitochondria to enable more aerobic metabolism and more ATP production .
Endurance exercise can also increase the amount of myoglobin in a cell , as increased aerobic respiration increases the need for oxygen .
Myoglobin is found in the sarcoplasm and acts as an oxygen storage supply for the mitochondria .
The training can trigger the formation of more extensive capillary networks around the fiber , a process called angiogenesis , to supply oxygen and remove metabolic waste .
To allow these capillary networks to supply the deep portions of the muscle , muscle mass does not greatly increase in order to maintain a smaller area for the diffusion of nutrients and gases .
All of these cellular changes result in the ability to sustain low levels of muscle contractions for greater periods without fatiguing .
The proportion of SO muscle fibers in muscle determines the suitability of that muscle for endurance , and may benefit those participating in endurance activities .
Postural muscles have a large number of SO fibers and relatively few FO and FG fibers , to keep the back straight ( Figure 10.18 ) .
Endurance training can result in overuse injuries such as stress fractures and joint and tendon inflammation .
Resistance exercises , as opposed to endurance exercise , require large amounts of FG fibers to produce short , powerful movements that are not repeated over long periods .
The high rates of ATP hydrolysis and cross-bridge formation in FG fibers result in powerful muscle contractions .
Muscles used for power have a higher ratio of FG to SO/FO fibers , and trained athletes possess even higher levels of FG fibers in their muscles .
Resistance exercise affects muscles by increasing the formation of myofibrils , thereby increasing the thickness of muscle fibers .
This added structure causes hypertrophy , or the enlargement of muscles , exemplified by the large skeletal muscles seen in body builders and other athletes ( Figure 10.19 ) .
Because this muscular enlargement is achieved by the addition of structural proteins , athletes trying to build muscle mass often ingest large amounts of protein .
Except for the hypertrophy that follows an increase in the number of sarcomeres and myofibrils in a skeletal muscle , the cellular changes observed during endurance training do not usually occur with resistance training .
There is usually no significant increase in mitochondria or capillary density .
However , resistance training does increase the development of connective tissue , which adds to the overall mass of the muscle and helps to contain muscles as they produce increasingly powerful contractions .
Tendons also become stronger to prevent tendon damage , as the force produced by muscles is transferred to tendons that attach the muscle to bone .
For effective strength training , the intensity of the exercise must continually be increased .
For instance , continued weight lifting without increasing the weight of the load does not increase muscle size .
To produce ever-greater results , the weights lifted must become increasingly heavier , making it more difficult for muscles to move the load .
The muscle then adapts to this heavier load , and an even heavier load must be used if even greater muscle mass is desired .
If done improperly , resistance training can lead to overuse injuries of the muscle , tendon , or bone .
These injuries can occur if the load is too heavy or if the muscles are not given sufficient time between workouts to recover or if joints are not aligned properly during the exercises .
Cellular damage to muscle fibers that occurs after intense exercise includes damage to the sarcolemma and myofibrils .
This muscle damage contributes to the feeling of soreness after strenuous exercise , but muscles gain mass as this damage is repaired , and additional structural proteins are added to replace the damaged ones .
Overworking skeletal muscles can also lead to tendon damage and even skeletal damage if the load is too great for the muscles to bear .
Some athletes attempt to boost their performance by using various agents that may enhance muscle performance .
Anabolic steroids are one of the more widely known agents used to boost muscle mass and increase power output .
Anabolic steroids are a form of testosterone , a male sex hormone that stimulates muscle formation , leading to increased muscle mass .
Endurance athletes may also try to boost the availability of oxygen to muscles to increase aerobic respiration by using substances such as erythropoietin ( EPO ) , a hormone normally produced in the kidneys , which triggers the production of red blood cells .
The extra oxygen carried by these blood cells can then be used by muscles for aerobic respiration .
Human growth hormone ( hGH ) is another supplement , and although it can facilitate building muscle mass , its main role is to promote the healing of muscle and other tissues after strenuous exercise .
Increased hGH may allow for faster recovery after muscle damage , reducing the rest required after exercise , and allowing for more sustained high-level performance .
Although performance-enhancing substances often do improve performance , most are banned by governing bodies in sports and are illegal for nonmedical purposes .
Their use to enhance performance raises ethical issues of cheating because they give users an unfair advantage over nonusers .
A greater concern , however , is that their use carries serious health risks .
The side effects of these substances are often significant , nonreversible , and in some cases fatal .
The physiological strain caused by these substances is often greater than what the body can handle , leading to effects that are unpredictable and dangerous .
Anabolic steroid use has been linked to infertility , aggressive behavior , cardiovascular disease , and brain cancer .
Similarly , some athletes have used creatine to increase power output .
Creatine phosphate provides quick bursts of ATP to muscles in the initial stages of contraction .
Increasing the amount of creatine available to cells is thought to produce more ATP and therefore increase explosive power output , although its effectiveness as a supplement has been questioned .
Although atrophy due to disuse can often be reversed with exercise , muscle atrophy with age , referred to as sarcopenia , is irreversible .
This is a primary reason why even highly trained athletes succumb to declining performance with age .
This decline is noticeable in athletes whose sports require strength and powerful movements , such as sprinting , whereas the effects of age are less noticeable in endurance athletes such as marathon runners or long-distance cyclists .
As muscles age , muscle fibers die , and they are replaced by connective tissue and adipose tissue ( Figure 10.20 ) .
Because those tissues can not contract and generate force as muscle can , muscles lose the ability to produce powerful contractions .
The decline in muscle mass causes a loss of strength , including the strength required for posture and mobility .
This may be caused by a reduction in FG fibers that hydrolyze ATP quickly to produce short , powerful contractions .
Muscles in older people sometimes possess greater numbers of SO fibers , which are responsible for longer contractions and do not produce powerful movements .
There may also be a reduction in the size of motor units , resulting in fewer fibers being stimulated and less muscle tension being produced .
Sarcopenia can be delayed to some extent by exercise , as training adds structural proteins and causes cellular changes that can offset the effects of atrophy .
Increased exercise can produce greater numbers of cellular mitochondria , increase capillary density , and increase the mass and strength of connective tissue .
The effects of age-related atrophy are especially pronounced in people who are sedentary , as the loss of muscle cells is displayed as functional impairments such as trouble with locomotion , balance , and posture .
This can lead to a decrease in quality of life and medical problems , such as joint problems because the muscles that stabilize bones and joints are weakened .
Problems with locomotion and balance can also cause various injuries due to falls .
By the end of this section , you will be able to : Describe intercalated discs and gap junctions Describe a desmosome Cardiac muscle tissue is only found in the heart .
Highly coordinated contractions of cardiac muscle pump blood into the vessels of the circulatory system .
Similar to skeletal muscle , cardiac muscle is striated and organized into sarcomeres , possessing the same banding organization as skeletal muscle ( Figure 10.21 ) .
However , cardiac muscle fibers are shorter than skeletal muscle fibers and usually contain only one nucleus , which is located in the central region of the cell .
Cardiac muscle fibers also possess many mitochondria and myoglobin , as ATP is produced primarily through aerobic metabolism .
Cardiac muscle fibers cells also are extensively branched and are connected to one another at their ends by intercalated discs .
An intercalated disc allows the cardiac muscle cells to contract in a wave-like pattern so that the heart can work as a pump .
the University View Cardiovascular % 20System/305_HISTO_40X.svs/view.apml explore the tissue sample in greater detail .
of Michigan WebScope at http : //virtualslides.med.umich.edu/Histology/ to ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/cardmuscleMG ) Intercalated discs are part of the sarcolemma and contain two structures important in cardiac muscle contraction : gap junctions and desmosomes .
A gap junction forms channels between adjacent cardiac muscle fibers that allow the depolarizing current produced by cations to flow from one cardiac muscle cell to the next .
This joining is called electric coupling , and in cardiac muscle it allows the quick transmission of action potentials and the coordinated contraction of the entire heart .
This network of electrically connected cardiac muscle cells creates a functional unit of contraction called a syncytium .
The remainder of the intercalated disc is composed of desmosomes .
A desmosome is a cell structure that anchors the ends of cardiac muscle fibers together so the cells do not pull apart during the stress of individual fibers contracting ( Figure 10.22 ) .
Contractions of the heart ( heartbeats ) are controlled by specialized cardiac muscle cells called pacemaker cells that directly control heart rate .
Although cardiac muscle can not be consciously controlled , the pacemaker cells respond to signals from the autonomic nervous system ( ANS ) to speed up or slow down the heart rate .
The pacemaker cells can also respond to various hormones that modulate heart rate to control blood pressure .
The wave of contraction that allows the heart to work as a unit , called a functional syncytium , begins with the pacemaker cells .
This group of cells is self-excitable and able to depolarize to threshold and fire action potentials on their own , a feature called autorhythmicity ; they do this at set intervals which determine heart rate .
Another feature of cardiac muscle is its relatively long action potentials in its fibers , having a sustained depolarization “ plateau. ” The plateau is produced by Ca entry though voltage-gated calcium channels in the sarcolemma of cardiac muscle fibers .
This sustained depolarization ( and Ca entry ) provides for a longer contraction than is produced by an action potential in skeletal muscle .
Smooth muscle is also present in the eyes , where it functions to change the size of the iris and alter the shape of the lens ; and in the skin where it causes hair to stand erect in response to cold temperature or fear .
View the University of Michigan WebScope at http : //virtualslides.med.umich.edu/Histology/Digestive % 20System/ Intestines/169_HISTO_40X.svs/view.apml ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/smoothmuscMG ) to explore the tissue sample in greater detail .
Although they do not have striations and sarcomeres , smooth muscle fibers do have actin and myosin contractile proteins , and thick and thin filaments .
These thin filaments are anchored by dense bodies .
A dense body is analogous to the Z-discs of skeletal and cardiac muscle fibers and is fastened to the sarcolemma .
Calcium ions are supplied by the SR in the fibers and by sequestration from the extracellular fluid through membrane indentations called calveoli .
Because smooth muscle cells do not contain troponin , cross-bridge formation is not regulated by the troponin-tropomyosin complex but instead by the regulatory protein calmodulin .
In a smooth muscle fiber , external Ca ions passing through opened calcium channels in the sarcolemma , and additional Ca released from SR , bind to calmodulin .
The Ca -calmodulin complex then activates an enzyme called myosin ( light chain ) kinase , which , in turn , activates the myosin heads by phosphorylating them ( converting ATP to ADP and P , with the P attaching to the head ) .
The heads can then attach to actin-binding sites and pull on the thin filaments .
The thin filaments also are anchored to the dense bodies ; the structures invested in the inner membrane of the sarcolemma ( at adherens junctions ) that also have cord-like intermediate filaments attached to them .
When the thin filaments slide past the thick filaments , they pull on the dense bodies , structures tethered to the sarcolemma , which then pull on the intermediate filaments networks throughout the sarcoplasm .
This arrangement causes the entire muscle fiber to contract in a manner whereby the ends are pulled toward the center , causing the midsection to bulge in a corkscrew motion ( Figure 10.24 ) .
Although smooth muscle contraction relies on the presence of Ca ions , smooth muscle fibers have a much smaller diameter than skeletal muscle cells .
T-tubules are not required to reach the interior of the cell and therefore not necessary to transmit an action potential deep into the fiber .
Smooth muscle fibers have a limited calcium-storing SR but have calcium channels in the sarcolemma ( similar to cardiac muscle fibers ) that open during the action potential along the sarcolemma .
The influx of extracellular Ca ions , which diffuse into the sarcoplasm to reach the calmodulin , accounts for most of the Ca that triggers contraction of a smooth muscle cell .
Muscle contraction continues until ATP-dependent calcium pumps actively transport Ca ions back into the SR and out of the cell .
However , a low concentration of calcium remains in the sarcoplasm to maintain muscle tone .
This remaining calcium keeps the muscle slightly contracted , which is important in certain tracts and around blood vessels .
Because most smooth muscles must function for long periods without rest , their power output is relatively low , but contractions can continue without using large amounts of energy .
Some smooth muscle can also maintain contractions even as Ca is removed and myosin kinase is inactivated/dephosphorylated .
This can happen as a subset of cross-bridges between myosin heads and actin , called latch-bridges , keep the thick and thin filaments linked together for a prolonged period , and without the need for ATP .
This allows for the maintaining of muscle “ tone ” in smooth muscle that lines arterioles and other visceral organs with very little energy expenditure .
Smooth muscle is not under voluntary control ; thus , it is called involuntary muscle .
The triggers for smooth muscle contraction include hormones , neural stimulation by the ANS , and local factors .
In certain locations , such as the walls of visceral organs , stretching the muscle can trigger its contraction ( the stress-relaxation response ) .
Axons of neurons in the ANS do not form the highly organized NMJs with smooth muscle , as seen between motor neurons and skeletal muscle fibers .
Instead , there is a series of neurotransmitter-filled bulges called varicosities as an axon courses through smooth muscle , loosely forming motor units ( Figure 10.25 ) .
A varicosity releases neurotransmitters into the synaptic cleft .
Also , visceral muscle in the walls of the hollow organs ( except the heart ) contains pacesetter cells .
A pacesetter cell can spontaneously trigger action potentials and contractions in the muscle .
Smooth muscle is organized in two ways : as single-unit smooth muscle , which is much more common ; and as multiunit smooth muscle .
The two types have different locations in the body and have different characteristics .
Single-unit muscle has its muscle fibers joined by gap junctions so that the muscle contracts as a single unit .
This type of smooth muscle is found in the walls of all visceral organs except the heart ( which has cardiac muscle in its walls ) , and so it is commonly called visceral muscle .
Because the muscle fibers are not constrained by the organization and stretchability limits of sarcomeres , visceral smooth muscle has a stress-relaxation response .
This means that as the muscle of a hollow organ is stretched when it fills , the mechanical stress of the stretching will trigger contraction , but this is immediately followed by relaxation so that the organ does not empty its contents prematurely .
This is important for hollow organs , such as the stomach or urinary bladder , which continuously expand as they fill .
The smooth muscle around these organs also can maintain a muscle tone when the organ empties and shrinks , a feature that prevents “ flabbiness ” in the empty organ .
In general , visceral smooth muscle produces slow , steady contractions that allow substances , such as food in the digestive tract , to move through the body .
Multiunit smooth muscle cells rarely possess gap junctions , and thus are not electrically coupled .
As a result , contraction does not spread from one cell to the next , but is instead confined to the cell that was originally stimulated .
Stimuli for multiunit smooth muscles come from autonomic nerves or hormones but not from stretching .
This type of tissue is found around large blood vessels , in the respiratory airways , and in the eyes .
Similar to skeletal and cardiac muscle cells , smooth muscle can undergo hypertrophy to increase in size .
Unlike other muscle , smooth muscle can also divide to produce more cells , a process called hyperplasia .
This can most evidently be observed in the uterus at puberty , which responds to increased estrogen levels by producing more uterine smooth muscle fibers , and greatly increases the size of the myometrium .
By the end of this section , you will be able to : Describe the function of satellite cells Define fibrosis Explain which muscle has the greatest regeneration ability Most muscle tissue of the body arises from embryonic mesoderm .
Paraxial mesodermal cells adjacent to the neural tube form blocks of cells called somites .
Skeletal muscles , excluding those of the head and limbs , develop from mesodermal somites , whereas skeletal muscle in the head and limbs develop from general mesoderm .
Somites give rise to myoblasts .
A myoblast is a muscle-forming stem cell that migrates to different regions in the body and then fuse ( s ) to form a syncytium , or myotube .
As a myotube is formed from many different myoblast cells , it contains many nuclei , but has a continuous cytoplasm .
This is why skeletal muscle cells are multinucleate , as the nucleus of each contributing myoblast remains intact in the mature skeletal muscle cell .
However , cardiac and smooth muscle cells are not multinucleate because the myoblasts that form their cells do not fuse .
Gap junctions develop in the cardiac and single-unit smooth muscle in the early stages of development .
In skeletal muscles , ACh receptors are initially present along most of the surface of the myoblasts , but spinal nerve innervation causes the release of growth factors that stimulate the formation of motor end-plates and NMJs .
As neurons become active , electrical signals that are sent through the muscle influence the distribution of slow and fast fibers in the muscle .
Although the number of muscle cells is set during development , satellite cells help to repair skeletal muscle cells .
A satellite cell is similar to a myoblast because it is a type of stem cell ; however , satellite cells are incorporated into muscle cells and facilitate the protein synthesis required for repair and growth .
These cells are located outside the sarcolemma and are stimulated to grow and fuse with muscle cells by growth factors that are released by muscle fibers under certain forms of stress .
Satellite cells can regenerate muscle fibers to a very limited extent , but they primarily help to repair damage in living cells .
If a cell is damaged to a greater extent than can be repaired by satellite cells , the muscle fibers are replaced by scar tissue in a process called fibrosis .
Because scar tissue can not contract , muscle that has sustained significant damage loses strength and can not produce the same amount of power or endurance as it could before being damaged .
Smooth muscle tissue can regenerate from a type of stem cell called a pericyte , which is found in some small blood vessels .
Pericytes allow smooth muscle cells to regenerate and repair much more readily than skeletal and cardiac muscle tissue .
Similar to skeletal muscle tissue , cardiac muscle does not regenerate to a great extent .
Dead cardiac muscle tissue is replaced by scar tissue , which can not contract .
As scar tissue accumulates , the heart loses its ability to pump because of the loss of contractile power .
However , some minor regeneration may occur due to stem cells found in the blood that occasionally enter cardiac tissue .
As muscle cells die , they are not regenerated but instead are replaced by connective tissue and adipose tissue , which do not possess the contractile abilities of muscle tissue .
Muscles atrophy when they are not used , and over time if atrophy is prolonged , muscle cells die .
It is therefore important that those who are susceptible to muscle atrophy exercise to maintain muscle function and prevent the complete loss of muscle tissue .
In extreme cases , when movement is not possible , electrical stimulation can be introduced to a muscle from an external source .
This acts as a substitute for endogenous neural stimulation , stimulating the muscle to contract and preventing the loss of proteins that occurs with a lack of use .
Physiotherapists work with patients to maintain muscles .
They are trained to target muscles susceptible to atrophy , and to prescribe and monitor exercises designed to stimulate those muscles .
There are various causes of atrophy , including mechanical injury , disease , and age .
After breaking a limb or undergoing surgery , muscle use is impaired and can lead to disuse atrophy .
If the muscles are not exercised , this atrophy can lead to long-term muscle weakness .
A stroke can also cause muscle impairment by interrupting neural stimulation to certain muscles .
Without neural inputs , these muscles do not contract and thus begin to lose structural proteins .
Exercising these muscles can help to restore muscle function and minimize functional impairments .
Age-related muscle loss is also a target of physical therapy , as exercise can reduce the effects of age-related atrophy and improve muscle function .
The goal of a physiotherapist is to improve physical functioning and reduce functional impairments ; this is achieved by understanding the cause of muscle impairment and assessing the capabilities of a patient , after which a program to enhance these capabilities is designed .
Some factors that are assessed include strength , balance , and endurance , which are continually monitored as exercises are introduced to track improvements in muscle function .
Physiotherapists can also instruct patients on the proper use of equipment , such as crutches , and assess whether someone has sufficient strength to use the equipment and when they can function without it .
Skeletal muscles are even used during sleep .
The diaphragm is a sheet of skeletal muscle that has to contract and relax for you to breathe day and night .
If you recall from your study of the skeletal system and joints , body movement occurs around the joints in the body .
The focus of this chapter is on skeletal muscle organization .
The system to name skeletal muscles will be explained ; in some cases , the muscle is named by its shape , and in other cases it is named by its location or attachments to the skeleton .
If you understand the meaning of the name of the muscle , often it will help you remember its location and/or what it does .
This chapter also will describe how skeletal muscles are arranged to accomplish movement , and how other muscles may assist , or be arranged on the skeleton to resist or carry out the opposite movement .
The actions of the skeletal muscles will be covered in a regional manner , working from the head down to the toes .
The tendons are strong bands of dense , regular connective tissue that connect muscles to bones .
The bone connection is why this muscle tissue is called skeletal muscle .
To pull on a bone , that is , to change the angle at its synovial joint , which essentially moves the skeleton , a skeletal muscle must also be attached to a fixed part of the skeleton .
The moveable end of the muscle that attaches to the bone being pulled is called the muscle ’ s insertion , and the end of the muscle attached to a fixed ( stabilized ) bone is called the origin .
During forearm flexion —bending the elbow—the brachioradialis assists the brachialis .
Although a number of muscles may be involved in an action , the principal muscle involved is called the prime mover , or agonist .
To lift a cup , a muscle called the biceps brachii is actually the prime mover ; however , because it can be assisted by the brachialis , the brachialis is called a synergist in this action ( Figure 11.2 ) .
A synergist can also be a fixator that stabilizes the bone that is the attachment for the prime mover ’ s origin .
A muscle with the opposite action of the prime mover is called an antagonist .
For example , to extend the knee , a group of four muscles called the quadriceps femoris in the anterior compartment of the thigh are activated ( and would be called the agonists of knee extension ) .
However , to flex the knee joint , an opposite or antagonistic set of muscles called the hamstrings is activated .
As you can see , these terms would also be reversed for the opposing action .
If you consider the first action as the knee bending , the hamstrings would be called the agonists and the quadriceps femoris would then be called the antagonists .
See Table 11.1 for a list of some agonists and antagonists .
There are also skeletal muscles that do not pull against the skeleton for movements .
For example , there are the muscles that produce facial expressions .
The insertions and origins of facial muscles are in the skin , so that certain individual muscles contract to form a smile or frown , form sounds or words , and raise the eyebrows .
There also are skeletal muscles in the tongue , and the external urinary and anal sphincters that allow for voluntary regulation of urination and defecation , respectively .
In addition , the diaphragm contracts and relaxes to change the volume of the pleural cavities but it does not move the skeleton to do this .
When exercising , it is important to first warm up the muscles .
Stretching pulls on the muscle fibers and it also results in an increased blood flow to the muscles being worked .
Without a proper warm-up , it is possible that you may either damage some of the muscle fibers or pull a tendon .
A pulled tendon , regardless of location , results in pain , swelling , and diminished function ; if it is moderate to severe , the injury could immobilize you for an extended period .
Recall the discussion about muscles crossing joints to create movement .
Most of the joints you use during exercise are synovial joints , which have synovial fluid in the joint space between two bones .
Exercise and stretching may also have a beneficial effect on synovial joints .
Synovial fluid is a thin , but viscous film with the consistency of egg whites .
When you first get up and start moving , your joints feel stiff for a number of reasons .
After proper stretching and warm-up , the synovial fluid may become less viscous , allowing for better joint function .
Skeletal muscle is enclosed in connective tissue scaffolding at three levels .
Each muscle fiber ( cell ) is covered by endomysium and the entire muscle is covered by epimysium .
When a group of muscle fibers is “ bundled ” as a unit within the whole muscle by an additional covering of a connective tissue called perimysium , that bundled group of muscle fibers is called a fascicle .
Fascicle arrangement by perimysia is correlated to the force generated by a muscle ; it also affects the range of motion of the muscle .
Based on the patterns of fascicle arrangement , skeletal muscles can be classified in several ways .
What follows are the most common fascicle arrangements .
Parallel muscles have fascicles that are arranged in the same direction as the long axis of the muscle ( Figure 11.3 ) .
The majority of skeletal muscles in the body have this type of organization .
Some parallel muscles are flat sheets that expand at the ends to make broad attachments .
Other parallel muscles are rotund with tendons at one or both ends .
Muscles that seem to be plump have a large mass of tissue located in the middle of the muscle , between the insertion and the origin , which is known as the central body .
A more common name for this muscle is belly .
When a muscle contracts , the contractile fibers shorten it to an even larger bulge .
For example , extend and then flex your biceps brachii muscle ; the large , middle section is the belly ( Figure 11.4 ) .
When a parallel muscle has a central , large belly that is spindle-shaped , meaning it tapers as it extends to its origin and insertion , it sometimes is called fusiform .
Circular muscles are also called sphincters ( see Figure 11.3 ) .
When they relax , the sphincters ’ concentrically arranged bundles of muscle fibers increase the size of the opening , and when they contract , the size of the opening shrinks to the point of closure .
The orbicularis oris muscle is a circular muscle that goes around the mouth .
When it contracts , the oral opening becomes smaller , as when puckering the lips for whistling .
Another example is the orbicularis oculi , one of which surrounds each eye .
Consider , for example , the names of the two orbicularis muscles ( orbicularis oris and oribicularis oculi ) , where part of the first name of both muscles is the same .
The first part of orbicularis , orb ( orb = “ circular ” ) , is a reference to a round or circular structure ; it may also make one think of orbit , such as the moon ’ s path around the earth .
The word oris ( oris = “ oral ” ) refers to the oral cavity , or the mouth .
The word oculi ( ocular = “ eye ” ) refers to the eye .
There are other muscles throughout the body named by their shape or location .
The deltoid is a large , triangular-shaped muscle that covers the shoulder .
It is so-named because the Greek letter delta looks like a triangle .
The rectus abdomis ( rector = “ straight ” ) is the straight muscle in the anterior wall of the abdomen , while the rectus femoris is the straight muscle in the anterior compartment of the thigh .
When a muscle has a widespread expansion over a sizable area , but then the fascicles come to a single , common attachment point , the muscle is called convergent .
The attachment point for a convergent muscle could be a tendon , an aponeurosis ( a flat , broad tendon ) , or a raphe ( a very slender tendon ) .
The large muscle on the chest , the pectoralis major , is an example of a convergent muscle because it converges on the greater tubercle of the humerus via a tendon .
The temporalis muscle of the cranium is another .
Pennate muscles ( penna = “ feathers ” ) blend into a tendon that runs through the central region of the muscle for its whole length , somewhat like the quill of a feather with the muscle arranged similar to the feathers .
Due to this design , the muscle fibers in a pennate muscle can only pull at an angle , and as a result , contracting pennate muscles do not move their tendons very far .
However , because a pennate muscle generally can hold more muscle fibers within it , it can produce relatively more tension for its size .
There are three subtypes of pennate muscles .
In a unipennate muscle , the fascicles are located on one side of the tendon .
The extensor digitorum of the forearm is an example of a unipennate muscle .
A bipennate muscle has fascicles on both sides of the tendon .
In some pennate muscles , the muscle fibers wrap around the tendon , sometimes forming individual fascicles in the process .
This arrangement is referred to as multipennate .
A common example is the deltoid muscle of the shoulder , which covers the shoulder but has a single tendon that inserts on the deltoid tuberosity of the humerus .
Because of fascicles , a portion of a multipennate muscle like the deltoid can be stimulated by the nervous system to change the direction of the pull .
For example , when the deltoid muscle contracts , the arm abducts ( moves away from midline in the sagittal plane ) , but when only the anterior fascicle is stimulated , the arm will abduct and flex ( move anteriorly at the shoulder joint ) .
Skeletal muscles do not work by themselves .
Muscles are arranged in pairs based on their functions .
For muscles attached to the bones of the skeleton , the connection determines the force , speed , and range of movement .
These characteristics depend on each other and can explain the general organization of the muscular and skeletal systems .
The skeleton and muscles act together to move the body .
Have you ever used the back of a hammer to remove a nail from wood ?
The handle acts as a lever and the head of the hammer acts as a fulcrum , the fixed point that the force is applied to when you pull back or push down on the handle .
The effort applied to this system is the pulling or pushing on the handle to remove the nail , which is the load , or “ resistance ” to the movement of the handle in the system .
Our musculoskeletal system works in a similar manner , with bones being stiff levers and the articular endings of the bones—encased in synovial joints—acting as fulcrums .
The load would be an object being lifted or any resistance to a movement ( your head is a load when you are lifting it ) , and the effort , or applied force , comes from contracting skeletal muscle .
The educated class of subsequent societies studied Latin and Greek , and therefore the early pioneers of anatomy continued to apply Latin and Greek terminology or roots when they named the skeletal muscles .
The large number of muscles in the body and unfamiliar words can make learning the names of the muscles in the body seem daunting , but understanding the etymology can help .
Etymology is the study of how the root of a particular word entered a language and how the use of the word evolved over time .
Taking the time to learn the root of the words is crucial to understanding the vocabulary of anatomy and physiology .
When you understand the names of muscles it will help you remember where the muscles are located and what they do ( Figure 11.5 , Figure 11.6 , and Table 11.2 ) .
Pronunciation of words and terms will take a bit of time to master , but after you have some basic information ; the correct names and pronunciations will become easier .
Anatomists name the skeletal muscles according to a number of criteria , each of which describes the muscle in some way .
These include naming the muscle after its shape , its size compared to other muscles in the area , its location in the body or the location of its attachments to the skeleton , how many origins it has , or its action .
The skeletal muscle ’ s anatomical location or its relationship to a particular bone often determines its name .
For example , the frontalis muscle is located on top of the frontal bone of the skull .
Similarly , the shapes of some muscles are very distinctive and the names , such as orbicularis , reflect the shape .
For the buttocks , the size of the muscles influences the names : gluteus maximus ( largest ) , gluteus medius ( medium ) , and the gluteus minimus ( smallest ) .
Names were given to indicate length— brevis ( short ) , longus ( long ) —and to identify position relative to the midline : lateralis ( to the outside away from the midline ) , and medialis ( toward the midline ) .
The direction of the muscle fibers and fascicles are used to describe muscles relative to the midline , such as the rectus ( straight ) abdominis , or the oblique ( at an angle ) muscles of the abdomen .
Some muscle names indicate the number of muscles in a group .
One example of this is the quadriceps , a group of four muscles located on the anterior ( front ) thigh .
Other muscle names can provide information as to how many origins a particular muscle has , such as the biceps brachii .
The prefix bi indicates that the muscle has two origins and tri indicates three origins .
The location of a muscle ’ s attachment can also appear in its name .
When the name of a muscle is based on the attachments , the origin is always named first .
For instance , the sternocleidomastoid muscle of the neck has a dual origin on the sternum ( sterno ) and clavicle ( cleido ) , and it inserts on the mastoid process of the temporal bone .
The last feature by which to name a muscle is its action .
When muscles are named for the movement they produce , one can find action words in their name .
Some examples are flexor ( decreases the angle at the joint ) , extensor ( increases the angle at the joint ) , abductor ( moves the bone away from the midline ) , or adductor ( moves the bone toward the midline ) .
This system reflects the bones of the skeleton system , which are also arranged in this manner .
The axial muscles are grouped based on location , function , or both .
Some of the axial muscles may seem to blur the boundaries because they cross over to the appendicular skeleton .
The first grouping of the axial muscles you will review includes the muscles of the head and neck , then you will review the muscles of the vertebral column , and finally you will review the oblique and rectus muscles .
The origins of the muscles of facial expression are on the surface of the skull ( remember , the origin of a muscle does not move ) .
The insertions of these muscles have fibers intertwined with connective tissue and the dermis of the skin .
Because the muscles insert in the skin rather than on bone , when they contract , the skin moves to create facial expression ( Figure 11.7 ) .
The orbicularis oris is a circular muscle that moves the lips , and the orbicularis oculi is a circular muscle that closes the eye .
The occipitofrontalis muscle moves up the scalp and eyebrows .
The muscle has a frontal belly and an occipital ( near the occipital bone on the posterior part of the skull ) belly .
In other words , there is a muscle on the forehead ( frontalis ) and one on the back of the head ( occipitalis ) , but there is no muscle across the top of the head .
Instead , the two bellies are connected by a broad tendon called the epicranial aponeurosis , or galea aponeurosis ( galea = “ apple ” ) .
The physicians originally studying human anatomy thought the skull looked like an apple .
A large portion of the face is composed of the buccinator muscle , which compresses the cheek .
This muscle allows you to whistle , blow , and suck ; and it contributes to the action of chewing .
There are several small facial muscles , one of which is the corrugator supercilii , which is the prime mover of the eyebrows .
Place your finger on your eyebrows at the point of the bridge of the nose .
Raise your eyebrows as if you were surprised and lower your eyebrows as if you were frowning .
With these movements , you can feel the action of the corrugator supercilli .
Additional muscles of facial expression are presented in Figure 11.8 .
The movement of the eyeball is under the control of the extrinsic eye muscles , which originate outside the eye and insert onto the outer surface of the white of the eye .
These muscles are located inside the eye socket and can not be seen on any part of the visible eyeball ( Figure 11.9 and Table 11.3 ) .
If you have ever been to a doctor who held up a finger and asked you to follow it up , down , and to both sides , he or she is checking to make sure your eye muscles are acting in a coordinated pattern .
In anatomical terminology , chewing is called mastication .
Muscles involved in chewing must be able to exert enough pressure to bite through and then chew food before it is swallowed ( Figure 11.10 and Table 11.4 ) .
The masseter muscle is the main muscle used for chewing because it elevates the mandible ( lower jaw ) to close the mouth , and it is assisted by the temporalis muscle , which retracts the mandible .
You can feel the temporalis move by putting your fingers to your temple as you chew .
Although the masseter and temporalis are responsible for elevating and closing the jaw to break food into digestible pieces , the medial pterygoid and lateral pterygoid muscles provide assistance in chewing and moving food within the mouth .
Although the tongue is obviously important for tasting food , it is also necessary for mastication , deglutition ( swallowing ) , and speech ( Figure 11.11 and Figure 11.12 ) .
Because it is so moveable , the tongue facilitates complex speech patterns and sounds .
Tongue muscles can be extrinsic or intrinsic .
Extrinsic tongue muscles insert into the tongue from outside origins , and the intrinsic tongue muscles insert into the tongue from origins within it .
The extrinsic muscles move the whole tongue in different directions , whereas the intrinsic muscles allow the tongue to change its shape ( such as , curling the tongue in a loop or flattening it ) .
The extrinsic muscles all include the word root glossus ( glossus = “ tongue ” ) , and the muscle names are derived from where the muscle originates .
The genioglossus ( genio = “ chin ” ) originates on the mandible and allows the tongue to move downward and forward .
The styloglossus originates on the styloid bone , and allows upward and backward motion .
The palatoglossus originates on the soft palate to elevate the back of the tongue , and the hyoglossus originates on the hyoid bone to move the tongue downward and flatten it .
Before surgery , a patient must be made ready for general anesthesia .
The normal homeostatic controls of the body are put “ on hold ” so that the patient can be prepped for surgery .
Control of respiration must be switched from the patient ’ s homeostatic control to the control of the anesthesiologist .
The drugs used for anesthesia relax a majority of the body ’ s muscles .
Among the muscles affected during general anesthesia are those that are necessary for breathing and moving the tongue .
Under anesthesia , the tongue can relax and partially or fully block the airway , and the muscles of respiration may not move the diaphragm or chest wall .
To avoid possible complications , the safest procedure to use on a patient is called endotracheal intubation .
Placing a tube into the trachea allows the doctors to maintain a patient ’ s ( open ) airway to the lungs and seal the airway off from the oropharynx .
Post-surgery , the anesthesiologist gradually changes the mixture of the gases that keep the patient unconscious , and when the muscles of respiration begin to function , the tube is removed .
It still takes about 30 minutes for a patient to wake up , and for breathing muscles to regain control of respiration .
After surgery , most people have a sore or scratchy throat for a few days .
The muscles of the anterior neck assist in deglutition ( swallowing ) and speech by controlling the positions of the larynx ( voice box ) , and the hyoid bone , a horseshoe-shaped bone that functions as a solid foundation on which the tongue can move .
The muscles of the neck are categorized according to their position relative to the hyoid bone ( Figure 11.13 ) .
Suprahyoid muscles are superior to it , and the infrahyoid muscles are located inferiorly .
The suprahyoid muscles raise the hyoid bone , the floor of the mouth , and the larynx during deglutition .
These include the digastric muscle , which has anterior and posterior bellies that work to elevate the hyoid bone and larynx when one swallows ; it also depresses the mandible .
The stylohyoid muscle moves the hyoid bone posteriorly , elevating the larynx , and the mylohyoid muscle lifts it and helps press the tongue to the top of the mouth .
The geniohyoid depresses the mandible in addition to raising and pulling the hyoid bone anteriorly .
The strap-like infrahyoid muscles generally depress the hyoid bone and control the position of the larynx .
The omohyoid muscle , which has superior and inferior bellies , depresses the hyoid bone in conjunction with the sternohyoid and thyrohyoid muscles .
The thyrohyoid muscle also elevates the larynx ’ s thyroid cartilage , whereas the sternothyroid depresses it to create different tones of voice .
The head , attached to the top of the vertebral column , is balanced , moved , and rotated by the neck muscles ( Table 11.5 ) .
When these muscles act unilaterally , the head rotates .
When they contract bilaterally , the head flexes or extends .
The major muscle that laterally flexes and rotates the head is the sternocleidomastoid .
In addition , both muscles working together are the flexors of the head .
Place your fingers on both sides of the neck and turn your head to the left and to the right .
You will feel the movement originate there .
This muscle divides the neck into anterior and posterior triangles when viewed from the side ( Figure 11.14 ) .
The posterior muscles of the neck are primarily concerned with head movements , like extension .
The back muscles stabilize and move the vertebral column , and are grouped according to the lengths and direction of the fascicles .
The splenius muscles originate at the midline and run laterally and superiorly to their insertions .
From the sides and the back of the neck , the splenius capitis inserts onto the head region , and the splenius cervicis extends onto the cervical region .
These muscles can extend the head , laterally flex it , and rotate it ( Figure 11.15 ) .
The erector spinae group forms the majority of the muscle mass of the back and it is the primary extensor of the vertebral column .
It controls flexion , lateral flexion , and rotation of the vertebral column , and maintains the lumbar curve .
The erector spinae comprises the iliocostalis ( laterally placed ) group , the longissimus ( intermediately placed ) group , and the spinalis ( medially placed ) group .
The iliocostalis group includes the iliocostalis cervicis , associated with the cervical region ; the iliocostalis thoracis , associated with the thoracic region ; and the iliocostalis lumborum , associated with the lumbar region .
The three muscles of the longissimus group are the longissimus capitis , associated with the head region ; the longissimus cervicis , associated with the cervical region ; and the longissimus thoracis , associated with the thoracic region .
The third group , the spinalis group , comprises the spinalis capitis ( head region ) , the spinalis cervicis ( cervical region ) , and the spinalis thoracis ( thoracic region ) .
The transversospinales muscles run from the transverse processes to the spinous processes of the vertebrae .
Similar to the erector spinae muscles , the semispinalis muscles in this group are named for the areas of the body with which they are associated .
The semispinalis muscles include the semispinalis capitis , the semispinalis cervicis , and the semispinalis thoracis .
The multifidus muscle of the lumbar region helps extend and laterally flex the vertebral column .
Important in the stabilization of the vertebral column is the segmental muscle group , which includes the interspinales and intertransversarii muscles .
These muscles bring together the spinous and transverse processes of each consecutive vertebra .
Finally , the scalene muscles work together to flex , laterally flex , and rotate the head .
They also contribute to deep inhalation .
The scalene muscles include the anterior scalene muscle ( anterior to the middle scalene ) , the middle scalene muscle ( the longest , intermediate between the anterior and posterior scalenes ) , and the posterior scalene muscle ( the smallest , posterior to the middle scalene ) .
The muscles of the vertebral column , thorax , and abdominal wall extend , flex , and stabilize different parts of the body ’ s trunk .
The deep muscles of the core of the body help maintain posture as well as carry out other functions .
The brain sends out electrical impulses to these various muscle groups to control posture by alternate contraction and relaxation .
This is necessary so that no single muscle group becomes fatigued too quickly .
If any one group fails to function , body posture will be compromised .
There are four pairs of abdominal muscles that cover the anterior and lateral abdominal region and meet at the anterior midline .
These muscles of the anterolateral abdominal wall can be divided into four groups : the external obliques , the internal obliques , the transversus abdominis , and the rectus abdominis ( Figure 11.16 and Table 11.6 ) .
There are three flat skeletal muscles in the antero-lateral wall of the abdomen .
The external oblique , closest to the surface , extend inferiorly and medially , in the direction of sliding one ’ s four fingers into pants pockets .
Perpendicular to it is the intermediate internal oblique , extending superiorly and medially , the direction the thumbs usually go when the other fingers are in the pants pocket .
The deep muscle , the transversus abdominis , is arranged transversely around the abdomen , similar to the front of a belt on a pair of pants .
This arrangement of three bands of muscles in different orientations allows various movements and rotations of the trunk .
The three layers of muscle also help to protect the internal abdominal organs in an area where there is no bone .
The linea alba is a white , fibrous band that is made of the bilateral rectus sheaths that join at the anterior midline of the body .
These enclose the rectus abdominis muscles ( a pair of long , linear muscles , commonly called the “ sit-up ” muscles ) that originate at the pubic crest and symphysis , and extend the length of the body ’ s trunk .
Each muscle is segmented by three transverse bands of collagen fibers called the tendinous intersections .
This results in the look of “ six-pack abs , ” as each segment hypertrophies on individuals at the gym who do many sit-ups .
The posterior abdominal wall is formed by the lumbar vertebrae , parts of the ilia of the hip bones , psoas major and iliacus muscles , and quadratus lumborum muscle .
This part of the core plays a key role in stabilizing the rest of the body and maintaining posture .
Those who have a muscle or joint injury will most likely be sent to a physical therapist ( PT ) after seeing their regular doctor .
PTs have a master ’ s degree or doctorate , and are highly trained experts in the mechanics of body movements .
Many PTs also specialize in sports injuries .
If you injured your shoulder while you were kayaking , the first thing a physical therapist would do during your first visit is to assess the functionality of the joint .
The range of motion of a particular joint refers to the normal movements the joint performs .
The PT will ask you to abduct and adduct , circumduct , and flex and extend the arm .
The PT will note the shoulder ’ s degree of function , and based on the assessment of the injury , will create an appropriate physical therapy plan .
The first step in physical therapy will probably be applying a heat pack to the injured site , which acts much like a warm-up to draw blood to the area , to enhance healing .
You will be instructed to do a series of exercises to continue the therapy at home , followed by icing , to decrease inflammation and swelling , which will continue for several weeks .
When physical therapy is complete , the PT will do an exit exam and send a detailed report on the improved range of motion and return of normal limb function to your doctor .
Gradually , as the injury heals , the shoulder will begin to function correctly .
A PT works closely with patients to help them get back to their normal level of physical activity .
The muscles of the chest serve to facilitate breathing by changing the size of the thoracic cavity ( Table 11.7 ) .
When you inhale , your chest rises because the cavity expands .
Alternately , when you exhale , your chest falls because the thoracic cavity decreases in size .
The change in volume of the thoracic cavity during breathing is due to the alternate contraction and relaxation of the diaphragm ( Figure 11.17 ) .
It separates the thoracic and abdominal cavities , and is dome-shaped at rest .
The superior surface of the diaphragm is convex , creating the elevated floor of the thoracic cavity .
The inferior surface is concave , creating the curved roof of the abdominal cavity .
Defecating , urination , and even childbirth involve cooperation between the diaphragm and abdominal muscles ( this cooperation is referred to as the “ Valsalva maneuver ” ) .
You hold your breath by a steady contraction of the diaphragm ; this stabilizes the volume and pressure of the peritoneal cavity .
When the abdominal muscles contract , the pressure can not push the diaphragm up , so it increases pressure on the intestinal tract ( defecation ) , urinary tract ( urination ) , or reproductive tract ( childbirth ) .
The inferior surface of the pericardial sac and the inferior surfaces of the pleural membranes ( parietal pleura ) fuse onto the central tendon of the diaphragm .
The diaphragm also includes three openings for the passage of structures between the thorax and the abdomen .
The inferior vena cava passes through the caval opening , and the esophagus and attached nerves pass through the esophageal hiatus .
The aorta , thoracic duct , and azygous vein pass through the aortic hiatus of the posterior diaphragm .
There are three sets of muscles , called intercostal muscles , which span each of the intercostal spaces .
The principal role of the intercostal muscles is to assist in breathing by changing the dimensions of the rib cage ( Figure 11.18 ) .
The 11 pairs of superficial external intercostal muscles aid in inspiration of air during breathing because when they contract , they raise the rib cage , which expands it .
The 11 pairs of internal intercostal muscles , just under the externals , are used for expiration because they draw the ribs together to constrict the rib cage .
The innermost intercostal muscles are the deepest , and they act as synergists for the action of the internal intercostals .
The pelvic floor is a muscular sheet that defines the inferior portion of the pelvic cavity .
The pelvic diaphragm , spanning anteriorly to posteriorly from the pubis to the coccyx , comprises the levator ani and the ischiococcygeus .
Its openings include the anal canal and urethra , and the vagina in women .
The large levator ani consists of two skeletal muscles , the pubococcygeus and the iliococcygeus ( Figure 11.19 ) .
The levator ani is considered the most important muscle of the pelvic floor because it supports the pelvic viscera .
It resists the pressure produced by contraction of the abdominal muscles so that the pressure is applied to the colon to aid in defecation and to the uterus to aid in childbirth ( assisted by the ischiococcygeus , which pulls the coccyx anteriorly ) .
This muscle also creates skeletal muscle sphincters at the urethra and anus .
The perineum is the diamond-shaped space between the pubic symphysis ( anteriorly ) , the coccyx ( posteriorly ) , and the ischial tuberosities ( laterally ) , lying just inferior to the pelvic diaphragm ( levator ani and coccygeus ) .
Divided transversely into triangles , the anterior is the urogenital triangle , which includes the external genitals .
The posterior is the anal triangle , which contains the anus ( Figure 11.20 ) .
The perineum is also divided into superficial and deep layers with some of the muscles common to men and women ( Figure 11.21 ) .
Women also have the compressor urethrae and the sphincter urethrovaginalis , which function to close the vagina .
In men , there is the deep transverse perineal muscle that plays a role in ejaculation .
The pectoral girdle , or shoulder girdle , consists of the lateral ends of the clavicle and scapula , along with the proximal end of the humerus , and the muscles covering these three bones to stabilize the shoulder joint .
The girdle creates a base from which the head of the humerus , in its ball-and-socket joint with the glenoid fossa of the scapula , can move the arm in multiple directions .
Muscles that position the pectoral girdle are located either on the anterior thorax or on the posterior thorax ( Figure 11.22 and Table 11.8 ) .
The anterior muscles include the subclavius , pectoralis minor , and serratus anterior .
The posterior muscles include the trapezius , rhomboid major , and rhomboid minor .
When the rhomboids are contracted , your scapula moves medially , which can pull the shoulder and upper limb posteriorly .
Similar to the muscles that position the pectoral girdle , muscles that cross the shoulder joint and move the humerus bone of the arm include both axial and scapular muscles ( Figure 11.23 and Figure 11.24 ) .
The two axial muscles are the pectoralis major and the latissimus dorsi .
The pectoralis major is thick and fan-shaped , covering much of the superior portion of the anterior thorax .
The broad , triangular latissimus dorsi is located on the inferior part of the back , where it inserts into a thick connective tissue shealth called an aponeurosis .
The rest of the shoulder muscles originate on the scapula .
The anatomical and ligamental structure of the shoulder joint and the arrangements of the muscles covering it , allows the arm to carry out different types of movements .
The deltoid , the thick muscle that creates the rounded lines of the shoulder is the major abductor of the arm , but it also facilitates flexing and medial rotation , as well as extension and lateral rotation .
The subscapularis originates on the anterior scapula and medially rotates the arm .
Named for their locations , the supraspinatus ( superior to the spine of the scapula ) and the infraspinatus ( inferior to the spine of the scapula ) abduct the arm , and laterally rotate the arm , respectively .
The thick and flat teres major is inferior to the teres minor and extends the arm , and assists in adduction and medial rotation of it .
The long teres minor laterally rotates and extends the arm .
Finally , the coracobrachialis flexes and adducts the arm .
The tendons of the deep subscapularis , supraspinatus , infraspinatus , and teres minor connect the scapula to the humerus , forming the rotator cuff ( musculotendinous cuff ) , the circle of tendons around the shoulder joint .
When baseball pitchers undergo shoulder surgery it is usually on the rotator cuff , which becomes pinched and inflamed , and may tear away from the bone due to the repetitive motion of bring the arm overhead to throw a fast pitch .
The forearm , made of the radius and ulna bones , has four main types of action at the hinge of the elbow joint : flexion , extension , pronation , and supination .
The forearm flexors include the biceps brachii , brachialis , and brachioradialis .
The extensors are the triceps brachii and anconeus .
The pronators are the pronator teres and the pronator quadratus , and the supinator is the only one that turns the forearm anteriorly .
When the forearm faces anteriorly , it is supinated .
When the forearm faces posteriorly , it is pronated .
The biceps brachii , brachialis , and brachioradialis flex the forearm .
The two-headed biceps brachii crosses the shoulder and elbow joints to flex the forearm , also taking part in supinating the forearm at the radioulnar joints and flexing the arm at the shoulder joint .
Deep to the biceps brachii , the brachialis provides additional power in flexing the forearm .
Finally , the brachioradialis can flex the forearm quickly or help lift a load slowly .
These muscles and their associated blood vessels and nerves form the anterior compartment of the arm ( anterior flexor compartment of the arm ) ( Figure 11.25 and Figure 11.26 ) .
Wrist , hand , and finger movements are facilitated by two groups of muscles .
The forearm is the origin of the extrinsic muscles of the hand .
The palm is the origin of the intrinsic muscles of the hand .
The muscles in the anterior compartment of the forearm ( anterior flexor compartment of the forearm ) originate on the humerus and insert onto different parts of the hand .
These make up the bulk of the forearm .
From lateral to medial , the superficial anterior compartment of the forearm includes the flexor carpi radialis , palmaris longus , flexor carpi ulnaris , and flexor digitorum superficialis .
The flexor digitorum superficialis flexes the hand as well as the digits at the knuckles , which allows for rapid finger movements , as in typing or playing a musical instrument ( see Figure 11.27 and Table 11.9 ) .
However , poor ergonomics can irritate the tendons of these muscles as they slide back and forth with the carpal tunnel of the anterior wrist and pinch the median nerve , which also travels through the tunnel , causing Carpal Tunnel Syndrome .
The deep anterior compartment produces flexion and bends fingers to make a fist .
These are the flexor pollicis longus and the flexor digitorum profundus .
The muscles in the superficial posterior compartment of the forearm ( superficial posterior extensor compartment of the forearm ) originate on the humerus .
These are the extensor radialis longus , extensor carpi radialis brevis , extensor digitorum , extensor digiti minimi , and the extensor carpi ulnaris .
The muscles of the deep posterior compartment of the forearm ( deep posterior extensor compartment of the forearm ) originate on the radius and ulna .
These include the abductor pollicis longus , extensor pollicis brevis , extensor pollicis longus , and extensor indicis ( see Figure 11.27 ) .
The tendons of the forearm muscles attach to the wrist and extend into the hand .
Fibrous bands called retinacula sheath the tendons at the wrist .
The flexor retinaculum extends over the palmar surface of the hand while the extensor retinaculum extends over the dorsal surface of the hand .
The intrinsic muscles of the hand both originate and insert within it ( Figure 11.28 ) .
These muscles allow your fingers to also make precise movements for actions , such as typing or writing .
These muscles are divided into three groups .
The thenar muscles are on the radial aspect of the palm .
The hypothenar muscles are on the medial aspect of the palm , and the intermediate muscles are midpalmar .
The thenar muscles include the abductor pollicis brevis , opponens pollicis , flexor pollicis brevis , and the adductor pollicis .
These muscles form the thenar eminence , the rounded contour of the base of the thumb , and all act on the thumb .
The movements of the thumb play an integral role in most precise movements of the hand .
The hypothenar muscles include the abductor digiti minimi , flexor digiti minimi brevis , and the opponens digiti minimi .
These muscles form the hypothenar eminence , the rounded contour of the little finger , and as such , they all act on the little finger .
Finally , the intermediate muscles act on all the fingers and include the lumbrical , the palmar interossei , and the dorsal interossei .
Comparatively , there is much more movement at the pectoral girdle than at the pelvic girdle .
There is very little movement of the pelvic girdle because of its connection with the sacrum at the base of the axial skeleton .
The pelvic girdle is less range of motion because it was designed to stabilize and support the body .
What would happen if the pelvic girdle , which attaches the lower limbs to the torso , were capable of the same range of motion as the pectoral girdle ?
For one thing , walking would expend more energy if the heads of the femurs were not secured in the acetabula of the pelvis .
The body ’ s center of gravity is in the area of the pelvis .
If the center of gravity were not to remain fixed , standing up would be difficult as well .
Therefore , what the leg muscles lack in range of motion and versatility , they make up for in size and power , facilitating the body ’ s stabilization , posture , and movement .
Most muscles that insert on the femur ( the thigh bone ) and move it , originate on the pelvic girdle .
The psoas major and iliacus make up the iliopsoas group .
Some of the largest and most powerful muscles in the body are the gluteal muscles or gluteal group .
The gluteus maximus is the largest ; deep to the gluteus maximus is the gluteus medius , and deep to the gluteus medius is the gluteus minimus , the smallest of the trio ( Figure 11.29 and Figure 11.30 ) .
The tensor fascia latae is a thick , squarish muscle in the superior aspect of the lateral thigh .
It acts as a synergist of the gluteus medius and iliopsoas in flexing and abducting the thigh .
It also helps stabilize the lateral aspect of the knee by pulling on the iliotibial tract ( band ) , making it taut .
Deep to the gluteus maximus , the piriformis , obturator internus , obturator externus , superior gemellus , inferior gemellus , and quadratus femoris laterally rotate the femur at the hip .
The adductor longus , adductor brevis , and adductor magnus can both medially and laterally rotate the thigh depending on the placement of the foot .
The adductor longus flexes the thigh , whereas the adductor magnus extends it .
The pectineus adducts and flexes the femur at the hip as well .
The pectineus is located in the femoral triangle , which is formed at the junction between the hip and the leg and also includes the femoral nerve , the femoral artery , the femoral vein , and the deep inguinal lymph nodes .
Deep fascia in the thigh separates it into medial , anterior , and posterior compartments ( see Figure 11.29 and Figure 11.31 ) .
The muscles in the medial compartment of the thigh are responsible for adducting the femur at the hip .
Along with the adductor longus , adductor brevis , adductor magnus , and pectineus , the strap-like gracilis adducts the thigh in addition to flexing the leg at the knee .
The muscles of the anterior compartment of the thigh flex the thigh and extend the leg .
This compartment contains the quadriceps femoris group , which actually comprises four muscles that extend and stabilize the knee .
The tendon common to all four is the quadriceps tendon ( patellar tendon ) , which inserts into the patella and continues below it as the patellar ligament .
The patellar ligament attaches to the tibial tuberosity .
In addition to the quadriceps femoris , the sartorius is a band-like muscle that extends from the anterior superior iliac spine to the medial side of the proximal tibia .
This versatile muscle flexes the leg at the knee and flexes , abducts , and laterally rotates the leg at the hip .
This muscle allows us to sit cross-legged .
The posterior compartment of the thigh includes muscles that flex the leg and extend the thigh .
The three long muscles on the back of the knee are the hamstring group , which flexes the knee .
These are the biceps femoris , semitendinosus , and semimembranosus .
The tendons of these muscles form the popliteal fossa , the diamond-shaped space at the back of the knee .
Similar to the thigh muscles , the muscles of the leg are divided by deep fascia into compartments , although the leg has three : anterior , lateral , and posterior ( Figure 11.32 and Figure 11.33 ) .
The fibularis tertius , a small muscle that originates on the anterior surface of the fibula , is associated with the extensor digitorum longus and sometimes fused to it , but is not present in all people .
Thick bands of connective tissue called the superior extensor retinaculum ( transverse ligament of the ankle ) and the inferior extensor retinaculum , hold the tendons of these muscles in place during dorsiflexion .
The lateral compartment of the leg includes two muscles : the fibularis longus ( peroneus longus ) and the fibularis brevis ( peroneus brevis ) .
The superficial muscles in the posterior compartment of the leg all insert onto the calcaneal tendon ( Achilles tendon ) , a strong tendon that inserts into the calcaneal bone of the ankle .
The muscles in this compartment are large and strong and keep humans upright .
The most superficial and visible muscle of the calf is the gastrocnemius .
Deep to the gastrocnemius is the wide , flat soleus .
The plantaris runs obliquely between the two ; some people may have two of these muscles , whereas no plantaris is observed in about seven percent of other cadaver dissections .
The plantaris tendon is a desirable substitute for the fascia lata in hernia repair , tendon transplants , and repair of ligaments .
There are four deep muscles in the posterior compartment of the leg as well : the popliteus , flexor digitorum longus , flexor hallucis longus , and tibialis posterior .
The foot also has intrinsic muscles , which originate and insert within it ( similar to the intrinsic muscles of the hand ) .
These muscles primarily provide support for the foot and its arch , and contribute to movements of the toes ( Figure 11.34 and Figure 11.35 ) .
The principal support for the longitudinal arch of the foot is a deep fascia called plantar aponeurosis , which runs from the calcaneus bone to the toes ( inflammation of this tissue is the cause of “ plantar fasciitis , ” which can affect runners .
The intrinsic muscles of the foot consist of two groups .
The dorsal group includes only one muscle , the extensor digitorum brevis .
The second group is the plantar group , which consists of four layers , starting with the most superficial .
In Peter D. Kramer ’ s book Listening to Prozac , a pharmaceutical researcher is quoted as saying , “ If the human brain were simple enough for us to understand , we would be too simple to understand it ” ( 1994 ) .
That quote is from the early 1990s ; in the two decades since , progress has continued at an amazing rate within the scientific disciplines of neuroscience .
It is an interesting conundrum to consider that the complexity of the nervous system may be too complex for it ( that is , for us ) to completely unravel .
But our current level of understanding is probably nowhere close to that limit .
One easy way to begin to understand the structure of the nervous system is to start with the large divisions and work through to a more in-depth understanding .
In other chapters , the finer details of the nervous system will be explained , but first looking at an overview of the system will allow you to begin to understand how its parts work together .
The focus of this chapter is on nervous ( neural ) tissue , both its structure and its function .
But before you learn about that , you will see a big picture of the system—actually , a few big pictures .
That suggests it is made of two organs—and you may not even think of the spinal cord as an organ—but the nervous system is a very complex structure .
Within the brain , many different and separate regions are responsible for many different and separate functions .
It is as if the nervous system is composed of many organs that all look similar and can only be differentiated using tools such as the microscope or electrophysiology .
In comparison , it is easy to see that the stomach is different than the esophagus or the liver , so you can imagine the digestive system as a collection of specific organs .
The nervous system can be divided into two major regions : the central and peripheral nervous systems .
The central nervous system ( CNS ) is the brain and spinal cord , and the peripheral nervous system ( PNS ) is everything else ( Figure 12.2 ) .
The brain is contained within the cranial cavity of the skull , and the spinal cord is contained within the vertebral cavity of the vertebral column .
It is a bit of an oversimplification to say that the CNS is what is inside these two cavities and the peripheral nervous system is outside of them , but that is one way to start to think about it .
In actuality , there are some elements of the peripheral nervous system that are within the cranial or vertebral cavities .
The peripheral nervous system is so named because it is on the periphery—meaning beyond the brain and spinal cord .
Depending on different aspects of the nervous system , the dividing line between central and peripheral is not necessarily universal .
Nervous tissue , present in both the CNS and PNS , contains two basic types of cells : neurons and glial cells .
A glial cell is one of a variety of cells that provide a framework of tissue that supports the neurons and their activities .
The neuron is the more functionally important of the two , in terms of the communicative function of the nervous system .
To describe the functional divisions of the nervous system , it is important to understand the structure of a neuron .
Neurons are cells and therefore have a soma , or cell body , but they also have extensions of the cell ; each extension is generally referred to as a process .
There is one important process that every neuron has called an axon , which is the fiber that connects a neuron with its target .
Another type of process that branches off from the soma is the dendrite .
Dendrites are responsible for receiving most of the input from other neurons .
Looking at nervous tissue , there are regions that predominantly contain cell bodies and regions that are largely composed of just axons .
These two regions within nervous system structures are often referred to as gray matter ( the regions with many cell bodies and dendrites ) or white matter ( the regions with many axons ) .
Figure 12.3 demonstrates the appearance of these regions in the brain and spinal cord .
The colors ascribed to these regions are what would be seen in “ fresh , ” or unstained , nervous tissue .
Gray matter is not necessarily gray .
It can be pinkish because of blood content , or even slightly tan , depending on how long the tissue has been preserved .
But white matter is white because axons are insulated by a lipid-rich substance called myelin .
Lipids can appear as white ( “ fatty ” ) material , much like the fat on a raw piece of chicken or beef .
Actually , gray matter may have that color ascribed to it because next to the white matter , it is just darker—hence , gray .
The distinction between gray matter and white matter is most often applied to central nervous tissue , which has large regions that can be seen with the unaided eye .
When looking at peripheral structures , often a microscope is used and the tissue is stained with artificial colors .
That is not to say that central nervous tissue can not be stained and viewed under a microscope , but unstained tissue is most likely from the CNS—for example , a frontal section of the brain or cross section of the spinal cord .
Regardless of the appearance of stained or unstained tissue , the cell bodies of neurons or axons can be located in discrete anatomical structures that need to be named .
Those names are specific to whether the structure is central or peripheral .
A localized collection of neuron cell bodies in the CNS is referred to as a nucleus .
In the PNS , a cluster of neuron cell bodies is referred to as a ganglion .
Figure 12.4 indicates how the term nucleus has a few different meanings within anatomy and physiology .
It is the center of an atom , where protons and neutrons are found ; it is the center of a cell , where the DNA is found ; and it is a center of some function in the CNS .
There is also a potentially confusing use of the word ganglion ( plural = ganglia ) that has a historical explanation .
In the central nervous system , there is a group of nuclei that are connected together and were once called the basal ganglia before “ ganglion ” became accepted as a description for a peripheral structure .
Some sources refer to this group of nuclei as the “ basal nuclei ” to avoid confusion .
Terminology applied to bundles of axons also differs depending on location .
A bundle of axons , or fibers , found in the CNS is called a tract whereas the same thing in the PNS would be called a nerve .
There is an important point to make about these terms , which is that they can both be used to refer to the same bundle of axons .
When those axons are in the PNS , the term is nerve , but if they are CNS , the term is tract .
The most obvious example of this is the axons that project from the retina into the brain .
Those axons are called the optic nerve as they leave the eye , but when they are inside the cranium , they are referred to as the optic tract .
There is a specific place where the name changes , which is the optic chiasm , but they are still the same axons ( Figure 12.5 ) .
A similar situation outside of science can be described for some roads .
In the PNS , they are called the optic nerve , and in the CNS , they are the optic tract .
Table 12.1 helps to clarify which of these terms apply to the central or peripheral nervous systems .
In 2003 , the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine was awarded to Paul C. Lauterbur and Sir Peter Mansfield for discoveries related to magnetic resonance imaging ( MRI ) .
This is a tool to see the structures of the body ( not just the nervous system ) that depends on magnetic fields associated with certain atomic nuclei .
The utility of this technique in the nervous system is that fat tissue and water appear as different shades between black and white .
Because white matter is fatty ( from myelin ) and gray matter is not , they can be easily distinguished in MRI images .
Visit the Nobel Prize web site ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/nobel_2 ) to play an interactive game that demonstrates the use of this technology and compares it with other types of imaging technologies .
Also , the results from an MRI session are compared with images obtained from X-ray or computed tomography .
How do the imaging techniques shown in this game indicate the separation of white and gray matter compared with the freshly dissected tissue shown earlier ?
The nervous system can also be divided on the basis of its functions , but anatomical divisions and functional divisions are different .
The CNS and the PNS both contribute to the same functions , but those functions can be attributed to different regions of the brain ( such as the cerebral cortex or the hypothalamus ) or to different ganglia in the periphery .
The problem with trying to fit functional differences into anatomical divisions is that sometimes the same structure can be part of several functions .
For example , the optic nerve carries signals from the retina that are either used for the conscious perception of visual stimuli , which takes place in the cerebral cortex , or for the reflexive responses of smooth muscle tissue that are processed through the hypothalamus .
There are two ways to consider how the nervous system is divided functionally .
First , the basic functions of the nervous system are sensation , integration , and response .
Secondly , control of the body can be somatic or autonomic—divisions that are largely defined by the structures that are involved in the response .
There is also a region of the peripheral nervous system that is called the enteric nervous system that is responsible for a specific set of the functions within the realm of autonomic control related to gastrointestinal functions .
The nervous system is involved in receiving information about the environment around us ( sensation ) and generating responses to that information ( motor responses ) .
The nervous system can be divided into regions that are responsible for sensation ( sensory functions ) and for the response ( motor functions ) .
But there is a third function that needs to be included .
Sensory input needs to be integrated with other sensations , as well as with memories , emotional state , or learning ( cognition ) .
Some regions of the nervous system are termed integration or association areas .
The process of integration combines sensory perceptions and higher cognitive functions such as memories , learning , and emotion to produce a response .
The first major function of the nervous system is sensation—receiving information about the environment to gain input about what is happening outside the body ( or , sometimes , within the body ) .
The sensory functions of the nervous system register the presence of a change from homeostasis or a particular event in the environment , known as a stimulus .
The senses we think of most are the “ big five ” : taste , smell , touch , sight , and hearing .
The stimuli for taste and smell are both chemical substances ( molecules , compounds , ions , etc .
) , touch is physical or mechanical stimuli that interact with the skin , sight is light stimuli , and hearing is the perception of sound , which is a physical stimulus similar to some aspects of touch .
There are actually more senses than just those , but that list represents the major senses .
Those five are all senses that receive stimuli from the outside world , and of which there is conscious perception .
Additional sensory stimuli might be from the internal environment ( inside the body ) , such as the stretch of an organ wall or the concentration of certain ions in the blood .
The nervous system produces a response on the basis of the stimuli perceived by sensory structures .
An obvious response would be the movement of muscles , such as withdrawing a hand from a hot stove , but there are broader uses of the term .
The nervous system can cause the contraction of all three types of muscle tissue .
For example , skeletal muscle contracts to move the skeleton , cardiac muscle is influenced as heart rate increases during exercise , and smooth muscle contracts as the digestive system moves food along the digestive tract .
Responses also include the neural control of glands in the body as well , such as the production and secretion of sweat by the eccrine and merocrine sweat glands found in the skin to lower body temperature .
Responses can be divided into those that are voluntary or conscious ( contraction of skeletal muscle ) and those that are involuntary ( contraction of smooth muscles , regulation of cardiac muscle , activation of glands ) .
Voluntary responses are governed by the somatic nervous system and involuntary responses are governed by the autonomic nervous system , which are discussed in the next section .
Stimuli that are received by sensory structures are communicated to the nervous system where that information is processed .
This is called integration .
Stimuli are compared with , or integrated with , other stimuli , memories of previous stimuli , or the state of a person at a particular time .
This leads to the specific response that will be generated .
Seeing a baseball pitched to a batter will not automatically cause the batter to swing .
The trajectory of the ball and its speed will need to be considered .
Maybe the count is three balls and one strike , and the batter wants to let this pitch go by in the hope of getting a walk to first base .
Or maybe the batter ’ s team is so far ahead , it would be fun to just swing away .
The nervous system can be divided into two parts mostly on the basis of a functional difference in responses .
The somatic nervous system ( SNS ) is responsible for conscious perception and voluntary motor responses .
Voluntary motor response means the contraction of skeletal muscle , but those contractions are not always voluntary in the sense that you have to want to perform them .
Some somatic motor responses are reflexes , and often happen without a conscious decision to perform them .
If your friend jumps out from behind a corner and yells “ Boo ! ” you will be startled and you might scream or leap back .
You didn ’ t decide to do that , and you may not have wanted to give your friend a reason to laugh at your expense , but it is a reflex involving skeletal muscle contractions .
Other motor responses become automatic ( in other words , unconscious ) as a person learns motor skills ( referred to as “ habit learning ” or “ procedural memory ” ) .
The autonomic nervous system ( ANS ) is responsible for involuntary control of the body , usually for the sake of homeostasis ( regulation of the internal environment ) .
Sensory input for autonomic functions can be from sensory structures tuned to external or internal environmental stimuli .
The motor output extends to smooth and cardiac muscle as well as glandular tissue .
The role of the autonomic system is to regulate the organ systems of the body , which usually means to control homeostasis .
Sweat glands , for example , are controlled by the autonomic system .
When you are hot , sweating helps cool your body down .
That is a homeostatic mechanism .
But when you are nervous , you might start sweating also .
That is not homeostatic , it is the physiological response to an emotional state .
There is another division of the nervous system that describes functional responses .
The enteric nervous system ( ENS ) is responsible for controlling the smooth muscle and glandular tissue in your digestive system .
It is a large part of the PNS , and is not dependent on the CNS .
It is sometimes valid , however , to consider the enteric system to be a part of the autonomic system because the neural structures that make up the enteric system are a component of the autonomic output that regulates digestion .
There are some differences between the two , but for our purposes here there will be a good bit of overlap .
See Figure 12.6 for examples of where these divisions of the nervous system can be found .
Visit this site ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/troublewstairs ) to read about a woman that notices that her daughter is having trouble walking up the stairs .
This leads to the discovery of a hereditary condition that affects the brain and spinal cord .
The electromyography and MRI tests indicated deficiencies in the spinal cord and cerebellum , both of which are responsible for controlling coordinated movements .
To what functional division of the nervous system would these structures belong ?
Have you ever heard the claim that humans only use 10 percent of their brains ?
Maybe you have seen an advertisement on a website saying that there is a secret to unlocking the full potential of your mind—as if there were 90 percent of your brain sitting idle , just waiting for you to use it .
If you see an ad like that , don ’ t click .
It isn ’ t true .
An easy way to see how much of the brain a person uses is to take measurements of brain activity while performing a task .
An example of this kind of measurement is functional magnetic resonance imaging ( fMRI ) , which generates a map of the most active areas and can be generated and presented in three dimensions ( Figure 12.7 ) .
This procedure is different from the standard MRI technique because it is measuring changes in the tissue in time with an experimental condition or event .
The underlying assumption is that active nervous tissue will have greater blood flow .
By having the subject perform a visual task , activity all over the brain can be measured .
Consider this possible experiment : the subject is told to look at a screen with a black dot in the middle ( a fixation point ) .
A photograph of a face is projected on the screen away from the center .
The subject has to look at the photograph and decipher what it is .
The subject has been instructed to push a button if the photograph is of someone they recognize .
The photograph might be of a celebrity , so the subject would press the button , or it might be of a random person unknown to the subject , so the subject would not press the button .
In this task , visual sensory areas would be active , integrating areas would be active , motor areas responsible for moving the eyes would be active , and motor areas for pressing the button with a finger would be active .
This task does not even include all of the functions the brain performs .
There is no language response , the body is mostly lying still in the MRI machine , and it does not consider the autonomic functions that would be ongoing in the background .
Neurons are the primary type of cell that most anyone associates with the nervous system .
They are responsible for the computation and communication that the nervous system provides .
They are electrically active and release chemical signals to target cells .
Glial cells , or glia , are known to play a supporting role for nervous tissue .
Ongoing research pursues an expanded role that glial cells might play in signaling , but neurons are still considered the basis of this function .
Neurons are important , but without glial support they would not be able to perform their function .
Neurons are the cells considered to be the basis of nervous tissue .
They are responsible for the electrical signals that communicate information about sensations , and that produce movements in response to those stimuli , along with inducing thought processes within the brain .
An important part of the function of neurons is in their structure , or shape .
The threedimensional shape of these cells makes the immense numbers of connections within the nervous system possible .
As you learned in the first section , the main part of a neuron is the cell body , which is also known as the soma ( soma = “ body ” ) .
The cell body contains the nucleus and most of the major organelles .
But what makes neurons special is that they have many extensions of their cell membranes , which are generally referred to as processes .
Neurons are usually described as having one , and only one , axon—a fiber that emerges from the cell body and projects to target cells .
That single axon can branch repeatedly to communicate with many target cells .
It is the axon that propagates the nerve impulse , which is communicated to one or more cells .
The other processes of the neuron are dendrites , which receive information from other neurons at specialized areas of contact called synapses .
The dendrites are usually highly branched processes , providing locations for other neurons to communicate with the cell body .
Information flows through a neuron from the dendrites , across the cell body , and down the axon .
This gives the neuron a polarity—meaning that information flows in this one direction .
Figure 12.8 shows the relationship of these parts to one another .
Where the axon emerges from the cell body , there is a special region referred to as the axon hillock .
This is a tapering of the cell body toward the axon fiber .
Within the axon hillock , the cytoplasm changes to a solution of limited components called axoplasm .
Because the axon hillock represents the beginning of the axon , it is also referred to as the initial segment .
Many axons are wrapped by an insulating substance called myelin , which is actually made from glial cells .
Myelin acts as insulation much like the plastic or rubber that is used to insulate electrical wires .
A key difference between myelin and the insulation on a wire is that there are gaps in the myelin covering of an axon .
Each gap is called a node of Ranvier and is important to the way that electrical signals travel down the axon .
The length of the axon between each gap , which is wrapped in myelin , is referred to as an axon segment .
At the end of the axon is the axon terminal , where there are usually several branches extending toward the target cell , each of which ends in an enlargement called a synaptic end bulb .
These bulbs are what make the connection with the target cell at the synapse .
Visit this site ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/nervetissue3 ) to learn about how nervous tissue is composed of neurons and glial cells .
Neurons are dynamic cells with the ability to make a vast number of connections , to respond incredibly quickly to stimuli , and to initiate movements on the basis of those stimuli .
They are the focus of intense research because failures in physiology can lead to devastating illnesses .
Why are neurons only found in animals ?
Based on what this article says about neuron function , why would n't they be helpful for plants or microorganisms ?
There are many neurons in the nervous system—a number in the trillions .
And there are many different types of neurons .
They can be classified by many different criteria .
The first way to classify them is by the number of processes attached to the cell body .
Using the standard model of neurons , one of these processes is the axon , and the rest are dendrites .
Because information flows through the neuron from dendrites or cell bodies toward the axon , these names are based on the neuron 's polarity ( Figure 12.9 ) .
Unipolar cells have only one process emerging from the cell .
True unipolar cells are only found in invertebrate animals , so the unipolar cells in humans are more appropriately called “ pseudo-unipolar ” cells .
Invertebrate unipolar cells do not have dendrites .
Human unipolar cells have an axon that emerges from the cell body , but it splits so that the axon can extend along a very long distance .
At one end of the axon are dendrites , and at the other end , the axon forms synaptic connections with a target .
Unipolar cells are exclusively sensory neurons and have two unique characteristics .
First , their dendrites are receiving sensory information , sometimes directly from the stimulus itself .
Secondly , the cell bodies of unipolar neurons are always found in ganglia .
Sensory reception is a peripheral function ( those dendrites are in the periphery , perhaps in the skin ) so the cell body is in the periphery , though closer to the CNS in a ganglion .
The axon projects from the dendrite endings , past the cell body in a ganglion , and into the central nervous system .
Bipolar cells have two processes , which extend from each end of the cell body , opposite to each other .
One is the axon and one the dendrite .
Bipolar cells are not very common .
They are found mainly in the olfactory epithelium ( where smell stimuli are sensed ) , and as part of the retina .
Multipolar neurons are all of the neurons that are not unipolar or bipolar .
They have one axon and two or more dendrites ( usually many more ) .
With the exception of the unipolar sensory ganglion cells , and the two specific bipolar cells mentioned above , all other neurons are multipolar .
Some cutting edge research suggests that certain neurons in the CNS do not conform to the standard model of “ one , and only one ” axon .
Some sources describe a fourth type of neuron , called an anaxonic neuron .
The name suggests that it has no axon ( an= “ without ” ) , but this is not accurate .
Anaxonic neurons are very small , and if you look through a microscope at the standard resolution used in histology ( approximately 400X to 1000X total magnification ) , you will not be able to distinguish any process specifically as an axon or a dendrite .
Any of those processes can function as an axon depending on the conditions at any given time .
Nevertheless , even if they can not be easily seen , and one specific process is definitively the axon , these neurons have multiple processes and are therefore multipolar .
Neurons can also be classified on the basis of where they are found , who found them , what they do , or even what chemicals they use to communicate with each other .
Some neurons referred to in this section on the nervous system are named on the basis of those sorts of classifications ( Figure 12.10 ) .
For example , a multipolar neuron that has a very important role to play in a part of the brain called the cerebellum is known as a Purkinje ( commonly pronounced per-KIN-gee ) cell .
It is named after the anatomist who discovered it ( Jan Evangilista Purkinje , 1787–1869 ) .
Glial cells , or neuroglia or simply glia , are the other type of cell found in nervous tissue .
They are considered to be supporting cells , and many functions are directed at helping neurons complete their function for communication .
And research may find much more about them in the future .
There are six types of glial cells .
Four of them are found in the CNS and two are found in the PNS .
Table 12.2 outlines some common characteristics and functions .
One cell providing support to neurons of the CNS is the astrocyte , so named because it appears to be star-shaped under the microscope ( astro= “ star ” ) .
Astrocytes have many processes extending from their main cell body ( not axons or dendrites like neurons , just cell extensions ) .
Those processes extend to interact with neurons , blood vessels , or the connective tissue covering the CNS that is called the pia mater ( Figure 12.11 ) .
Generally , they are supporting cells for the neurons in the central nervous system .
Some ways in which they support neurons in the central nervous system are by maintaining the concentration of chemicals in the extracellular space , removing excess signaling molecules , reacting to tissue damage , and contributing to the blood-brain barrier ( BBB ) .
The blood-brain barrier is a physiological barrier that keeps many substances that circulate in the rest of the body from getting into the central nervous system , restricting what can cross from circulating blood into the CNS .
Nutrient molecules , such as glucose or amino acids , can pass through the BBB , but other molecules can not .
This actually causes problems with drug delivery to the CNS .
Pharmaceutical companies are challenged to design drugs that can cross the BBB as well as have an effect on the nervous system .
Like a few other parts of the body , the brain has a privileged blood supply .
Very little can pass through by diffusion .
Most substances that cross the wall of a blood vessel into the CNS must do so through an active transport process .
Because of this , only specific types of molecules can enter the CNS .
Glucose—the primary energy source—is allowed , as are amino acids .
Water and some other small particles , like gases and ions , can enter .
But most everything else can not , including white blood cells , which are one of the body ’ s main lines of defense .
While this barrier protects the CNS from exposure to toxic or pathogenic substances , it also keeps out the cells that could protect the brain and spinal cord from disease and damage .
The BBB also makes it harder for pharmaceuticals to be developed that can affect the nervous system .
Aside from finding efficacious substances , the means of delivery is also crucial .
Also found in CNS tissue is the oligodendrocyte , sometimes called just “ oligo , ” which is the glial cell type that insulates axons in the CNS .
The name means “ cell of a few branches ” ( oligo= “ few ” ; dendro= “ branches ” ; -cyte = “ cell ” ) .
There are a few processes that extend from the cell body .
Each one reaches out and surrounds an axon to insulate it in myelin .
One oligodendrocyte will provide the myelin for multiple axon segments , either for the same axon or for separate axons .
The function of myelin will be discussed below .
Microglia are , as the name implies , smaller than most of the other glial cells .
Ongoing research into these cells , although not entirely conclusive , suggests that they may originate as white blood cells , called macrophages , that become part of the CNS during early development .
While their origin is not conclusively determined , their function is related to what macrophages do in the rest of the body .
When macrophages encounter diseased or damaged cells in the rest of the body , they ingest and digest those cells or the pathogens that cause disease .
Microglia are the cells in the CNS that can do this in normal , healthy tissue , and they are therefore also referred to as CNS-resident macrophages .
The ependymal cell is a glial cell that filters blood to make cerebrospinal fluid ( CSF ) , the fluid that circulates through the CNS .
Because of the privileged blood supply inherent in the BBB , the extracellular space in nervous tissue does not easily exchange components with the blood .
Ependymal cells line each ventricle , one of four central cavities that are remnants of the hollow center of the neural tube formed during the embryonic development of the brain .
The choroid plexus is a specialized structure in the ventricles where ependymal cells come in contact with blood vessels and filter and absorb components of the blood to produce cerebrospinal fluid .
Because of this , ependymal cells can be considered a component of the BBB , or a place where the BBB breaks down .
These glial cells appear similar to epithelial cells , making a single layer of cells with little intracellular space and tight connections between adjacent cells .
They also have cilia on their apical surface to help move the CSF through the ventricular space .
The relationship of these glial cells to the structure of the CNS is seen in Figure 12.11 .
One of the two types of glial cells found in the PNS is the satellite cell .
Satellite cells are found in sensory and autonomic ganglia , where they surround the cell bodies of neurons .
This accounts for the name , based on their appearance under the microscope .
They provide support , performing similar functions in the periphery as astrocytes do in the CNS—except , of course , for establishing the BBB .
The second type of glial cell is the Schwann cell , which insulate axons with myelin in the periphery .
Schwann cells are different than oligodendrocytes , in that a Schwann cell wraps around a portion of only one axon segment and no others .
Oligodendrocytes have processes that reach out to multiple axon segments , whereas the entire Schwann cell surrounds just one axon segment .
The nucleus and cytoplasm of the Schwann cell are on the edge of the myelin sheath .
The relationship of these two types of glial cells to ganglia and nerves in the PNS is seen in Figure 12.12 .
The insulation for axons in the nervous system is provided by glial cells , oligodendrocytes in the CNS , and Schwann cells in the PNS .
Whereas the manner in which either cell is associated with the axon segment , or segments , that it insulates is different , the means of myelinating an axon segment is mostly the same in the two situations .
Myelin is a lipid-rich sheath that surrounds the axon and by doing so creates a myelin sheath that facilitates the transmission of electrical signals along the axon .
The lipids are essentially the phospholipids of the glial cell membrane .
Myelin , however , is more than just the membrane of the glial cell .
It also includes important proteins that are integral to that membrane .
Some of the proteins help to hold the layers of the glial cell membrane closely together .
The appearance of the myelin sheath can be thought of as similar to the pastry wrapped around a hot dog for “ pigs in a blanket ” or a similar food .
The glial cell is wrapped around the axon several times with little to no cytoplasm between the glial cell layers .
For oligodendrocytes , the rest of the cell is separate from the myelin sheath as a cell process extends back toward the cell body .
A few other processes provide the same insulation for other axon segments in the area .
For Schwann cells , the outermost layer of the cell membrane contains cytoplasm and the nucleus of the cell as a bulge on one side of the myelin sheath .
During development , the glial cell is loosely or incompletely wrapped around the axon ( Figure 12.13a ) .
The edges of this loose enclosure extend toward each other , and one end tucks under the other .
The inner edge wraps around the axon , creating several layers , and the other edge closes around the outside so that the axon is completely enclosed .
View the University of Michigan WebScope ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/nervefiber ) to see an electron micrograph of a cross-section of a myelinated nerve fiber .
The axon contains microtubules and neurofilaments that are bounded by a plasma membrane known as the axolemma .
Outside the plasma membrane of the axon is the myelin sheath , which is composed of the tightly wrapped plasma membrane of a Schwann cell .
What aspects of the cells in this image react with the stain to make them a deep , dark , black color , such as the multiple layers that are the myelin sheath ?
Myelin sheaths can extend for one or two millimeters , depending on the diameter of the axon .
Axon diameters can be as small as 1 to 20 micrometers .
Because a micrometer is 1/1000 of a millimeter , this means that the length of a myelin sheath can be 100–1000 times the diameter of the axon .
Figure 12.8 , Figure 12.11 , and Figure 12.12 show the myelin sheath surrounding an axon segment , but are not to scale .
If the myelin sheath were drawn to scale , the neuron would have to be immense—possibly covering an entire wall of the room in which you are sitting .
Several diseases can result from the demyelination of axons .
The causes of these diseases are not the same ; some have genetic causes , some are caused by pathogens , and others are the result of autoimmune disorders .
Though the causes are varied , the results are largely similar .
The myelin insulation of axons is compromised , making electrical signaling slower .
Multiple sclerosis ( MS ) is one such disease .
It is an example of an autoimmune disease .
The antibodies produced by lymphocytes ( a type of white blood cell ) mark myelin as something that should not be in the body .
This causes inflammation and the destruction of the myelin in the central nervous system .
As the insulation around the axons is destroyed by the disease , scarring becomes obvious .
This is where the name of the disease comes from ; sclerosis means hardening of tissue , which is what a scar is .
Multiple scars are found in the white matter of the brain and spinal cord .
The symptoms of MS include both somatic and autonomic deficits .
Control of the musculature is compromised , as is control of organs such as the bladder .
Guillain-Barré ( pronounced gee-YAN bah-RAY ) syndrome is an example of a demyelinating disease of the peripheral nervous system .
It is also the result of an autoimmune reaction , but the inflammation is in peripheral nerves .
Sensory symptoms or motor deficits are common , and autonomic failures can lead to changes in the heart rhythm or a drop in blood pressure , especially when standing , which causes dizziness .
Before getting to the nuts and bolts of how this works , an illustration of how the components come together will be helpful .
An example is summarized in Figure 12.14 .
Imagine you are about to take a shower in the morning before going to school .
You have turned on the faucet to start the water as you prepare to get in the shower .
After a few minutes , you expect the water to be a temperature that will be comfortable to enter .
So you put your hand out into the spray of water .
What happens next depends on how your nervous system interacts with the stimulus of the water temperature and what you do in response to that stimulus .
Found in the skin of your fingers or toes is a type of sensory receptor that is sensitive to temperature , called a thermoreceptor .
When you place your hand under the shower ( Figure 12.15 ) , the cell membrane of the thermoreceptors changes its electrical state ( voltage ) .
The amount of change is dependent on the strength of the stimulus ( how hot the water is ) .
This is called a graded potential .
If the stimulus is strong , the voltage of the cell membrane will change enough to generate an electrical signal that will travel down the axon .
You have learned about this type of signaling before , with respect to the interaction of nerves and muscles at the neuromuscular junction .
The voltage at which such a signal is generated is called the threshold , and the resulting electrical signal is called an action potential .
In this example , the action potential travels—a process known as propagation —along the axon from the axon hillock to the axon terminals and into the synaptic end bulbs .
When this signal reaches the end bulbs , it causes the release of a signaling molecule called a neurotransmitter .
The neurotransmitter diffuses across the short distance of the synapse and binds to a receptor protein of the target neuron .
When the molecular signal binds to the receptor , the cell membrane of the target neuron changes its electrical state and a new graded potential begins .
If that graded potential is strong enough to reach threshold , the second neuron generates an action potential at its axon hillock .
The target of this neuron is another neuron in the thalamus of the brain , the part of the CNS that acts as a relay for sensory information .
At another synapse , neurotransmitter is released and binds to its receptor .
The thalamus then sends the sensory information to the cerebral cortex , the outermost layer of gray matter in the brain , where conscious perception of that water temperature begins .
Finally , a plan is developed about what to do , whether that is to turn the temperature up , turn the whole shower off and go back to bed , or step into the shower .
To do any of these things , the cerebral cortex has to send a command out to your body to move muscles ( Figure 12.16 ) .
A region of the cortex is specialized for sending signals down to the spinal cord for movement .
The upper motor neuron is in this region , called the precentral gyrus of the frontal cortex , which has an axon that extends all the way down the spinal cord .
At the level of the spinal cord at which this axon makes a synapse , a graded potential occurs in the cell membrane of a lower motor neuron .
This second motor neuron is responsible for causing muscle fibers to contract .
In the manner described in the chapter on muscle tissue , an action potential travels along the motor neuron axon into the periphery .
The axon terminates on muscle fibers at the neuromuscular junction .
Acetylcholine is released at this specialized synapse , which causes the muscle action potential to begin , following a large potential known as an end plate potential .
When the lower motor neuron excites the muscle fiber , it contracts .
All of this occurs in a fraction of a second , but this story is the basis of how the nervous system functions .
Understanding how the nervous system works could be a driving force in your career .
Studying neurophysiology is a very rewarding path to follow .
It means that there is a lot of work to do , but the rewards are worth the effort .
The career path of a research scientist can be straightforward : college , graduate school , postdoctoral research , academic research position at a university .
A Bachelor ’ s degree in science will get you started , and for neurophysiology that might be in biology , psychology , computer science , engineering , or neuroscience .
But the real specialization comes in graduate school .
There are many different programs out there to study the nervous system , not just neuroscience itself .
Most graduate programs are doctoral , meaning that a Master ’ s degree is not part of the work .
These are usually considered five-year programs , with the first two years dedicated to course work and finding a research mentor , and the last three years dedicated to finding a research topic and pursuing that with a near single-mindedness .
The research will usually result in a few publications in scientific journals , which will make up the bulk of a doctoral dissertation .
After graduating with a Ph.D. , researchers will go on to find specialized work called a postdoctoral fellowship within established labs .
In this position , a researcher starts to establish their own research career with the hopes of finding an academic position at a research university .
Other options are available if you are interested in how the nervous system works .
Especially for neurophysiology , a medical degree might be more suitable so you can learn about the clinical applications of neurophysiology and possibly work with human subjects .
An academic career is not a necessity .
Others with a medical degree and a specialization in neuroscience go on to work directly with patients , diagnosing and treating mental disorders .
You can do this as a psychiatrist , a neuropsychologist , a neuroscience nurse , or a neurodiagnostic technician , among other possible career paths .
To understand how neurons are able to communicate , it is necessary to describe the role of an excitable membrane in generating these signals .
The basis of this communication is the action potential , which demonstrates how changes in the membrane can constitute a signal .
Looking at the way these signals work in more variable circumstances involves a look at graded potentials , which will be covered in the next section .
Most cells in the body make use of charged particles , ions , to build up a charge across the cell membrane .
Previously , this was shown to be a part of how muscle cells work .
For skeletal muscles to contract , based on excitation–contraction coupling , requires input from a neuron .
Both of the cells make use of the cell membrane to regulate ion movement between the extracellular fluid and cytosol .
As you learned in the chapter on cells , the cell membrane is primarily responsible for regulating what can cross the membrane and what stays on only one side .
The cell membrane is a phospholipid bilayer , so only substances that can pass directly through the hydrophobic core can diffuse through unaided .
Charged particles , which are hydrophilic by definition , can not pass through the cell membrane without assistance ( Figure 12.17 ) .
Transmembrane proteins , specifically channel proteins , make this possible .
Several passive transport channels , as well as active transport pumps , are necessary to generate a transmembrane potential and an action potential .
Of special interest is the carrier protein referred to as the sodium/ potassium pump that moves sodium ions ( Na ) out of a cell and potassium ions ( K ) into a cell , thus regulating ion concentration on both sides of the cell membrane .
The sodium/potassium pump requires energy in the form of adenosine triphosphate ( ATP ) , so it is also referred to as an ATPase .
As was explained in the cell chapter , the concentration of Na is higher outside the cell than inside , and the concentration of K is higher inside the cell than outside .
That means that this pump is moving the ions against the concentration gradients for sodium and potassium , which is why it requires energy .
In fact , the pump basically maintains those concentration gradients .
Ion channels are pores that allow specific charged particles to cross the membrane in response to an existing concentration gradient .
Proteins are capable of spanning the cell membrane , including its hydrophobic core , and can interact with the charge of ions because of the varied properties of amino acids found within specific domains or regions of the protein channel .
Hydrophobic amino acids are found in the domains that are apposed to the hydrocarbon tails of the phospholipids .
Hydrophilic amino acids are exposed to the fluid environments of the extracellular fluid and cytosol .
Additionally , the ions will interact with the hydrophilic amino acids , which will be selective for the charge of the ion .
Channels for cations ( positive ions ) will have negatively charged side chains in the pore .
Channels for anions ( negative ions ) will have positively charged side chains in the pore .
This is called electrochemical exclusion , meaning that the channel pore is charge-specific .
Ion channels can also be specified by the diameter of the pore .
The distance between the amino acids will be specific for the diameter of the ion when it dissociates from the water molecules surrounding it .
Because of the surrounding water molecules , larger pores are not ideal for smaller ions because the water molecules will interact , by hydrogen bonds , more readily than the amino acid side chains .
This is called size exclusion .
Some ion channels are selective for charge but not necessarily for size , and thus are called a nonspecific channel .
These nonspecific channels allow cations—particularly Na , K , and Ca —to cross the membrane , but exclude anions .
Ion channels do not always freely allow ions to diffuse across the membrane .
Some are opened by certain events , meaning the channels are gated .
So another way that channels can be categorized is on the basis of how they are gated .
Although these classes of ion channels are found primarily in the cells of nervous or muscular tissue , they also can be found in the cells of epithelial and connective tissues .
A ligand-gated channel opens because a signaling molecule , a ligand , binds to the extracellular region of the channel .
This type of channel is also known as an ionotropic receptor because when the ligand , known as a neurotransmitter in the nervous system , binds to the protein , ions cross the membrane changing its charge ( Figure 12.18 ) .
A mechanically gated channel opens because of a physical distortion of the cell membrane .
Many channels associated with the sense of touch ( somatosensation ) are mechanically gated .
For example , as pressure is applied to the skin , these channels open and allow ions to enter the cell .
Similar to this type of channel would be the channel that opens on the basis of temperature changes , as in testing the water in the shower ( Figure 12.19 ) .
A voltage-gated channel is a channel that responds to changes in the electrical properties of the membrane in which it is embedded .
Normally , the inner portion of the membrane is at a negative voltage .
When that voltage becomes less negative , the channel begins to allow ions to cross the membrane ( Figure 12.20 ) .
A leakage channel is randomly gated , meaning that it opens and closes at random , hence the reference to leaking .
There is no actual event that opens the channel ; instead , it has an intrinsic rate of switching between the open and closed states .
Leakage channels contribute to the resting transmembrane voltage of the excitable membrane ( Figure 12.21 ) .
The electrical state of the cell membrane can have several variations .
These are all variations in the membrane potential .
A potential is a distribution of charge across the cell membrane , measured in millivolts ( mV ) .
The standard is to compare the inside of the cell relative to the outside , so the membrane potential is a value representing the charge on the intracellular side of the membrane based on the outside being zero , relatively speaking ( Figure 12.22 ) .
The concentration of ions in extracellular and intracellular fluids is largely balanced , with a net neutral charge .
However , a slight difference in charge occurs right at the membrane surface , both internally and externally .
It is the difference in this very limited region that has all the power in neurons ( and muscle cells ) to generate electrical signals , including action potentials .
Before these electrical signals can be described , the resting state of the membrane must be explained .
When the cell is at rest , and the ion channels are closed ( except for leakage channels which randomly open ) , ions are distributed across the membrane in a very predictable way .
The concentration of Na outside the cell is 10 times greater than the concentration inside .
Also , the concentration of K inside the cell is greater than outside .
The cytosol contains a high concentration of anions , in the form of phosphate ions and negatively charged proteins .
Large anions are a component of the inner cell membrane , including specialized phospholipids and proteins associated with the inner leaflet of the membrane ( leaflet is a term used for one side of the lipid bilayer membrane ) .
The negative charge is localized in the large anions .
With the ions distributed across the membrane at these concentrations , the difference in charge is measured at -70 mV , the value described as the resting membrane potential .
The exact value measured for the resting membrane potential varies between cells , but -70 mV is most commonly used as this value .
This voltage would actually be much lower except for the contributions of some important proteins in the membrane .
Leakage channels allow Na to slowly move into the cell or K to slowly move out , and the Na /K pump restores them .
This may appear to be a waste of energy , but each has a role in maintaining the membrane potential .
Resting membrane potential describes the steady state of the cell , which is a dynamic process that is balanced by ion leakage and ion pumping .
Without any outside influence , it will not change .
To get an electrical signal started , the membrane potential has to change .
This starts with a channel opening for Na in the membrane .
Because the concentration of Na is higher outside the cell than inside the cell by a factor of 10 , ions will rush into the cell that are driven largely by the concentration gradient .
Because sodium is a positively charged ion , it will change the relative voltage immediately inside the cell relative to immediately outside .
The resting potential is the state of the membrane at a voltage of -70 mV , so the sodium cation entering the cell will cause it to become less negative .
This is known as depolarization , meaning the membrane potential moves toward zero .
The concentration gradient for Na is so strong that it will continue to enter the cell even after the membrane potential has become zero , so that the voltage immediately around the pore begins to become positive .
The electrical gradient also plays a role , as negative proteins below the membrane attract the sodium ion .
The membrane potential will reach +30 mV by the time sodium has entered the cell .
As the membrane potential reaches +30 mV , other voltage-gated channels are opening in the membrane .
These channels are specific for the potassium ion .
A concentration gradient acts on K , as well .
As K starts to leave the cell , taking a positive charge with it , the membrane potential begins to move back toward its resting voltage .
This is called repolarization , meaning that the membrane voltage moves back toward the -70 mV value of the resting membrane potential .
Repolarization returns the membrane potential to the -70 mV value that indicates the resting potential , but it actually overshoots that value .
Potassium ions reach equilibrium when the membrane voltage is below -70 mV , so a period of hyperpolarization occurs while the K channels are open .
Those K channels are slightly delayed in closing , accounting for this short overshoot .
What has been described here is the action potential , which is presented as a graph of voltage over time in Figure 12.23 .
It is the electrical signal that nervous tissue generates for communication .
The change in the membrane voltage from -70 mV at rest to +30 mV at the end of depolarization is a 100-mV change .
That can also be written as a 0.1-V change .
To put that value in perspective , think about a battery .
In fact , the membrane potential can be described as a battery .
A charge is stored across the membrane that can be released under the correct conditions .
A battery in your remote has stored a charge that is “ released ” when you push a button .
What happens across the membrane of an electrically active cell is a dynamic process that is hard to visualize with static images or through text descriptions .
View this animation ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/dynamic1 ) to learn more about this process .
What is the difference between the driving force for Na and K ?
And what is similar about the movement of these two ions ?
The question is , now , what initiates the action potential ?
The description above conveniently glosses over that point .
But it is vital to understanding what is happening .
The membrane potential will stay at the resting voltage until something changes .
The description above just says that a Na channel opens .
Now , to say “ a channel opens ” does not mean that one individual transmembrane protein changes .
Instead , it means that one kind of channel opens .
There are a few different types of channels that allow Na to cross the membrane .
A ligand-gated Na channel will open when a neurotransmitter binds to it and a mechanically gated Na channel will open when a physical stimulus affects a sensory receptor ( like pressure applied to the skin compresses a touch receptor ) .
Whether it is a neurotransmitter binding to its receptor protein or a sensory stimulus activating a sensory receptor cell , some stimulus gets the process started .
Sodium starts to enter the cell and the membrane becomes less negative .
A third type of channel that is an important part of depolarization in the action potential is the voltage-gated Na channel .
The channels that start depolarizing the membrane because of a stimulus help the cell to depolarize from -70 mV to -55 mV .
Once the membrane reaches that voltage , the voltage-gated Na channels open .
This is what is known as the threshold .
Any depolarization that does not change the membrane potential to -55 mV or higher will not reach threshold and thus will not result in an action potential .
Also , any stimulus that depolarizes the membrane to -55 mV or beyond will cause a large number of channels to open and an action potential will be initiated .
Because of the threshold , the action potential can be likened to a digital event—it either happens or it does not .
If the threshold is not reached , then no action potential occurs .
If depolarization reaches -55 mV , then the action potential continues and runs all the way to +30 mV , at which K causes repolarization , including the hyperpolarizing overshoot .
Also , those changes are the same for every action potential , which means that once the threshold is reached , the exact same thing happens .
A stronger stimulus , which might depolarize the membrane well past threshold , will not make a “ bigger ” action potential .
Action potentials are “ all or none. ” Either the membrane reaches the threshold and everything occurs as described above , or the membrane does not reach the threshold and nothing else happens .
All action potentials peak at the same voltage ( +30 mV ) , so one action potential is not bigger than another .
Stronger stimuli will initiate multiple action potentials more quickly , but the individual signals are not bigger .
Thus , for example , you will not feel a greater sensation of pain , or have a stronger muscle contraction , because of the size of the action potential because they are not different sizes .
As we have seen , the depolarization and repolarization of an action potential are dependent on two types of channels ( the voltage-gated Na channel and the voltage-gated K channel ) .
The voltage-gated Na channel actually has two gates .
One is the activation gate , which opens when the membrane potential crosses -55 mV .
The other gate is the inactivation gate , which closes after a specific period of time—on the order of a fraction of a millisecond .
When a cell is at rest , the activation gate is closed and the inactivation gate is open .
However , when the threshold is reached , the activation gate opens , allowing Na to rush into the cell .
Timed with the peak of depolarization , the inactivation gate closes .
During repolarization , no more sodium can enter the cell .
When the membrane potential passes -55 mV again , the activation gate closes .
After that , the inactivation gate re-opens , making the channel ready to start the whole process over again .
The voltage-gated K channel has only one gate , which is sensitive to a membrane voltage of -50 mV .
However , it does not open as quickly as the voltage-gated Na channel does .
It might take a fraction of a millisecond for the channel to open once that voltage has been reached .
The timing of this coincides exactly with when the Na flow peaks , so voltage-gated K channels open just as the voltage-gated Na channels are being inactivated .
As the membrane potential repolarizes and the voltage passes -50 mV again , the channel closes—again , with a little delay .
Potassium continues to leave the cell for a short while and the membrane potential becomes more negative , resulting in the hyperpolarizing overshoot .
Then the channel closes again and the membrane can return to the resting potential because of the ongoing activity of the non-gated channels and the Na /K pump .
All of this takes place within approximately 2 milliseconds ( Figure 12.24 ) .
While an action potential is in progress , another one can not be initiated .
That effect is referred to as the refractory period .
There are two phases of the refractory period : the absolute refractory period and the relative refractory period .
During the absolute phase , another action potential will not start .
This is because of the inactivation gate of the voltage-gated Na channel .
Once that channel is back to its resting conformation ( less than -55 mV ) , a new action potential could be started , but only by a stronger stimulus than the one that initiated the current action potential .
This is because of the flow of K out of the cell .
Because that ion is rushing out , any Na that tries to enter will not depolarize the cell , but will only keep the cell from hyperpolarizing .
The action potential is initiated at the beginning of the axon , at what is called the initial segment .
There is a high density of voltage-gated Na channels so that rapid depolarization can take place here .
Going down the length of the axon , the action potential is propagated because more voltage-gated Na channels are opened as the depolarization spreads .
This spreading occurs because Na enters through the channel and moves along the inside of the cell membrane .
As the Na moves , or flows , a short distance along the cell membrane , its positive charge depolarizes a little more of the cell membrane .
As that depolarization spreads , new voltage-gated Na channels open and more ions rush into the cell , spreading the depolarization a little farther .
Because voltage-gated Na channels are inactivated at the peak of the depolarization , they can not be opened again for a brief time—the absolute refractory period .
Because of this , depolarization spreading back toward previously opened channels has no effect .
The action potential must propagate toward the axon terminals ; as a result , the polarity of the neuron is maintained , as mentioned above .
Propagation , as described above , applies to unmyelinated axons .
When myelination is present , the action potential propagates differently .
Sodium ions that enter the cell at the initial segment start to spread along the length of the axon segment , but there are no voltage-gated Na channels until the first node of Ranvier .
Because there is not constant opening of these channels along the axon segment , the depolarization spreads at an optimal speed .
The distance between nodes is the optimal distance to keep the membrane still depolarized above threshold at the next node .
As Na spreads along the inside of the membrane of the axon segment , the charge starts to dissipate .
If the node were any farther down the axon , that depolarization would have fallen off too much for voltage-gated Na channels to be activated at the next node of Ranvier .
If the nodes were any closer together , the speed of propagation would be slower .
Propagation along an unmyelinated axon is referred to as continuous conduction ; along the length of a myelinated axon , it is saltatory conduction .
Continuous conduction is slow because there are always voltage-gated Na channels opening , and more and more Na is rushing into the cell .
Saltatory conduction is faster because the action potential basically jumps from one node to the next ( saltare = “ to leap ” ) , and the new influx of Na renews the depolarized membrane .
Along with the myelination of the axon , the diameter of the axon can influence the speed of conduction .
Much as water runs faster in a wide river than in a narrow creek , Na -based depolarization spreads faster down a wide axon than down a narrow one .
This concept is known as resistance and is generally true for electrical wires or plumbing , just as it is true for axons , although the specific conditions are different at the scales of electrons or ions versus water in a river .
Glial cells , especially astrocytes , are responsible for maintaining the chemical environment of the CNS tissue .
The concentrations of ions in the extracellular fluid are the basis for how the membrane potential is established and changes in electrochemical signaling .
If the balance of ions is upset , drastic outcomes are possible .
Normally the concentration of K is higher inside the neuron than outside .
After the repolarizing phase of the action potential , K leakage channels and the Na /K pump ensure that the ions return to their original locations .
Following a stroke or other ischemic event , extracellular K levels are elevated .
The astrocytes in the area are equipped to clear excess K to aid the pump .
But when the level is far out of balance , the effects can be irreversible .
Astrocytes can become reactive in cases such as these , which impairs their ability to maintain the local chemical environment .
The glial cells enlarge and their processes swell .
They lose their K buffering ability and the function of the pump is affected , or even reversed .
One of the early signs of cell disease is this `` leaking '' of sodium ions into the body cells .
This sodium/potassium imbalance negatively affects the internal chemistry of cells , preventing them from functioning normally .
this site ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/neurolab ) to see a virtual neurophysiology lab , and to observe Visit electrophysiological processes in the nervous system , where scientists directly measure the electrical signals produced by neurons .
Often , the action potentials occur so rapidly that watching a screen to see them occur is not helpful .
A speaker is powered by the signals recorded from a neuron and it “ pops ” each time the neuron fires an action potential .
These action potentials are firing so fast that it sounds like static on the radio .
Electrophysiologists can recognize the patterns within that static to understand what is happening .
Why is the leech model used for measuring the electrical activity of neurons instead of using humans ?
A stimulus starts the depolarization , but the action potential runs on its own once a threshold has been reached .
The question is now , “ What flips the light switch on ? ” Temporary changes to the cell membrane voltage can result from neurons receiving information from the environment , or from the action of one neuron on another .
These special types of potentials influence a neuron and determine whether an action potential will occur or not .
Many of these transient signals originate at the synapse .
Local changes in the membrane potential are called graded potentials and are usually associated with the dendrites of a neuron .
The amount of change in the membrane potential is determined by the size of the stimulus that causes it .
In the example of testing the temperature of the shower , slightly warm water would only initiate a small change in a thermoreceptor , whereas hot water would cause a large amount of change in the membrane potential .
Graded potentials can be of two sorts , either they are depolarizing or hyperpolarizing ( Figure 12.25 ) .
For a membrane at the resting potential , a graded potential represents a change in that voltage either above -70 mV or below -70 mV .
Depolarizing graded potentials are often the result of Na or Ca entering the cell .
Both of these ions have higher concentrations outside the cell than inside ; because they have a positive charge , they will move into the cell causing it to become less negative relative to the outside .
Hyperpolarizing graded potentials can be caused by K leaving the cell or Cl entering the cell .
If a positive charge moves out of a cell , the cell becomes more negative ; if a negative charge enters the cell , the same thing happens .
For the unipolar cells of sensory neurons—both those with free nerve endings and those within encapsulations—graded potentials develop in the dendrites that influence the generation of an action potential in the axon of the same cell .
This is called a generator potential .
For other sensory receptor cells , such as taste cells or photoreceptors of the retina , graded potentials in their membranes result in the release of neurotransmitters at synapses with sensory neurons .
This is called a receptor potential .
A postsynaptic potential ( PSP ) is the graded potential in the dendrites of a neuron that is receiving synapses from other cells .
Postsynaptic potentials can be depolarizing or hyperpolarizing .
Depolarization in a postsynaptic potential is called an excitatory postsynaptic potential ( EPSP ) because it causes the membrane potential to move toward threshold .
Hyperpolarization in a postsynaptic potential is an inhibitory postsynaptic potential ( IPSP ) because it causes the membrane potential to move away from threshold .
All types of graded potentials will result in small changes of either depolarization or hyperpolarization in the voltage of a membrane .
These changes can lead to the neuron reaching threshold if the changes add together , or summate .
The combined effects of different types of graded potentials are illustrated in Figure 12.26 .
If the total change in voltage in the membrane is a positive 15 mV , meaning that the membrane depolarizes from -70 mV to -55 mV , then the graded potentials will result in the membrane reaching threshold .
For receptor potentials , threshold is not a factor because the change in membrane potential for receptor cells directly causes neurotransmitter release .
However , generator potentials can initiate action potentials in the sensory neuron axon , and postsynaptic potentials can initiate an action potential in the axon of other neurons .
Graded potentials summate at a specific location at the beginning of the axon to initiate the action potential , namely the initial segment .
For sensory neurons , which do not have a cell body between the dendrites and the axon , the initial segment is directly adjacent to the dendritic endings .
For all other neurons , the axon hillock is essentially the initial segment of the axon , and it is where summation takes place .
These locations have a high density of voltage-gated Na channels that initiate the depolarizing phase of the action potential .
Summation can be spatial or temporal , meaning it can be the result of multiple graded potentials at different locations on the neuron , or all at the same place but separated in time .
Spatial summation is related to associating the activity of multiple inputs to a neuron with each other .
Temporal summation is the relationship of multiple action potentials from a single cell resulting in a significant change in the membrane potential .
Spatial and temporal summation can act together , as well .
Watch this video ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/summation ) to learn about summation .
The process of converting electrical signals to chemical signals and back requires subtle changes that can result in transient increases or decreases in membrane voltage .
To cause a lasting change in the target cell , multiple signals are usually added together , or summated .
Does spatial summation have to happen all at once , or can the separate signals arrive on the postsynaptic neuron at slightly different times ?
Explain your answer .
There are two types of connections between electrically active cells , chemical synapses and electrical synapses .
In a chemical synapse , a chemical signal—namely , a neurotransmitter—is released from one cell and it affects the other cell .
In an electrical synapse , there is a direct connection between the two cells so that ions can pass directly from one cell to the next .
If one cell is depolarized in an electrical synapse , the joined cell also depolarizes because the ions pass between the cells .
Chemical synapses involve the transmission of chemical information from one cell to the next .
This section will concentrate on the chemical type of synapse .
An example of a chemical synapse is the neuromuscular junction ( NMJ ) described in the chapter on muscle tissue .
In the nervous system , there are many more synapses that are essentially the same as the NMJ .
Other synapses are similar to this , and the specifics are different , but they all contain the same characteristics .
When an action potential reaches the axon terminals , voltage-gated Ca channels in the membrane of the synaptic end bulb open .
The concentration of Ca increases inside the end bulb , and the Ca ion associates with proteins in the outer surface of neurotransmitter vesicles .
The Ca facilitates the merging of the vesicle with the presynaptic membrane so that the neurotransmitter is released through exocytosis into the small gap between the cells , known as the synaptic cleft .
Once in the synaptic cleft , the neurotransmitter diffuses the short distance to the postsynaptic membrane and can interact with neurotransmitter receptors .
Receptors are specific for the neurotransmitter , and the two fit together like a key and lock .
One neurotransmitter binds to its receptor and will not bind to receptors for other neurotransmitters , making the binding a specific chemical event ( Figure 12.27 ) .
There are several systems of neurotransmitters that are found at various synapses in the nervous system .
These groups refer to the chemicals that are the neurotransmitters , and within the groups are specific systems .
The first group , which is a neurotransmitter system of its own , is the cholinergic system .
It is the system based on acetylcholine .
This includes the NMJ as an example of a cholinergic synapse , but cholinergic synapses are found in other parts of the nervous system .
They are in the autonomic nervous system , as well as distributed throughout the brain .
The cholinergic system has two types of receptors , the nicotinic receptor is found in the NMJ as well as other synapses .
There is also an acetylcholine receptor known as the muscarinic receptor .
Both of these receptors are named for drugs that interact with the receptor in addition to acetylcholine .
Nicotine will bind to the nicotinic receptor and activate it similar to acetylcholine .
Muscarine , a product of certain mushrooms , will bind to the muscarinic receptor .
However , nicotine will not bind to the muscarinic receptor and muscarine will not bind to the nicotinic receptor .
Another group of neurotransmitters are amino acids .
This includes glutamate ( Glu ) , GABA ( gamma-aminobutyric acid , a derivative of glutamate ) , and glycine ( Gly ) .
These amino acids have an amino group and a carboxyl group in their chemical structures .
Glutamate is one of the 20 amino acids that are used to make proteins .
Each amino acid neurotransmitter would be part of its own system , namely the glutamatergic , GABAergic , and glycinergic systems .
They each have their own receptors and do not interact with each other .
Amino acid neurotransmitters are eliminated from the synapse by reuptake .
A pump in the cell membrane of the presynaptic element , or sometimes a neighboring glial cell , will clear the amino acid from the synaptic cleft so that it can be recycled , repackaged in vesicles , and released again .
Another class of neurotransmitter is the biogenic amine , a group of neurotransmitters that are enzymatically made from amino acids .
They have amino groups in them , but no longer have carboxyl groups and are therefore no longer classified as amino acids .
Serotonin is made from tryptophan .
It is the basis of the serotonergic system , which has its own specific receptors .
Serotonin is transported back into the presynaptic cell for repackaging .
Other biogenic amines are made from tyrosine , and include dopamine , norepinephrine , and epinephrine .
Dopamine is part of its own system , the dopaminergic system , which has dopamine receptors .
Dopamine is removed from the synapse by transport proteins in the presynaptic cell membrane .
Norepinephrine and epinephrine belong to the adrenergic neurotransmitter system .
The two molecules are very similar and bind to the same receptors , which are referred to as alpha and beta receptors .
Norepinephrine and epinephrine are also transported back into the presynaptic cell .
The chemical epinephrine ( epi= “ on ” ; “ -nephrine ” = kidney ) is also known as adrenaline ( renal = “ kidney ” ) , and norepinephrine is sometimes referred to as noradrenaline .
The adrenal gland produces epinephrine and norepinephrine to be released into the blood stream as hormones .
A neuropeptide is a neurotransmitter molecule made up of chains of amino acids connected by peptide bonds .
This is what a protein is , but the term protein implies a certain length to the molecule .
Some neuropeptides are quite short , such as met-enkephalin , which is five amino acids long .
Others are long , such as beta-endorphin , which is 31 amino acids long .
First , if there is no receptor protein in the membrane of the postsynaptic element , then the neurotransmitter has no effect .
The depolarizing or hyperpolarizing effect is also dependent on the receptor .
When acetylcholine binds to the nicotinic receptor , the postsynaptic cell is depolarized .
This is because the receptor is a cation channel and positively charged Na will rush into the cell .
However , when acetylcholine binds to the muscarinic receptor , of which there are several variants , it might cause depolarization or hyperpolarization of the target cell .
The amino acid neurotransmitters , glutamate , glycine , and GABA , are almost exclusively associated with just one effect .
Glutamate is considered an excitatory amino acid , but only because Glu receptors in the adult cause depolarization of the postsynaptic cell .
Glycine and GABA are considered inhibitory amino acids , again because their receptors cause hyperpolarization .
The biogenic amines have mixed effects .
For example , the dopamine receptors that are classified as D1 receptors are excitatory whereas D2-type receptors are inhibitory .
Biogenic amine receptors and neuropeptide receptors can have even more complex effects because some may not directly affect the membrane potential , but rather have an effect on gene transcription or other metabolic processes in the neuron .
The characteristics of the various neurotransmitter systems presented in this section are organized in Table 12.3 .
The important thing to remember about neurotransmitters , and signaling chemicals in general , is that the effect is entirely dependent on the receptor .
Neurotransmitters bind to one of two classes of receptors at the cell surface , ionotropic or metabotropic ( Figure 12.28 ) .
Ionotropic receptors are ligand-gated ion channels , such as the nicotinic receptor for acetylcholine or the glycine receptor .
A metabotropic receptor involves a complex of proteins that result in metabolic changes within the cell .
The receptor complex includes the transmembrane receptor protein , a G protein , and an effector protein .
The neurotransmitter , referred to as the first messenger , binds to the receptor protein on the extracellular surface of the cell , and the intracellular side of the protein initiates activity of the G protein .
The G protein is a guanosine triphosphate ( GTP ) hydrolase that physically moves from the receptor protein to the effector protein to activate the latter .
An effector protein is an enzyme that catalyzes the generation of a new molecule , which acts as the intracellular mediator of the signal that binds to the receptor .
This intracellular mediator is called the second messenger .
Different receptors use different second messengers .
Two common examples of second messengers are cyclic adenosine monophosphate ( cAMP ) and inositol triphosphate ( IP ) .
The enzyme adenylate cyclase ( an example of an effector protein ) makes cAMP , and phospholipase C is the enzyme that makes IP .
Second messengers , after they are produced by the effector protein , cause metabolic changes within the cell .
These changes are most likely the activation of other enzymes in the cell .
In neurons , they often modify ion channels , either opening or closing them .
These enzymes can also cause changes in the cell , such as the activation of genes in the nucleus , and therefore the increased synthesis of proteins .
In neurons , these kinds of changes are often the basis of stronger connections between cells at the synapse and may be the basis of learning and memory .
Watch this video ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/neurotrans ) to learn about the release of a neurotransmitter .
The action potential reaches the end of the axon , called the axon terminal , and a chemical signal is released to tell the target cell to do something—either to initiate a new action potential , or to suppress that activity .
In a very short space , the electrical signal of the action potential is changed into the chemical signal of a neurotransmitter and then back to electrical changes in the target cell membrane .
What is the importance of voltage-gated calcium channels in the release of neurotransmitters ?
The underlying cause of some neurodegenerative diseases , such as Alzheimer ’ s and Parkinson ’ s , appears to be related to proteins—specifically , to proteins behaving badly .
One of the strongest theories of what causes Alzheimer ’ s disease is based on the accumulation of beta-amyloid plaques , dense conglomerations of a protein that is not functioning correctly .
Parkinson ’ s disease is linked to an increase in a protein known as alpha-synuclein that is toxic to the cells of the substantia nigra nucleus in the midbrain .
For proteins to function correctly , they are dependent on their three-dimensional shape .
The linear sequence of amino acids folds into a three-dimensional shape that is based on the interactions between and among those amino acids .
When the folding is disturbed , and proteins take on a different shape , they stop functioning correctly .
But the disease is not necessarily the result of functional loss of these proteins ; rather , these altered proteins start to accumulate and may become toxic .
For example , in Alzheimer ’ s , the hallmark of the disease is the accumulation of these amyloid plaques in the cerebral cortex .
The term coined to describe this sort of disease is “ proteopathy ” and it includes other diseases .
Creutzfeld-Jacob disease , the human variant of the prion disease known as mad cow disease in the bovine , also involves the accumulation of amyloid plaques , similar to Alzheimer ’ s .
Diseases of other organ systems can fall into this group as well , such as cystic fibrosis or type 2 diabetes .
Recognizing the relationship between these diseases has suggested new therapeutic possibilities .
Interfering with the accumulation of the proteins , and possibly as early as their original production within the cell , may unlock new ways to alleviate these devastating diseases .
The structures of the nervous system must be described in detail to understand how many of these functions are possible .
There is a physiological concept known as localization of function that states that certain structures are specifically responsible for prescribed functions .
It is an underlying concept in all of anatomy and physiology , but the nervous system illustrates the concept very well .
Fresh , unstained nervous tissue can be described as gray or white matter , and within those two types of tissue it can be very hard to see any detail .
However , as specific regions and structures have been described , they were related to specific functions .
Understanding these structures and the functions they perform requires a detailed description of the anatomy of the nervous system , delving deep into what the central and peripheral structures are .
The place to start this study of the nervous system is the beginning of the individual human life , within the womb .
The embryonic development of the nervous system allows for a simple framework on which progressively more complicated structures can be built .
With this framework in place , a thorough investigation of the nervous system is possible .
Starting from an embryologic perspective allows you to understand more easily how the parts relate to each other .
The embryonic nervous system begins as a very simple structure—essentially just a straight line , which then gets increasingly complex .
Looking at the development of the nervous system with a couple of early snapshots makes it easier to understand the whole complex system .
Many structures that appear to be adjacent in the adult brain are not connected , and the connections that exist may seem arbitrary .
But there is an underlying order to the system that comes from how different parts develop .
By following the developmental pattern , it is possible to learn what the major regions of the nervous system are .
To begin , a sperm cell and an egg cell fuse to become a fertilized egg .
The fertilized egg cell , or zygote , starts dividing to generate the cells that make up an entire organism .
Sixteen days after fertilization , the developing embryo ’ s cells belong to one of three germ layers that give rise to the different tissues in the body .
The endoderm , or inner tissue , is responsible for generating the lining tissues of various spaces within the body , such as the mucosae of the digestive and respiratory systems .
The mesoderm , or middle tissue , gives rise to most of the muscle and connective tissues .
Finally the ectoderm , or outer tissue , develops into the integumentary system ( the skin ) and the nervous system .
It is probably not difficult to see that the outer tissue of the embryo becomes the outer covering of the body .
But how is it responsible for the nervous system ?
As the embryo develops , a portion of the ectoderm differentiates into a specialized region of neuroectoderm , which is the precursor for the tissue of the nervous system .
Molecular signals induce cells in this region to differentiate into the neuroepithelium , forming a neural plate .
The cells then begin to change shape , causing the tissue to buckle and fold inward ( Figure 13.2 ) .
A neural groove forms , visible as a line along the dorsal surface of the embryo .
The ridge-like edge on either side of the neural groove is referred as the neural fold .
As the neural folds come together and converge , the underlying structure forms into a tube just beneath the ectoderm called the neural tube .
Cells from the neural folds then separate from the ectoderm to form a cluster of cells referred to as the neural crest , which runs lateral to the neural tube .
The neural crest migrates away from the nascent , or embryonic , central nervous system ( CNS ) that will form along the neural groove and develops into several parts of the peripheral nervous system ( PNS ) , including the enteric nervous tissue .
Many tissues that are not part of the nervous system also arise from the neural crest , such as craniofacial cartilage and bone , and melanocytes .
At this point , the early nervous system is a simple , hollow tube .
It runs from the anterior end of the embryo to the posterior end .
Beginning at 25 days , the anterior end develops into the brain , and the posterior portion becomes the spinal cord .
This is the most basic arrangement of tissue in the nervous system , and it gives rise to the more complex structures by the fourth week of development .
As the anterior end of the neural tube starts to develop into the brain , it undergoes a couple of enlargements ; the result is the production of sac-like vesicles .
Similar to a child ’ s balloon animal , the long , straight neural tube begins to take on a new shape .
Three vesicles form at the first stage , which are called primary vesicles .
These vesicles are given names that are based on Greek words , the main root word being enkephalon , which means “ brain ” ( en= “ inside ” ; kephalon = “ head ” ) .
The prefix to each generally corresponds to its position along the length of the developing nervous system .
The prosencephalon ( pros= “ in front ” ) is the forward-most vesicle , and the term can be loosely translated to mean forebrain .
The mesencephalon ( mes= “ middle ” ) is the next vesicle , which can be called the midbrain .
The third vesicle at this stage is the rhombencephalon .
The first part of this word is also the root of the word rhombus , which is a geometrical figure with four sides of equal length ( a square is a rhombus with 90° angles ) .
Whereas prosencephalon and mesencephalon translate into the English words forebrain and midbrain , there is not a word for “ four-sided-figure-brain. ” However , the third vesicle can be called the hindbrain .
One way of thinking about how the brain is arranged is to use these three regions—forebrain , midbrain , and hindbrain—which are based on the primary vesicle stage of development ( Figure 13.3a ) .
The brain continues to develop , and the vesicles differentiate further ( see Figure 13.3b ) .
The three primary vesicles become five secondary vesicles .
The prosencephalon enlarges into two new vesicles called the telencephalon and the diencephalon .
The telecephalon will become the cerebrum .
The diencephalon gives rise to several adult structures ; two that will be important are the thalamus and the hypothalamus .
In the embryonic diencephalon , a structure known as the eye cup develops , which will eventually become the retina , the nervous tissue of the eye called the retina .
This is a rare example of nervous tissue developing as part of the CNS structures in the embryo , but becoming a peripheral structure in the fully formed nervous system .
The mesencephalon does not differentiate into any finer divisions .
The midbrain is an established region of the brain at the primary vesicle stage of development and remains that way .
The rest of the brain develops around it and constitutes a large percentage of the mass of the brain .
Dividing the brain into forebrain , midbrain , and hindbrain is useful in considering its developmental pattern , but the midbrain is a small proportion of the entire brain , relatively speaking .
The rhombencephalon develops into the metencephalon and myelencephalon .
The metencephalon corresponds to the adult structure known as the pons and also gives rise to the cerebellum .
The cerebellum ( from the Latin meaning “ little brain ” ) accounts for about 10 percent of the mass of the brain and is an important structure in itself .
The most significant connection between the cerebellum and the rest of the brain is at the pons , because the pons and cerebellum develop out of the same vesicle .
The myelencephalon corresponds to the adult structure known as the medulla oblongata .
The structures that come from the mesencephalon and rhombencephalon , except for the cerebellum , are collectively considered the brain stem , which specifically includes the midbrain , pons , and medulla .
Watch this animation ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/braindevel ) to examine the development of the brain , starting with the neural tube .
As the anterior end of the neural tube develops , it enlarges into the primary vesicles that establish the forebrain , midbrain , and hindbrain .
Those structures continue to develop throughout the rest of embryonic development and into adolescence .
They are the basis of the structure of the fully developed adult brain .
How would you describe the difference in the relative sizes of the three regions of the brain when comparing the early ( 25th embryonic day ) brain and the adult brain ?
While the brain is developing from the anterior neural tube , the spinal cord is developing from the posterior neural tube .
However , its structure does not differ from the basic layout of the neural tube .
It is a long , straight cord with a small , hollow space down the center .
The neural tube is defined in terms of its anterior versus posterior portions , but it also has a dorsal–ventral dimension .
As the neural tube separates from the rest of the ectoderm , the side closest to the surface is dorsal , and the deeper side is ventral .
As the spinal cord develops , the cells making up the wall of the neural tube proliferate and differentiate into the neurons and glia of the spinal cord .
The dorsal tissues will be associated with sensory functions , and the ventral tissues will be associated with motor functions .
Embryonic development can help in understanding the structure of the adult brain because it establishes a framework on which more complex structures can be built .
First , the neural tube establishes the anterior–posterior dimension of the nervous system , which is called the neuraxis .
The embryonic nervous system in mammals can be said to have a standard arrangement .
Humans ( and other primates , to some degree ) make this complicated by standing up and walking on two legs .
The anterior–posterior dimension of the neuraxis overlays the superior–inferior dimension of the body .
However , there is a major curve between the brain stem and forebrain , which is called the cephalic flexure .
Because of this , the neuraxis starts in an inferior position—the end of the spinal cord—and ends in an anterior position , the front of the cerebrum .
If this is confusing , just imagine a four-legged animal standing up on two legs .
Without the flexure in the brain stem , and at the top of the neck , that animal would be looking straight up instead of straight in front ( Figure 13.4 ) .
In summary , the primary vesicles help to establish the basic regions of the nervous system : forebrain , midbrain , and hindbrain .
These divisions are useful in certain situations , but they are not equivalent regions .
The midbrain is small compared with the hindbrain and particularly the forebrain .
The secondary vesicles go on to establish the major regions of the adult nervous system that will be followed in this text .
The telencephalon is the cerebrum , which is the major portion of the human brain .
The diencephalon continues to be referred to by this Greek name , because there is no better term for it ( dia= “ through ” ) .
The diencephalon is between the cerebrum and the rest of the nervous system and can be described as the region through which all projections have to pass between the cerebrum and everything else .
The brain stem includes the midbrain , pons , and medulla , which correspond to the mesencephalon , metencephalon , and myelencephalon .
The cerebellum , being a large portion of the brain , is considered a separate region .
Table 13.1 connects the different stages of development to the adult structures of the CNS .
One other benefit of considering embryonic development is that certain connections are more obvious because of how these adult structures are related .
The retina , which began as part of the diencephalon , is primarily connected to the diencephalon .
The eyes are just inferior to the anterior-most part of the cerebrum , but the optic nerve extends back to the thalamus as the optic tract , with branches into a region of the hypothalamus .
There is also a connection of the optic tract to the midbrain , but the mesencephalon is adjacent to the diencephalon , so that is not difficult to imagine .
The cerebellum originates out of the metencephalon , and its largest white matter connection is to the pons , also from the metencephalon .
There are connections between the cerebellum and both the medulla and midbrain , which are adjacent structures in the secondary vesicle stage of development .
In the adult brain , the cerebellum seems close to the cerebrum , but there is no direct connection between them .
Another aspect of the adult CNS structures that relates to embryonic development is the ventricles—open spaces within the CNS where cerebrospinal fluid circulates .
They are the remnant of the hollow center of the neural tube .
The four ventricles and the tubular spaces associated with them can be linked back to the hollow center of the embryonic brain ( see Table 13.1 ) .
Early formation of the nervous system depends on the formation of the neural tube .
A groove forms along the dorsal surface of the embryo , which becomes deeper until its edges meet and close off to form the tube .
If this fails to happen , especially in the posterior region where the spinal cord forms , a developmental defect called spina bifida occurs .
The closing of the neural tube is important for more than just the proper formation of the nervous system .
The surrounding tissues are dependent on the correct development of the tube .
The connective tissues surrounding the CNS can be involved as well .
There are three classes of this disorder : occulta , meningocele , and myelomeningocele ( Figure 13.5 ) .
The first type , spina bifida occulta , is the mildest because the vertebral bones do not fully surround the spinal cord , but the spinal cord itself is not affected .
No functional differences may be noticed , which is what the word occulta means ; it is hidden spina bifida .
The other two types both involve the formation of a cyst—a fluid-filled sac of the connective tissues that cover the spinal cord called the meninges .
“ Meningocele ” means that the meninges protrude through the spinal column but nerves may not be involved and few symptoms are present , though complications may arise later in life .
“ Myelomeningocele ” means that the meninges protrude and spinal nerves are involved , and therefore severe neurological symptoms can be present .
Often surgery to close the opening or to remove the cyst is necessary .
The earlier that surgery can be performed , the better the chances of controlling or limiting further damage or infection at the opening .
For many children with meningocele , surgery will alleviate the pain , although they may experience some functional loss .
Because the myelomeningocele form of spina bifida involves more extensive damage to the nervous tissue , neurological damage may persist , but symptoms can often be handled .
Complications of the spinal cord may present later in life , but overall life expectancy is not reduced .
Watch this video ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/whitematter ) to learn about the white matter in the cerebrum that develops during childhood and adolescence .
This is a composite of MRI images taken of the brains of people from 5 years of age through 20 years of age , demonstrating how the cerebrum changes .
As the color changes to blue , the ratio of gray matter to white matter changes .
The caption for the video describes it as “ less gray matter , ” which is another way of saying “ more white matter. ” If the brain does not finish developing until approximately 20 years of age , can teenagers be held responsible for behaving badly ?
The spinal cord is a single structure , whereas the adult brain is described in terms of four major regions : the cerebrum , the diencephalon , the brain stem , and the cerebellum .
A person ’ s conscious experiences are based on neural activity in the brain .
The regulation of homeostasis is governed by a specialized region in the brain .
The coordination of reflexes depends on the integration of sensory and motor pathways in the spinal cord .
The iconic gray mantle of the human brain , which appears to make up most of the mass of the brain , is the cerebrum ( Figure 13.6 ) .
The wrinkled portion is the cerebral cortex , and the rest of the structure is beneath that outer covering .
There is a large separation between the two sides of the cerebrum called the longitudinal fissure .
It separates the cerebrum into two distinct halves , a right and left cerebral hemisphere .
Deep within the cerebrum , the white matter of the corpus callosum provides the major pathway for communication between the two hemispheres of the cerebral cortex .
Many of the higher neurological functions , such as memory , emotion , and consciousness , are the result of cerebral function .
The complexity of the cerebrum is different across vertebrate species .
The cerebrum of the most primitive vertebrates is not much more than the connection for the sense of smell .
In mammals , the cerebrum comprises the outer gray matter that is the cortex ( from the Latin word meaning “ bark of a tree ” ) and several deep nuclei that belong to three important functional groups .
The basal nuclei are responsible for cognitive processing , the most important function being that associated with planning movements .
The basal forebrain contains nuclei that are important in learning and memory .
The limbic cortex is the region of the cerebral cortex that is part of the limbic system , a collection of structures involved in emotion , memory , and behavior .
The cerebrum is covered by a continuous layer of gray matter that wraps around either side of the forebrain—the cerebral cortex .
This thin , extensive region of wrinkled gray matter is responsible for the higher functions of the nervous system .
A gyrus ( plural = gyri ) is the ridge of one of those wrinkles , and a sulcus ( plural = sulci ) is the groove between two gyri .
The pattern of these folds of tissue indicates specific regions of the cerebral cortex .
The head is limited by the size of the birth canal , and the brain must fit inside the cranial cavity of the skull .
Extensive folding in the cerebral cortex enables more gray matter to fit into this limited space .
If the gray matter of the cortex were peeled off of the cerebrum and laid out flat , its surface area would be roughly equal to one square meter .
The folding of the cortex maximizes the amount of gray matter in the cranial cavity .
During embryonic development , as the telencephalon expands within the skull , the brain goes through a regular course of growth that results in everyone ’ s brain having a similar pattern of folds .
The surface of the brain can be mapped on the basis of the locations of large gyri and sulci .
Using these landmarks , the cortex can be separated into four major regions , or lobes ( Figure 13.7 ) .
The lateral sulcus that separates the temporal lobe from the other regions is one such landmark .
Superior to the lateral sulcus are the parietal lobe and frontal lobe , which are separated from each other by the central sulcus .
The posterior region of the cortex is the occipital lobe , which has no obvious anatomical border between it and the parietal or temporal lobes on the lateral surface of the brain .
From the medial surface , an obvious landmark separating the parietal and occipital lobes is called the parietooccipital sulcus .
The fact that there is no obvious anatomical border between these lobes is consistent with the functions of these regions being interrelated .
Different regions of the cerebral cortex can be associated with particular functions , a concept known as localization of function .
In the early 1900s , a German neuroscientist named Korbinian Brodmann performed an extensive study of the microscopic anatomy—the cytoarchitecture—of the cerebral cortex and divided the cortex into 52 separate regions on the basis of the histology of the cortex .
His work resulted in a system of classification known as Brodmann ’ s areas , which is still used today to describe the anatomical distinctions within the cortex ( Figure 13.8 ) .
The results from Brodmann ’ s work on the anatomy align very well with the functional differences within the cortex .
Areas 17 and 18 in the occipital lobe are responsible for primary visual perception .
That visual information is complex , so it is processed in the temporal and parietal lobes as well .
The temporal lobe is associated with primary auditory sensation , known as Brodmann ’ s areas 41 and 42 in the superior temporal lobe .
Because regions of the temporal lobe are part of the limbic system , memory is an important function associated with that lobe .
Memory is essentially a sensory function ; memories are recalled sensations such as the smell of Mom ’ s baking or the sound of a barking dog .
Even memories of movement are really the memory of sensory feedback from those movements , such as stretching muscles or the movement of the skin around a joint .
Structures in the temporal lobe are responsible for establishing long-term memory , but the ultimate location of those memories is usually in the region in which the sensory perception was processed .
The main sensation associated with the parietal lobe is somatosensation , meaning the general sensations associated with the body .
Posterior to the central sulcus is the postcentral gyrus , the primary somatosensory cortex , which is identified as Brodmann ’ s areas 1 , 2 , and 3 .
Anterior to the central sulcus is the frontal lobe , which is primarily associated with motor functions .
The precentral gyrus is the primary motor cortex .
Cells from this region of the cerebral cortex are the upper motor neurons that instruct cells in the spinal cord to move skeletal muscles .
Anterior to this region are a few areas that are associated with planned movements .
The premotor area is responsible for thinking of a movement to be made .
The frontal eye fields are important in eliciting eye movements and in attending to visual stimuli .
Broca ’ s area is responsible for the production of language , or controlling movements responsible for speech ; in the vast majority of people , it is located only on the left side .
Anterior to these regions is the prefrontal lobe , which serves cognitive functions that can be the basis of personality , short-term memory , and consciousness .
The prefrontal lobotomy is an outdated mode of treatment for personality disorders ( psychiatric conditions ) that profoundly affected the personality of the patient .
Beneath the cerebral cortex are sets of nuclei known as subcortical nuclei that augment cortical processes .
The nuclei of the basal forebrain serve as the primary location for acetylcholine production , which modulates the overall activity of the cortex , possibly leading to greater attention to sensory stimuli .
Alzheimer ’ s disease is associated with a loss of neurons in the basal forebrain .
The hippocampus and amygdala are medial-lobe structures that , along with the adjacent cortex , are involved in long-term memory formation and emotional responses .
The basal nuclei are a set of nuclei in the cerebrum responsible for comparing cortical processing with the general state of activity in the nervous system to influence the likelihood of movement taking place .
For example , while a student is sitting in a classroom listening to a lecture , the basal nuclei will keep the urge to jump up and scream from actually happening .
( The basal nuclei are also referred to as the basal ganglia , although that is potentially confusing because the term ganglia is typically used for peripheral structures . )
The major structures of the basal nuclei that control movement are the caudate , putamen , and globus pallidus , which are located deep in the cerebrum .
The caudate is a long nucleus that follows the basic C-shape of the cerebrum from the frontal lobe , through the parietal and occipital lobes , into the temporal lobe .
The putamen is mostly deep in the anterior regions of the frontal and parietal lobes .
Together , the caudate and putamen are called the striatum .
The globus pallidus is a layered nucleus that lies just medial to the putamen ; they are called the lenticular nuclei because they look like curved pieces fitting together like lenses .
The globus pallidus has two subdivisions , the external and internal segments , which are lateral and medial , respectively .
These nuclei are depicted in a frontal section of the brain in Figure 13.9 .
The basal nuclei in the cerebrum are connected with a few more nuclei in the brain stem that together act as a functional group that forms a motor pathway .
Two streams of information processing take place in the basal nuclei .
All input to the basal nuclei is from the cortex into the striatum ( Figure 13.10 ) .
The direct pathway is the projection of axons from the striatum to the globus pallidus internal segment ( GPi ) and the substantia nigra pars reticulata ( SNr ) .
The GPi/SNr then projects to the thalamus , which projects back to the cortex .
The indirect pathway is the projection of axons from the striatum to the globus pallidus external segment ( GPe ) , then to the subthalamic nucleus ( STN ) , and finally to GPi/SNr .
The two streams both target the GPi/SNr , but one has a direct projection and the other goes through a few intervening nuclei .
The direct pathway causes the disinhibition of the thalamus ( inhibition of one cell on a target cell that then inhibits the first cell ) , whereas the indirect pathway causes , or reinforces , the normal inhibition of the thalamus .
The thalamus then can either excite the cortex ( as a result of the direct pathway ) or fail to excite the cortex ( as a result of the indirect pathway ) .
The switch between the two pathways is the substantia nigra pars compacta , which projects to the striatum and releases the neurotransmitter dopamine .
Dopamine receptors are either excitatory ( D1-type receptors ) or inhibitory ( D2-type receptors ) .
The direct pathway is activated by dopamine , and the indirect pathway is inhibited by dopamine .
When the substantia nigra pars compacta is firing , it signals to the basal nuclei that the body is in an active state , and movement will be more likely .
When the substantia nigra pars compacta is silent , the body is in a passive state , and movement is inhibited .
To illustrate this situation , while a student is sitting listening to a lecture , the substantia nigra pars compacta would be silent and the student less likely to get up and walk around .
Likewise , while the professor is lecturing , and walking around at the front of the classroom , the professor ’ s substantia nigra pars compacta would be active , in keeping with his or her activity level .
Watch this video ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/basalnuclei1 ) to learn about the basal nuclei ( also known as the basal ganglia ) , which have two pathways that process information within the cerebrum .
As shown in this video , the direct pathway is the shorter pathway through the system that results in increased activity in the cerebral cortex and increased motor activity .
The direct pathway is described as resulting in “ disinhibition ” of the thalamus .
What does disinhibition mean ?
What are the two neurons doing individually to cause this ?
Watch this video ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/basalnuclei2 ) to learn about the basal nuclei ( also known as the basal ganglia ) , which have two pathways that process information within the cerebrum .
As shown in this video , the indirect pathway is the longer pathway through the system that results in decreased activity in the cerebral cortex , and therefore less motor activity .
The indirect pathway has an extra couple of connections in it , including disinhibition of the subthalamic nucleus .
What is the end result on the thalamus , and therefore on movement initiated by the cerebral cortex ?
There is a persistent myth that people are “ right-brained ” or “ left-brained , ” which is an oversimplification of an important concept about the cerebral hemispheres .
There is some lateralization of function , in which the left side of the brain is devoted to language function and the right side is devoted to spatial and nonverbal reasoning .
Whereas these functions are predominantly associated with those sides of the brain , there is no monopoly by either side on these functions .
Many pervasive functions , such as language , are distributed globally around the cerebrum .
Some of the support for this misconception has come from studies of split brains .
A drastic way to deal with a rare and devastating neurological condition ( intractable epilepsy ) is to separate the two hemispheres of the brain .
After sectioning the corpus callosum , a split-brained patient will have trouble producing verbal responses on the basis of sensory information processed on the right side of the cerebrum , leading to the idea that the left side is responsible for language function .
However , there are well-documented cases of language functions lost from damage to the right side of the brain .
The deficits seen in damage to the left side of the brain are classified as aphasia , a loss of speech function ; damage on the right side can affect the use of language .
Right-side damage can result in a loss of ability to understand figurative aspects of speech , such as jokes , irony , or metaphors .
The diencephalon is the one region of the adult brain that retains its name from embryologic development .
The etymology of the word diencephalon translates to “ through brain. ” It is the connection between the cerebrum and the rest of the nervous system , with one exception .
The rest of the brain , the spinal cord , and the PNS all send information to the cerebrum through the diencephalon .
Output from the cerebrum passes through the diencephalon .
The single exception is the system associated with olfaction , or the sense of smell , which connects directly with the cerebrum .
In the earliest vertebrate species , the cerebrum was not much more than olfactory bulbs that received peripheral information about the chemical environment ( to call it smell in these organisms is imprecise because they lived in the ocean ) .
The diencephalon is deep beneath the cerebrum and constitutes the walls of the third ventricle .
The diencephalon can be described as any region of the brain with “ thalamus ” in its name .
The two major regions of the diencephalon are the thalamus itself and the hypothalamus ( Figure 13.11 ) .
There are other structures , such as the epithalamus , which contains the pineal gland , or the subthalamus , which includes the subthalamic nucleus that is part of the basal nuclei .
The thalamus is a collection of nuclei that relay information between the cerebral cortex and the periphery , spinal cord , or brain stem .
All sensory information , except for the sense of smell , passes through the thalamus before processing by the cortex .
Axons from the peripheral sensory organs , or intermediate nuclei , synapse in the thalamus , and thalamic neurons project directly to the cerebrum .
It is a requisite synapse in any sensory pathway , except for olfaction .
The thalamus does not just pass the information on , it also processes that information .
For example , the portion of the thalamus that receives visual information will influence what visual stimuli are important , or what receives attention .
The cerebrum also sends information down to the thalamus , which usually communicates motor commands .
This involves interactions with the cerebellum and other nuclei in the brain stem .
The cerebrum interacts with the basal nuclei , which involves connections with the thalamus .
The primary output of the basal nuclei is to the thalamus , which relays that output to the cerebral cortex .
The cortex also sends information to the thalamus that will then influence the effects of the basal nuclei .
Inferior and slightly anterior to the thalamus is the hypothalamus , the other major region of the diencephalon .
The hypothalamus is a collection of nuclei that are largely involved in regulating homeostasis .
The hypothalamus is the executive region in charge of the autonomic nervous system and the endocrine system through its regulation of the anterior pituitary gland .
Other parts of the hypothalamus are involved in memory and emotion as part of the limbic system .
The midbrain and hindbrain ( composed of the pons and the medulla ) are collectively referred to as the brain stem ( Figure 13.12 ) .
The structure emerges from the ventral surface of the forebrain as a tapering cone that connects the brain to the spinal cord .
Attached to the brain stem , but considered a separate region of the adult brain , is the cerebellum .
The midbrain coordinates sensory representations of the visual , auditory , and somatosensory perceptual spaces .
The pons is the main connection with the cerebellum .
The pons and the medulla regulate several crucial functions , including the cardiovascular and respiratory systems and rates .
The cranial nerves connect through the brain stem and provide the brain with the sensory input and motor output associated with the head and neck , including most of the special senses .
The major ascending and descending pathways between the spinal cord and brain , specifically the cerebrum , pass through the brain stem .
One of the original regions of the embryonic brain , the midbrain is a small region between the thalamus and pons .
It is separated into the tectum and tegmentum , from the Latin words for roof and floor , respectively .
The cerebral aqueduct passes through the center of the midbrain , such that these regions are the roof and floor of that canal .
The tectum is composed of four bumps known as the colliculi ( singular = colliculus ) , which means “ little hill ” in Latin .
The inferior colliculus is the inferior pair of these enlargements and is part of the auditory brain stem pathway .
Neurons of the inferior colliculus project to the thalamus , which then sends auditory information to the cerebrum for the conscious perception of sound .
The superior colliculus is the superior pair and combines sensory information about visual space , auditory space , and somatosensory space .
Activity in the superior colliculus is related to orienting the eyes to a sound or touch stimulus .
If you are walking along the sidewalk on campus and you hear chirping , the superior colliculus coordinates that information with your awareness of the visual location of the tree right above you .
That is the correlation of auditory and visual maps .
If you suddenly feel something wet fall on your head , your superior colliculus integrates that with the auditory and visual maps and you know that the chirping bird just relieved itself on you .
You want to look up to see the culprit , but do not .
The tegmentum is continuous with the gray matter of the rest of the brain stem .
Throughout the midbrain , pons , and medulla , the tegmentum contains the nuclei that receive and send information through the cranial nerves , as well as regions that regulate important functions such as those of the cardiovascular and respiratory systems .
The word pons comes from the Latin word for bridge .
It is visible on the anterior surface of the brain stem as the thick bundle of white matter attached to the cerebellum .
The pons is the main connection between the cerebellum and the brain stem .
The bridge-like white matter is only the anterior surface of the pons ; the gray matter beneath that is a continuation of the tegmentum from the midbrain .
Gray matter in the tegmentum region of the pons contains neurons receiving descending input from the forebrain that is sent to the cerebellum .
The medulla is the region known as the myelencephalon in the embryonic brain .
The initial portion of the name , “ myel , ” refers to the significant white matter found in this region—especially on its exterior , which is continuous with the white matter of the spinal cord .
The tegmentum of the midbrain and pons continues into the medulla because this gray matter is responsible for processing cranial nerve information .
A diffuse region of gray matter throughout the brain stem , known as the reticular formation , is related to sleep and wakefulness , such as general brain activity and attention .
The cerebellum , as the name suggests , is the “ little brain. ” It is covered in gyri and sulci like the cerebrum , and looks like a miniature version of that part of the brain ( Figure 13.13 ) .
The cerebellum is largely responsible for comparing information from the cerebrum with sensory feedback from the periphery through the spinal cord .
It accounts for approximately 10 percent of the mass of the brain .
Descending fibers from the cerebrum have branches that connect to neurons in the pons .
Those neurons project into the cerebellum , providing a copy of motor commands sent to the spinal cord .
Sensory information from the periphery , which enters through spinal or cranial nerves , is copied to a nucleus in the medulla known as the inferior olive .
Fibers from this nucleus enter the cerebellum and are compared with the descending commands from the cerebrum .
If the primary motor cortex of the frontal lobe sends a command down to the spinal cord to initiate walking , a copy of that instruction is sent to the cerebellum .
Sensory feedback from the muscles and joints , proprioceptive information about the movements of walking , and sensations of balance are sent to the cerebellum through the inferior olive and the cerebellum compares them .
If walking is not coordinated , perhaps because the ground is uneven or a strong wind is blowing , then the cerebellum sends out a corrective command to compensate for the difference between the original cortical command and the sensory feedback .
The output of the cerebellum is into the midbrain , which then sends a descending input to the spinal cord to correct the messages going to skeletal muscles .
The description of the CNS is concentrated on the structures of the brain , but the spinal cord is another major organ of the system .
Whereas the brain develops out of expansions of the neural tube into primary and then secondary vesicles , the spinal cord maintains the tube structure and is only specialized into certain regions .
As the spinal cord continues to develop in the newborn , anatomical features mark its surface .
The anterior midline is marked by the anterior median fissure , and the posterior midline is marked by the posterior median sulcus .
Axons enter the posterior side through the dorsal ( posterior ) nerve root , which marks the posterolateral sulcus on either side .
The axons emerging from the anterior side do so through the ventral ( anterior ) nerve root .
Note that it is common to see the terms dorsal ( dorsal = “ back ” ) and ventral ( ventral = “ belly ” ) used interchangeably with posterior and anterior , particularly in reference to nerves and the structures of the spinal cord .
You should learn to be comfortable with both .
On the whole , the posterior regions are responsible for sensory functions and the anterior regions are associated with motor functions .
This comes from the initial development of the spinal cord , which is divided into the basal plate and the alar plate .
The basal plate is closest to the ventral midline of the neural tube , which will become the anterior face of the spinal cord and gives rise to motor neurons .
The alar plate is on the dorsal side of the neural tube and gives rise to neurons that will receive sensory input from the periphery .
The length of the spinal cord is divided into regions that correspond to the regions of the vertebral column .
The name of a spinal cord region corresponds to the level at which spinal nerves pass through the intervertebral foramina .
Immediately adjacent to the brain stem is the cervical region , followed by the thoracic , then the lumbar , and finally the sacral region .
The spinal cord is not the full length of the vertebral column because the spinal cord does not grow significantly longer after the first or second year , but the skeleton continues to grow .
The nerves that emerge from the spinal cord pass through the intervertebral formina at the respective levels .
As the vertebral column grows , these nerves grow with it and result in a long bundle of nerves that resembles a horse ’ s tail and is named the cauda equina .
The sacral spinal cord is at the level of the upper lumbar vertebral bones .
The spinal nerves extend from their various levels to the proper level of the vertebral column .
The posterior horn is responsible for sensory processing .
The anterior horn sends out motor signals to the skeletal muscles .
The lateral horn , which is only found in the thoracic , upper lumbar , and sacral regions , is the central component of the sympathetic division of the autonomic nervous system .
Some of the largest neurons of the spinal cord are the multipolar motor neurons in the anterior horn .
The fibers that cause contraction of skeletal muscles are the axons of these neurons .
The motor neuron that causes contraction of the big toe , for example , is located in the sacral spinal cord .
The axon that has to reach all the way to the belly of that muscle may be a meter in length .
The neuronal cell body that maintains that long fiber must be quite large , possibly several hundred micrometers in diameter , making it one of the largest cells in the body .
Just as the gray matter is separated into horns , the white matter of the spinal cord is separated into columns .
Ascending tracts of nervous system fibers in these columns carry sensory information up to the brain , whereas descending tracts carry motor commands from the brain .
Looking at the spinal cord longitudinally , the columns extend along its length as continuous bands of white matter .
Between the two posterior horns of gray matter are the posterior columns .
Between the two anterior horns , and bounded by the axons of motor neurons emerging from that gray matter area , are the anterior columns .
The white matter on either side of the spinal cord , between the posterior horn and the axons of the anterior horn neurons , are the lateral columns .
The posterior columns are composed of axons of ascending tracts .
The anterior and lateral columns are composed of many different groups of axons of both ascending and descending tracts—the latter carrying motor commands down from the brain to the spinal cord to control output to the periphery .
Watch this video ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/graymatter ) to learn about the gray matter of the spinal cord that receives input from fibers of the dorsal ( posterior ) root and sends information out through the fibers of the ventral ( anterior ) root .
As discussed in this video , these connections represent the interactions of the CNS with peripheral structures for both sensory and motor functions .
The cervical and lumbar spinal cords have enlargements as a result of larger populations of neurons .
What are these enlargements responsible for ?
Parkinson ’ s disease is a disorder of the basal nuclei , specifically of the substantia nigra , that demonstrates the effects of the direct and indirect pathways .
Parkinson ’ s disease is the result of neurons in the substantia nigra pars compacta dying .
These neurons release dopamine into the striatum .
Without that modulatory influence , the basal nuclei are stuck in the indirect pathway , without the direct pathway being activated .
The direct pathway is responsible for increasing cortical movement commands .
The increased activity of the indirect pathway results in the hypokinetic disorder of Parkinson ’ s disease .
Parkinson ’ s disease is neurodegenerative , meaning that neurons die that can not be replaced , so there is no cure for the disorder .
Treatments for Parkinson ’ s disease are aimed at increasing dopamine levels in the striatum .
Currently , the most common way of doing that is by providing the amino acid L-DOPA , which is a precursor to the neurotransmitter dopamine and can cross the blood-brain barrier .
With levels of the precursor elevated , the remaining cells of the substantia nigra pars compacta can make more neurotransmitter and have a greater effect .
Unfortunately , the patient will become less responsive to L-DOPA treatment as time progresses , and it can cause increased dopamine levels elsewhere in the brain , which are associated with psychosis or schizophrenia .
Visit this site ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/parkinsons ) for a thorough explanation of Parkinson ’ s disease .
Compared with the nearest evolutionary relative , the chimpanzee , the human has a brain that is huge .
At a point in the past , a common ancestor gave rise to the two species of humans and chimpanzees .
That evolutionary history is long and is still an area of intense study .
But something happened to increase the size of the human brain relative to the chimpanzee .
Read this article ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/hugebrain ) in which the author explores the current understanding of why this happened .
According to one hypothesis about the expansion of brain size , what tissue might have been sacrificed so energy was available to grow our larger brain ?
Based on what you know about that tissue and nervous tissue , why would there be a trade-off between them in terms of energy use ?
The CNS has a privileged blood supply , as suggested by the blood-brain barrier .
The function of the tissue in the CNS is crucial to the survival of the organism , so the contents of the blood can not simply pass into the central nervous tissue .
To protect this region from the toxins and pathogens that may be traveling through the blood stream , there is strict control over what can move out of the general systems and into the brain and spinal cord .
Because of this privilege , the CNS needs specialized structures for the maintenance of circulation .
This begins with a unique arrangement of blood vessels carrying fresh blood into the CNS .
Beyond the supply of blood , the CNS filters that blood into cerebrospinal fluid ( CSF ) , which is then circulated through the cavities of the brain and spinal cord called ventricles .
A lack of oxygen to the CNS can be devastating , and the cardiovascular system has specific regulatory reflexes to ensure that the blood supply is not interrupted .
There are multiple routes for blood to get into the CNS , with specializations to protect that blood supply and to maximize the ability of the brain to get an uninterrupted perfusion .
The major artery carrying recently oxygenated blood away from the heart is the aorta .
The very first branches off the aorta supply the heart with nutrients and oxygen .
The next branches give rise to the common carotid arteries , which further branch into the internal carotid arteries .
The external carotid arteries supply blood to the tissues on the surface of the cranium .
The bases of the common carotids contain stretch receptors that immediately respond to the drop in blood pressure upon standing .
The orthostatic reflex is a reaction to this change in body position , so that blood pressure is maintained against the increasing effect of gravity ( orthostatic means “ standing up ” ) .
Heart rate increases—a reflex of the sympathetic division of the autonomic nervous system—and this raises blood pressure .
The internal carotid artery enters the cranium through the carotid canal in the temporal bone .
A second set of vessels that supply the CNS are the vertebral arteries , which are protected as they pass through the neck region by the transverse foramina of the cervical vertebrae .
The vertebral arteries enter the cranium through the foramen magnum of the occipital bone .
Branches off the left and right vertebral arteries merge into the anterior spinal artery supplying the anterior aspect of the spinal cord , found along the anterior median fissure .
The two vertebral arteries then merge into the basilar artery , which gives rise to branches to the brain stem and cerebellum .
The left and right internal carotid arteries and branches of the basilar artery all become the circle of Willis , a confluence of arteries that can maintain perfusion of the brain even if narrowing or a blockage limits flow through one part ( Figure 13.15 ) .
Watch this animation ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/bloodflow1 ) to see how blood flows to the brain and passes through the circle of Willis before being distributed through the cerebrum .
The circle of Willis is a specialized arrangement of arteries that ensure constant perfusion of the cerebrum even in the event of a blockage of one of the arteries in the circle .
The animation shows the normal direction of flow through the circle of Willis to the middle cerebral artery .
Where would the blood come from if there were a blockage just posterior to the middle cerebral artery on the left ?
After passing through the CNS , blood returns to the circulation through a series of dural sinuses and veins ( Figure 13.16 ) .
The superior sagittal sinus runs in the groove of the longitudinal fissure , where it absorbs CSF from the meninges .
The superior sagittal sinus drains to the confluence of sinuses , along with the occipital sinuses and straight sinus , to then drain into the transverse sinuses .
The transverse sinuses connect to the sigmoid sinuses , which then connect to the jugular veins .
From there , the blood continues toward the heart to be pumped to the lungs for reoxygenation .
The outer surface of the CNS is covered by a series of membranes composed of connective tissue called the meninges , which protect the brain .
The dura mater is a thick fibrous layer and a strong protective sheath over the entire brain and spinal cord .
It is anchored to the inner surface of the cranium and vertebral cavity .
The arachnoid mater is a membrane of thin fibrous tissue that forms a loose sac around the CNS .
Beneath the arachnoid is a thin , filamentous mesh called the arachnoid trabeculae , which looks like a spider web , giving this layer its name .
Directly adjacent to the surface of the CNS is the pia mater , a thin fibrous membrane that follows the convolutions of gyri and sulci in the cerebral cortex and fits into other grooves and indentations ( Figure 13.17 ) .
Like a thick cap covering the brain , the dura mater is a tough outer covering .
The name comes from the Latin for “ tough mother ” to represent its physically protective role .
It encloses the entire CNS and the major blood vessels that enter the cranium and vertebral cavity .
It is directly attached to the inner surface of the bones of the cranium and to the very end of the vertebral cavity .
There are infoldings of the dura that fit into large crevasses of the brain .
Two infoldings go through the midline separations of the cerebrum and cerebellum ; one forms a shelf-like tent between the occipital lobes of the cerebrum and the cerebellum , and the other surrounds the pituitary gland .
The dura also surrounds and supports the venous sinuses .
The middle layer of the meninges is the arachnoid , named for the spider-web–like trabeculae between it and the pia mater .
The arachnoid defines a sac-like enclosure around the CNS .
The trabeculae are found in the subarachnoid space , which is filled with circulating CSF .
The arachnoid emerges into the dural sinuses as the arachnoid granulations , where the CSF is filtered back into the blood for drainage from the nervous system .
The subarachnoid space is filled with circulating CSF , which also provides a liquid cushion to the brain and spinal cord .
Similar to clinical blood work , a sample of CSF can be withdrawn to find chemical evidence of neuropathology or metabolic traces of the biochemical functions of nervous tissue .
The outer surface of the CNS is covered in the thin fibrous membrane of the pia mater .
It is thought to have a continuous layer of cells providing a fluid-impermeable membrane .
The name pia mater comes from the Latin for “ tender mother , ” suggesting the thin membrane is a gentle covering for the brain .
The pia extends into every convolution of the CNS , lining the inside of the sulci in the cerebral and cerebellar cortices .
At the end of the spinal cord , a thin filament extends from the inferior end of CNS at the upper lumbar region of the vertebral column to the sacral end of the vertebral column .
Because the spinal cord does not extend through the lower lumbar region of the vertebral column , a needle can be inserted through the dura and arachnoid layers to withdraw CSF .
This procedure is called a lumbar puncture and avoids the risk of damaging the central tissue of the spinal cord .
Blood vessels that are nourishing the central nervous tissue are between the pia mater and the nervous tissue .
Meningitis is an inflammation of the meninges , the three layers of fibrous membrane that surround the CNS .
Meningitis can be caused by infection by bacteria or viruses .
The particular pathogens are not special to meningitis ; it is just an inflammation of that specific set of tissues from what might be a broader infection .
Bacterial meningitis can be caused by Streptococcus , Staphylococcus , or the tuberculosis pathogen , among many others .
Viral meningitis is usually the result of common enteroviruses ( such as those that cause intestinal disorders ) , but may be the result of the herpes virus or West Nile virus .
Bacterial meningitis tends to be more severe .
The symptoms associated with meningitis can be fever , chills , nausea , vomiting , light sensitivity , soreness of the neck , or severe headache .
More important are the neurological symptoms , such as changes in mental state ( confusion , memory deficits , and other dementia-type symptoms ) .
A serious risk of meningitis can be damage to peripheral structures because of the nerves that pass through the meninges .
Hearing loss is a common result of meningitis .
The primary test for meningitis is a lumbar puncture .
A needle inserted into the lumbar region of the spinal column through the dura mater and arachnoid membrane into the subarachnoid space can be used to withdraw the fluid for chemical testing .
Fatality occurs in 5 to 40 percent of children and 20 to 50 percent of adults with bacterial meningitis .
Treatment of bacterial meningitis is through antibiotics , but viral meningitis can not be treated with antibiotics because viruses do not respond to that type of drug .
Fortunately , the viral forms are milder .
Watch this video ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/lumbarpuncture ) that describes the procedure known as the lumbar puncture , a medical procedure used to sample the CSF .
Because of the anatomy of the CNS , it is a relative safe location to insert a needle .
Why is the lumbar puncture performed in the lower lumbar area of the vertebral column ?
Cerebrospinal fluid ( CSF ) circulates throughout and around the CNS .
In other tissues , water and small molecules are filtered through capillaries as the major contributor to the interstitial fluid .
In the brain , CSF is produced in special structures to perfuse through the nervous tissue of the CNS and is continuous with the interstitial fluid .
Specifically , CSF circulates to remove metabolic wastes from the interstitial fluids of nervous tissues and return them to the blood stream .
The ventricles are the open spaces within the brain where CSF circulates .
In some of these spaces , CSF is produced by filtering of the blood that is performed by a specialized membrane known as a choroid plexus .
The CSF circulates through all of the ventricles to eventually emerge into the subarachnoid space where it will be reabsorbed into the blood .
There are four ventricles within the brain , all of which developed from the original hollow space within the neural tube , the central canal .
The first two are named the lateral ventricles and are deep within the cerebrum .
These ventricles are connected to the third ventricle by two openings called the interventricular foramina .
The third ventricle is the space between the left and right sides of the diencephalon , which opens into the cerebral aqueduct that passes through the midbrain .
The aqueduct opens into the fourth ventricle , which is the space between the cerebellum and the pons and upper medulla ( Figure 13.18 ) .
As the telencephalon enlarges and grows into the cranial cavity , it is limited by the space within the skull .
The telencephalon is the most anterior region of what was the neural tube , but can not grow past the limit of the frontal bone of the skull .
Because the cerebrum fits into this space , it takes on a C-shaped formation , through the frontal , parietal , occipital , and finally temporal regions .
The space within the telencephalon is stretched into this same C-shape .
The two ventricles are in the left and right sides , and were at one time referred to as the first and second ventricles .
The interventricular foramina connect the frontal region of the lateral ventricles with the third ventricle .
The third ventricle is the space bounded by the medial walls of the hypothalamus and thalamus .
The two thalami touch in the center in most brains as the massa intermedia , which is surrounded by the third ventricle .
The cerebral aqueduct opens just inferior to the epithalamus and passes through the midbrain .
The tectum and tegmentum of the midbrain are the roof and floor of the cerebral aqueduct , respectively .
The aqueduct opens up into the fourth ventricle .
The floor of the fourth ventricle is the dorsal surface of the pons and upper medulla ( that gray matter making a continuation of the tegmentum of the midbrain ) .
The fourth ventricle then narrows into the central canal of the spinal cord .
The ventricular system opens up to the subarachnoid space from the fourth ventricle .
The single median aperture and the pair of lateral apertures connect to the subarachnoid space so that CSF can flow through the ventricles and around the outside of the CNS .
Cerebrospinal fluid is produced within the ventricles by a type of specialized membrane called a choroid plexus .
Ependymal cells ( one of the types of glial cells described in the introduction to the nervous system ) surround blood capillaries and filter the blood to make CSF .
The fluid is a clear solution with a limited amount of the constituents of blood .
It is essentially water , small molecules , and electrolytes .
Oxygen and carbon dioxide are dissolved into the CSF , as they are in blood , and can diffuse between the fluid and the nervous tissue .
The choroid plexuses are found in all four ventricles .
Observed in dissection , they appear as soft , fuzzy structures that may still be pink , depending on how well the circulatory system is cleared in preparation of the tissue .
The CSF is produced from components extracted from the blood , so its flow out of the ventricles is tied to the pulse of cardiovascular circulation .
From the lateral ventricles , the CSF flows into the third ventricle , where more CSF is produced , and then through the cerebral aqueduct into the fourth ventricle where even more CSF is produced .
A very small amount of CSF is filtered at any one of the plexuses , for a total of about 500 milliliters daily , but it is continuously made and pulses through the ventricular system , keeping the fluid moving .
From the fourth ventricle , CSF can continue down the central canal of the spinal cord , but this is essentially a cul-de-sac , so more of the fluid leaves the ventricular system and moves into the subarachnoid space through the median and lateral apertures .
Within the subarachnoid space , the CSF flows around all of the CNS , providing two important functions .
As with elsewhere in its circulation , the CSF picks up metabolic wastes from the nervous tissue and moves it out of the CNS .
It also acts as a liquid cushion for the brain and spinal cord .
By surrounding the entire system in the subarachnoid space , it provides a thin buffer around the organs within the strong , protective dura mater .
The arachnoid granulations are outpocketings of the arachnoid membrane into the dural sinuses so that CSF can be reabsorbed into the blood , along with the metabolic wastes .
From the dural sinuses , blood drains out of the head and neck through the jugular veins , along with the rest of the circulation for blood , to be reoxygenated by the lungs and wastes to be filtered out by the kidneys ( Table 13.2 ) .
What are the structures that produce CSF and where are they found ?
How are the structures indicated in this animation ?
The supply of blood to the brain is crucial to its ability to perform many functions .
Without a steady supply of oxygen , and to a lesser extent glucose , the nervous tissue in the brain can not keep up its extensive electrical activity .
These nutrients get into the brain through the blood , and if blood flow is interrupted , neurological function is compromised .
The common name for a disruption of blood supply to the brain is a stroke .
It is caused by a blockage to an artery in the brain .
The blockage is from some type of embolus : a blood clot , a fat embolus , or an air bubble .
When the blood can not travel through the artery , the surrounding tissue that is deprived starves and dies .
Strokes will often result in the loss of very specific functions .
A stroke in the lateral medulla , for example , can cause a loss in the ability to swallow .
Sometimes , seemingly unrelated functions will be lost because they are dependent on structures in the same region .
Along with the swallowing in the previous example , a stroke in that region could affect sensory functions from the face or extremities because important white matter pathways also pass through the lateral medulla .
Loss of blood flow to specific regions of the cortex can lead to the loss of specific higher functions , from the ability to recognize faces to the ability to move a particular region of the body .
Severe or limited memory loss can be the result of a temporal lobe stroke .
While the neurons in that area are recovering from the event , neurological function may be lost .
Function can return if the area is able to recover from the event .
Recovery from a stroke ( or TIA ) is strongly dependent on the speed of treatment .
Often , the person who is present and notices something is wrong must then make a decision .
The mnemonic F AST helps people remember what to look for when someone is dealing with sudden losses of neurological function .
If someone complains of feeling “ funny , ” check these things quickly : Look at the person ’ s face .
Does he or she have problems moving F ace muscles and making regular facial expressions ?
Ask the person to raise his or her A rms above the head .
Can the person lift one arm but not the other ?
Has the person ’ s S peech changed ?
Is he or she slurring words or having trouble saying things ?
If any of these things have happened , then it is T ime to call for help .
Sometimes , treatment with blood-thinning drugs can alleviate the problem , and recovery is possible .
If the tissue is damaged , the amazing thing about the nervous system is that it is adaptable .
With physical , occupational , and speech therapy , victims of strokes can recover , or more accurately relearn , functions .
Some peripheral structures are incorporated into the other organs of the body .
In describing the anatomy of the PNS , it is necessary to describe the common structures , the nerves and the ganglia , as they are found in various parts of the body .
Many of the neural structures that are incorporated into other organs are features of the digestive system ; these structures are known as the enteric nervous system and are a special subset of the PNS .
A ganglion is a group of neuron cell bodies in the periphery .
Ganglia can be categorized , for the most part , as either sensory ganglia or autonomic ganglia , referring to their primary functions .
The most common type of sensory ganglion is a dorsal ( posterior ) root ganglion .
These ganglia are the cell bodies of neurons with axons that are sensory endings in the periphery , such as in the skin , and that extend into the CNS through the dorsal nerve root .
The ganglion is an enlargement of the nerve root .
Under microscopic inspection , it can be seen to include the cell bodies of the neurons , as well as bundles of fibers that are the posterior nerve root ( Figure 13.19 ) .
The cells of the dorsal root ganglion are unipolar cells , classifying them by shape .
Also , the small round nuclei of satellite cells can be seen surrounding—as if they were orbiting—the neuron cell bodies .
View the University of Michigan WebScope at http : //virtualslides.med.umich.edu/Histology/Basic % 20Tissues/ Nervous % 20Tissue/065-2_HISTO_40X.svs/view.apml ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/spinalroot ) to explore the tissue sample in greater detail .
If you zoom in on the dorsal root ganglion , you can see smaller satellite glial cells surrounding the large cell bodies of the sensory neurons .
From what structure do satellite cells derive during embryologic development ?
Another type of sensory ganglion is a cranial nerve ganglion .
This is analogous to the dorsal root ganglion , except that it is associated with a cranial nerve instead of a spinal nerve .
The roots of cranial nerves are within the cranium , whereas the ganglia are outside the skull .
For example , the trigeminal ganglion is superficial to the temporal bone whereas its associated nerve is attached to the mid-pons region of the brain stem .
The neurons of cranial nerve ganglia are also unipolar in shape with associated satellite cells .
The other major category of ganglia are those of the autonomic nervous system , which is divided into the sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous systems .
The sympathetic chain ganglia constitute a row of ganglia along the vertebral column that receive central input from the lateral horn of the thoracic and upper lumbar spinal cord .
Superior to the chain ganglia are three paravertebral ganglia in the cervical region .
Three other autonomic ganglia that are related to the sympathetic chain are the prevertebral ganglia , which are located outside of the chain but have similar functions .
They are referred to as prevertebral because they are anterior to the vertebral column .
The neurons of these autonomic ganglia are multipolar in shape , with dendrites radiating out around the cell body where synapses from the spinal cord neurons are made .
The neurons of the chain , paravertebral , and prevertebral ganglia then project to organs in the head and neck , thoracic , abdominal , and pelvic cavities to regulate the sympathetic aspect of homeostatic mechanisms .
Another group of autonomic ganglia are the terminal ganglia that receive input from cranial nerves or sacral spinal nerves and are responsible for regulating the parasympathetic aspect of homeostatic mechanisms .
These two sets of ganglia , sympathetic and parasympathetic , often project to the same organs—one input from the chain ganglia and one input from a terminal ganglion—to regulate the overall function of an organ .
For example , the heart receives two inputs such as these ; one increases heart rate , and the other decreases it .
The terminal ganglia that receive input from cranial nerves are found in the head and neck , as well as the thoracic and upper abdominal cavities , whereas the terminal ganglia that receive sacral input are in the lower abdominal and pelvic cavities .
Terminal ganglia below the head and neck are often incorporated into the wall of the target organ as a plexus .
A plexus , in a general sense , is a network of fibers or vessels .
This can apply to nervous tissue ( as in this instance ) or structures containing blood vessels ( such as a choroid plexus ) .
For example , the enteric plexus is the extensive network of axons and neurons in the wall of the small and large intestines .
The enteric plexus is actually part of the enteric nervous system , along with the gastric plexuses and the esophageal plexus .
Though the enteric nervous system receives input originating from central neurons of the autonomic nervous system , it does not require CNS input to function .
In fact , it operates independently to regulate the digestive system .
Bundles of axons in the PNS are referred to as nerves .
These structures in the periphery are different than the central counterpart , called a tract .
Nerves are composed of more than just nervous tissue .
They have connective tissues invested in their structure , as well as blood vessels supplying the tissues with nourishment .
The outer surface of a nerve is a surrounding layer of fibrous connective tissue called the epineurium .
Within the nerve , axons are further bundled into fascicles , which are each surrounded by their own layer of fibrous connective tissue called perineurium .
Finally , individual axons are surrounded by loose connective tissue called the endoneurium ( Figure 13.21 ) .
These three layers are similar to the connective tissue sheaths for muscles .
Nerves are associated with the region of the CNS to which they are connected , either as cranial nerves connected to the brain or spinal nerves connected to the spinal cord .
View the University of Michigan WebScope at http : //virtualslides.med.umich.edu/Histology/Basic % 20Tissues/ Nervous % 20Tissue/068_HISTO_40X.svs/view.apml to explore the tissue sample in greater detail .
With what structures in a skeletal muscle are the endoneurium , perineurium , and epineurium comparable ?
There are twelve cranial nerves , which are designated CNI through CNXII for “ Cranial Nerve , ” using Roman numerals for 1 through 12 .
They can be classified as sensory nerves , motor nerves , or a combination of both , meaning that the axons in these nerves originate out of sensory ganglia external to the cranium or motor nuclei within the brain stem .
Sensory axons enter the brain to synapse in a nucleus .
Motor axons connect to skeletal muscles of the head or neck .
Three of the nerves are solely composed of sensory fibers ; five are strictly motor ; and the remaining four are mixed nerves .
Learning the cranial nerves is a tradition in anatomy courses , and students have always used mnemonic devices to remember the nerve names .
A traditional mnemonic is the rhyming couplet , “ On Old Olympus ’ Towering Tops/A Finn And German Viewed Some Hops , ” in which the initial letter of each word corresponds to the initial letter in the name of each nerve .
The names of the nerves have changed over the years to reflect current usage and more accurate naming .
An exercise to help learn this sort of information is to generate a mnemonic using words that have personal significance .
The names of the cranial nerves are listed in Table 13.3 along with a brief description of their function , their source ( sensory ganglion or motor nucleus ) , and their target ( sensory nucleus or skeletal muscle ) .
They are listed here with a brief explanation of each nerve ( Figure 13.23 ) .
The olfactory nerve and optic nerve are responsible for the sense of smell and vision , respectively .
The oculomotor nerve is responsible for eye movements by controlling four of the extraocular muscles .
It is also responsible for lifting the upper eyelid when the eyes point up , and for pupillary constriction .
The trochlear nerve and the abducens nerve are both responsible for eye movement , but do so by controlling different extraocular muscles .
The trigeminal nerve is responsible for cutaneous sensations of the face and controlling the muscles of mastication .
The facial nerve is responsible for the muscles involved in facial expressions , as well as part of the sense of taste and the production of saliva .
The vestibulocochlear nerve is responsible for the senses of hearing and balance .
The glossopharyngeal nerve is responsible for controlling muscles in the oral cavity and upper throat , as well as part of the sense of taste and the production of saliva .
The vagus nerve is responsible for contributing to homeostatic control of the organs of the thoracic and upper abdominal cavities .
The spinal accessory nerve is responsible for controlling the muscles of the neck , along with cervical spinal nerves .
The hypoglossal nerve is responsible for controlling the muscles of the lower throat and tongue .
Three of the cranial nerves also contain autonomic fibers , and a fourth is almost purely a component of the autonomic system .
The oculomotor , facial , and glossopharyngeal nerves contain fibers that contact autonomic ganglia .
The oculomotor fibers initiate pupillary constriction , whereas the facial and glossopharyngeal fibers both initiate salivation .
The vagus nerve primarily targets autonomic ganglia in the thoracic and upper abdominal cavities .
Visit this site ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/NYTmeningitis ) to read about a man who wakes with a headache and a loss of vision .
His regular doctor sent him to an ophthalmologist to address the vision loss .
The ophthalmologist recognizes a greater problem and immediately sends him to the emergency room .
Once there , the patient undergoes a large battery of tests , but a definite cause can not be found .
A specialist recognizes the problem as meningitis , but the question is what caused it originally .
How can that be cured ?
The loss of vision comes from swelling around the optic nerve , which probably presented as a bulge on the inside of the eye .
Why is swelling related to meningitis going to push on the optic nerve ?
Another important aspect of the cranial nerves that lends itself to a mnemonic is the functional role each nerve plays .
The nerves fall into one of three basic groups .
They are sensory , motor , or both ( see Table 13.3 ) .
The sentence , “ Some Say Marry Money But My Brother Says Brains Beauty Matter More , ” corresponds to the basic function of each nerve .
The first , second , and eighth nerves are purely sensory : the olfactory ( CNI ) , optic ( CNII ) , and vestibulocochlear ( CNVIII ) nerves .
The three eye-movement nerves are all motor : the oculomotor ( CNIII ) , trochlear ( CNIV ) , and abducens ( CNVI ) .
The spinal accessory ( CNXI ) and hypoglossal ( CNXII ) nerves are also strictly motor .
The remainder of the nerves contain both sensory and motor fibers .
They are the trigeminal ( CNV ) , facial ( CNVII ) , glossopharyngeal ( CNIX ) , and vagus ( CNX ) nerves .
The nerves that convey both are often related to each other .
The trigeminal and facial nerves both concern the face ; one concerns the sensations and the other concerns the muscle movements .
The facial and glossopharyngeal nerves are both responsible for conveying gustatory , or taste , sensations as well as controlling salivary glands .
The vagus nerve is involved in visceral responses to taste , namely the gag reflex .
This is not an exhaustive list of what these combination nerves do , but there is a thread of relation between them .
The nerves connected to the spinal cord are the spinal nerves .
The arrangement of these nerves is much more regular than that of the cranial nerves .
All of the spinal nerves are combined sensory and motor axons that separate into two nerve roots .
The sensory axons enter the spinal cord as the dorsal nerve root .
The motor fibers , both somatic and autonomic , emerge as the ventral nerve root .
The dorsal root ganglion for each nerve is an enlargement of the spinal nerve .
There are 31 spinal nerves , named for the level of the spinal cord at which each one emerges .
There are eight pairs of cervical nerves designated C1 to C8 , twelve thoracic nerves designated T1 to T12 , five pairs of lumbar nerves designated L1 to L5 , five pairs of sacral nerves designated S1 to S5 , and one pair of coccygeal nerves .
The nerves are numbered from the superior to inferior positions , and each emerges from the vertebral column through the intervertebral foramen at its level .
The first nerve , C1 , emerges between the first cervical vertebra and the occipital bone .
The second nerve , C2 , emerges between the first and second cervical vertebrae .
The same occurs for C3 to C7 , but C8 emerges between the seventh cervical vertebra and the first thoracic vertebra .
For the thoracic and lumbar nerves , each one emerges between the vertebra that has the same designation and the next vertebra in the column .
The sacral nerves emerge from the sacral foramina along the length of that unique vertebra .
Spinal nerves extend outward from the vertebral column to enervate the periphery .
The nerves in the periphery are not straight continuations of the spinal nerves , but rather the reorganization of the axons in those nerves to follow different courses .
Axons from different spinal nerves will come together into a systemic nerve .
This occurs at four places along the length of the vertebral column , each identified as a nerve plexus , whereas the other spinal nerves directly correspond to nerves at their respective levels .
In this instance , the word plexus is used to describe networks of nerve fibers with no associated cell bodies .
Of the four nerve plexuses , two are found at the cervical level , one at the lumbar level , and one at the sacral level ( Figure 13.24 ) .
The cervical plexus is composed of axons from spinal nerves C1 through C5 and branches into nerves in the posterior neck and head , as well as the phrenic nerve , which connects to the diaphragm at the base of the thoracic cavity .
The other plexus from the cervical level is the brachial plexus .
Spinal nerves C4 through T1 reorganize through this plexus to give rise to the nerves of the arms , as the name brachial suggests .
A large nerve from this plexus is the radial nerve from which the axillary nerve branches to go to the armpit region .
The radial nerve continues through the arm and is paralleled by the ulnar nerve and the median nerve .
The lumbar plexus arises from all the lumbar spinal nerves and gives rise to nerves enervating the pelvic region and the anterior leg .
The femoral nerve is one of the major nerves from this plexus , which gives rise to the saphenous nerve as a branch that extends through the anterior lower leg .
The sacral plexus comes from the lower lumbar nerves L4 and L5 and the sacral nerves S1 to S4 .
The most significant systemic nerve to come from this plexus is the sciatic nerve , which is a combination of the tibial nerve and the fibular nerve .
The sciatic nerve extends across the hip joint and is most commonly associated with the condition sciatica , which is the result of compression or irritation of the nerve or any of the spinal nerves giving rise to it .
These plexuses are described as arising from spinal nerves and giving rise to certain systemic nerves , but they contain fibers that serve sensory functions or fibers that serve motor functions .
This means that some fibers extend from cutaneous or other peripheral sensory surfaces and send action potentials into the CNS .
Those are axons of sensory neurons in the dorsal root ganglia that enter the spinal cord through the dorsal nerve root .
Other fibers are the axons of motor neurons of the anterior horn of the spinal cord , which emerge in the ventral nerve root and send action potentials to cause skeletal muscles to contract in their target regions .
For example , the radial nerve contains fibers of cutaneous sensation in the arm , as well as motor fibers that move muscles in the arm .
Spinal nerves of the thoracic region , T2 through T11 , are not part of the plexuses but rather emerge and give rise to the intercostal nerves found between the ribs , which articulate with the vertebrae surrounding the spinal nerve .
Anosmia is the loss of the sense of smell .
It is often the result of the olfactory nerve being severed , usually because of blunt force trauma to the head .
The sensory neurons of the olfactory epithelium have a limited lifespan of approximately one to four months , and new ones are made on a regular basis .
The new neurons extend their axons into the CNS by growing along the existing fibers of the olfactory nerve .
The ability of these neurons to be replaced is lost with age .
Age-related anosmia is not the result of impact trauma to the head , but rather a slow loss of the sensory neurons with no new neurons born to replace them .
Smell is an important sense , especially for the enjoyment of food .
There are only five tastes sensed by the tongue , and two of them are generally thought of as unpleasant tastes ( sour and bitter ) .
Anosmia results in a loss of the enjoyment of food .
As the replacement of olfactory neurons declines with age , anosmia can set in .
Without the sense of smell , many sufferers complain of food tasting bland .
Often , the only way to enjoy food is to add seasoning that can be sensed on the tongue , which usually means adding table salt .
The problem with this solution , however , is that this increases sodium intake , which can lead to cardiovascular problems through water retention and the associated increase in blood pressure .
However , this misses an important point : somatic refers to a functional division , whereas peripheral refers to an anatomic division .
The somatic nervous system is responsible for our conscious perception of the environment and for our voluntary responses to that perception by means of skeletal muscles .
Peripheral sensory neurons receive input from environmental stimuli , but the neurons that produce motor responses originate in the central nervous system .
The distinction between the structures ( i.e. , anatomy ) of the peripheral and central nervous systems and functions ( i.e. , physiology ) of the somatic and autonomic systems can most easily be demonstrated through a simple reflex action .
When you touch a hot stove , you pull your hand away .
Sensory receptors in the skin sense extreme temperature and the early signs of tissue damage .
This triggers an action potential , which travels along the sensory fiber from the skin , through the dorsal spinal root to the spinal cord , and directly activates a ventral horn motor neuron .
That neuron sends a signal along its axon to excite the biceps brachii , causing contraction of the muscle and flexion of the forearm at the elbow to withdraw the hand from the hot stove .
The withdrawal reflex has more components , such as inhibiting the opposing muscle and balancing posture while the arm is forcefully withdrawn , which will be further explored at the end of this chapter .
The basic withdrawal reflex explained above includes sensory input ( the painful stimulus ) , central processing ( the synapse in the spinal cord ) , and motor output ( activation of a ventral motor neuron that causes contraction of the biceps brachii ) .
Expanding the explanation of the withdrawal reflex can include inhibition of the opposing muscle , or cross extension , either of which increase the complexity of the example by involving more central neurons .
A collateral branch of the sensory axon would inhibit another ventral horn motor neuron so that the triceps brachii do not contract and slow the withdrawal down .
The cross extensor reflex provides a counterbalancing movement on the other side of the body , which requires another collateral of the sensory axon to activate contraction of the extensor muscles in the contralateral limb .
A more complex example of somatic function is conscious muscle movement .
For example , reading of this text starts with visual sensory input to the retina , which then projects to the thalamus , and on to the cerebral cortex .
A sequence of regions of the cerebral cortex process the visual information , starting in the primary visual cortex of the occipital lobe , and resulting in the conscious perception of these letters .
Subsequent cognitive processing results in understanding of the content .
As you continue reading , regions of the cerebral cortex in the frontal lobe plan how to move the eyes to follow the lines of text .
The output from the cortex causes activity in motor neurons in the brain stem that cause movement of the extraocular muscles through the third , fourth , and sixth cranial nerves .
This example also includes sensory input ( the retinal projection to the thalamus ) , central processing ( the thalamus and subsequent cortical activity ) , and motor output ( activation of neurons in the brain stem that lead to coordinated contraction of extraocular muscles ) .
Stimuli from varying sources , and of different types , are received and changed into the electrochemical signals of the nervous system .
This occurs when a stimulus changes the cell membrane potential of a sensory neuron .
The stimulus causes the sensory cell to produce an action potential that is relayed into the central nervous system ( CNS ) , where it is integrated with other sensory information—or sometimes higher cognitive functions—to become a conscious perception of that stimulus .
The central integration may then lead to a motor response .
Describing sensory function with the term sensation or perception is a deliberate distinction .
Sensation is the activation of sensory receptor cells at the level of the stimulus .
Perception is the central processing of sensory stimuli into a meaningful pattern .
Perception is dependent on sensation , but not all sensations are perceived .
Receptors are the cells or structures that detect sensations .
A receptor cell is changed directly by a stimulus .
A transmembrane protein receptor is a protein in the cell membrane that mediates a physiological change in a neuron , most often through the opening of ion channels or changes in the cell signaling processes .
Transmembrane receptors are activated by chemicals called ligands .
For example , a molecule in food can serve as a ligand for taste receptors .
Other transmembrane proteins , which are not accurately called receptors , are sensitive to mechanical or thermal changes .
Physical changes in these proteins increase ion flow across the membrane , and can generate an action potential or a graded potential in the sensory neurons .
Stimuli in the environment activate specialized receptor cells in the peripheral nervous system .
Different types of stimuli are sensed by different types of receptor cells .
Receptor cells can be classified into types on the basis of three different criteria : cell type , position , and function .
Receptors can be classified structurally on the basis of cell type and their position in relation to stimuli they sense .
They can also be classified functionally on the basis of the transduction of stimuli , or how the mechanical stimulus , light , or chemical changed the cell membrane potential .
The pain and temperature receptors in the dermis of the skin are examples of neurons that have free nerve endings .
Also located in the dermis of the skin are lamellated corpuscles , neurons with encapsulated nerve endings that respond to pressure and touch .
The cells in the retina that respond to light stimuli are an example of a specialized receptor , a photoreceptor .
Another way that receptors can be classified is based on their location relative to the stimuli .
An exteroceptor is a receptor that is located near a stimulus in the external environment , such as the somatosensory receptors that are located in the skin .
An interoceptor is one that interprets stimuli from internal organs and tissues , such as the receptors that sense the increase in blood pressure in the aorta or carotid sinus .
Finally , a proprioceptor is a receptor located near a moving part of the body , such as a muscle , that interprets the positions of the tissues as they move .
A third classification of receptors is by how the receptor transduces stimuli into membrane potential changes .
Stimuli are of three general types .
Some stimuli are ions and macromolecules that affect transmembrane receptor proteins when these chemicals diffuse across the cell membrane .
Some stimuli are physical variations in the environment that affect receptor cell membrane potentials .
Other stimuli include the electromagnetic radiation from visible light .
For humans , the only electromagnetic energy that is perceived by our eyes is visible light .
Some other organisms have receptors that humans lack , such as the heat sensors of snakes , the ultraviolet light sensors of bees , or magnetic receptors in migratory birds .
Receptor cells can be further categorized on the basis of the type of stimuli they transduce .
Chemical stimuli can be interpreted by a chemoreceptor that interprets chemical stimuli , such as an object ’ s taste or smell .
Osmoreceptors respond to solute concentrations of body fluids .
Additionally , pain is primarily a chemical sense that interprets the presence of chemicals from tissue damage , or similar intense stimuli , through a nociceptor .
Physical stimuli , such as pressure and vibration , as well as the sensation of sound and body position ( balance ) , are interpreted through a mechanoreceptor .
Another physical stimulus that has its own type of receptor is temperature , which is sensed through a thermoreceptor that is either sensitive to temperatures above ( heat ) or below ( cold ) normal body temperature .
Ask anyone what the senses are , and they are likely to list the five major senses—taste , smell , touch , hearing , and sight .
However , these are not all of the senses .
The most obvious omission from this list is balance .
Also , what is referred to simply as touch can be further subdivided into pressure , vibration , stretch , and hair-follicle position , on the basis of the type of mechanoreceptors that perceive these touch sensations .
Other overlooked senses include temperature perception by thermoreceptors and pain perception by nociceptors .
Within the realm of physiology , senses can be classified as either general or specific .
A general sense is one that is distributed throughout the body and has receptor cells within the structures of other organs .
Mechanoreceptors in the skin , muscles , or the walls of blood vessels are examples of this type .
General senses often contribute to the sense of touch , as described above , or to proprioception ( body movement ) and kinesthesia ( body movement ) , or to a visceral sense , which is most important to autonomic functions .
A special sense is one that has a specific organ devoted to it , namely the eye , inner ear , tongue , or nose .
Each of the senses is referred to as a sensory modality .
Modality refers to the way that information is encoded , which is similar to the idea of transduction .
The main sensory modalities can be described on the basis of how each is transduced .
The chemical senses are taste and smell .
The general sense that is usually referred to as touch includes chemical sensation in the form of nociception , or pain .
Pressure , vibration , muscle stretch , and the movement of hair by an external stimulus , are all sensed by mechanoreceptors .
Hearing and balance are also sensed by mechanoreceptors .
Finally , vision involves the activation of photoreceptors .
Listing all the different sensory modalities , which can number as many as 17 , involves separating the five major senses into more specific categories , or submodalities , of the larger sense .
An individual sensory modality represents the sensation of a specific type of stimulus .
For example , the general sense of touch , which is known as somatosensation , can be separated into light pressure , deep pressure , vibration , itch , pain , temperature , or hair movement .
Only a few recognized submodalities exist within the sense of taste , or gustation .
Until recently , only four tastes were recognized : sweet , salty , sour , and bitter .
Research at the turn of the 20th century led to recognition of the fifth taste , umami , during the mid-1980s .
Umami is a Japanese word that means “ delicious taste , ” and is often translated to mean savory .
Very recent research has suggested that there may also be a sixth taste for fats , or lipids .
Gustation is the special sense associated with the tongue .
The surface of the tongue , along with the rest of the oral cavity , is lined by a stratified squamous epithelium .
Raised bumps called papillae ( singular = papilla ) contain the structures for gustatory transduction .
There are four types of papillae , based on their appearance ( Figure 14.3 ) : circumvallate , foliate , filiform , and fungiform .
Within the structure of the papillae are taste buds that contain specialized gustatory receptor cells for the transduction of taste stimuli .
These receptor cells are sensitive to the chemicals contained within foods that are ingested , and they release neurotransmitters based on the amount of the chemical in the food .
Neurotransmitters from the gustatory cells can activate sensory neurons in the facial , glossopharyngeal , and vagus cranial nerves .
Salty taste is simply the perception of sodium ions ( Na ) in the saliva .
When you eat something salty , the salt crystals dissociate into the component ions Na and Cl , which dissolve into the saliva in your mouth .
The Na concentration becomes high outside the gustatory cells , creating a strong concentration gradient that drives the diffusion of the ion into the cells .
The entry of Na into these cells results in the depolarization of the cell membrane and the generation of a receptor potential .
Sour taste is the perception of H concentration .
Just as with sodium ions in salty flavors , these hydrogen ions enter the cell and trigger depolarization .
Sour flavors are , essentially , the perception of acids in our food .
Increasing hydrogen ion concentrations in the saliva ( lowering saliva pH ) triggers progressively stronger graded potentials in the gustatory cells .
For example , orange juice—which contains citric acid—will taste sour because it has a pH value of approximately 3 .
Of course , it is often sweetened so that the sour taste is masked .
The first two tastes ( salty and sour ) are triggered by the cations Na and H .
The other tastes result from food molecules binding to a G protein–coupled receptor .
A G protein signal transduction system ultimately leads to depolarization of the gustatory cell .
The sweet taste is the sensitivity of gustatory cells to the presence of glucose dissolved in the saliva .
Other monosaccharides such as fructose , or artificial sweeteners such as aspartame ( NutraSweet™ ) , saccharine , or sucralose ( Splenda™ ) also activate the sweet receptors .
The affinity for each of these molecules varies , and some will taste sweeter than glucose because they bind to the G protein–coupled receptor differently .
Bitter taste is similar to sweet in that food molecules bind to G protein–coupled receptors .
However , there are a number of different ways in which this can happen because there are a large diversity of bitter-tasting molecules .
Some bitter molecules depolarize gustatory cells , whereas others hyperpolarize gustatory cells .
Likewise , some bitter molecules increase G protein activation within the gustatory cells , whereas other bitter molecules decrease G protein activation .
The specific response depends on which molecule is binding to the receptor .
One major group of bitter-tasting molecules are alkaloids .
Alkaloids are nitrogen containing molecules that are commonly found in bitter-tasting plant products , such as coffee , hops ( in beer ) , tannins ( in wine ) , tea , and aspirin .
By containing toxic alkaloids , the plant is less susceptible to microbe infection and less attractive to herbivores .
Therefore , the function of bitter taste may primarily be related to stimulating the gag reflex to avoid ingesting poisons .
Because of this , many bitter foods that are normally ingested are often combined with a sweet component to make them more palatable ( cream and sugar in coffee , for example ) .
The highest concentration of bitter receptors appear to be in the posterior tongue , where a gag reflex could still spit out poisonous food .
The taste known as umami is often referred to as the savory taste .
Like sweet and bitter , it is based on the activation of G protein–coupled receptors by a specific molecule .
The molecule that activates this receptor is the amino acid L-glutamate .
Therefore , the umami flavor is often perceived while eating protein-rich foods .
Not surprisingly , dishes that contain meat are often described as savory .
Once the gustatory cells are activated by the taste molecules , they release neurotransmitters onto the dendrites of sensory neurons .
These neurons are part of the facial and glossopharyngeal cranial nerves , as well as a component within the vagus nerve dedicated to the gag reflex .
The facial nerve connects to taste buds in the anterior third of the tongue .
The glossopharyngeal nerve connects to taste buds in the posterior two thirds of the tongue .
The vagus nerve connects to taste buds in the extreme posterior of the tongue , verging on the pharynx , which are more sensitive to noxious stimuli such as bitterness .
Watch this video ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/DanielleReed ) to learn about Dr. Danielle Reed of the Monell Chemical Senses Center in Philadelphia , Pennsylvania , who became interested in science at an early age because of her sensory experiences .
She recognized that her sense of taste was unique compared with other people she knew .
Now , she studies the genetic differences between people and their sensitivities to taste stimuli .
In the video , there is a brief image of a person sticking out their tongue , which has been covered with a colored dye .
This is how Dr. Reed is able to visualize and count papillae on the surface of the tongue .
People fall into two groups known as “ tasters ” and “ nontasters ” based on the density of papillae on their tongue , which also indicates the number of taste buds .
Non-tasters can taste food , but they are not as sensitive to certain tastes , such as bitterness .
Dr. Reed discovered that she is a non-taster , which explains why she perceived bitterness differently than other people she knew .
Are you very sensitive to tastes ?
Can you see any similarities among the members of your family ?
Like taste , the sense of smell , or olfaction , is also responsive to chemical stimuli .
The olfactory receptor neurons are located in a small region within the superior nasal cavity ( Figure 14.4 ) .
This region is referred to as the olfactory epithelium and contains bipolar sensory neurons .
Each olfactory sensory neuron has dendrites that extend from the apical surface of the epithelium into the mucus lining the cavity .
As airborne molecules are inhaled through the nose , they pass over the olfactory epithelial region and dissolve into the mucus .
These odorant molecules bind to proteins that keep them dissolved in the mucus and help transport them to the olfactory dendrites .
The odorant–protein complex binds to a receptor protein within the cell membrane of an olfactory dendrite .
These receptors are G protein–coupled , and will produce a graded membrane potential in the olfactory neurons .
The axon of an olfactory neuron extends from the basal surface of the epithelium , through an olfactory foramen in the cribriform plate of the ethmoid bone , and into the brain .
The group of axons called the olfactory tract connect to the olfactory bulb on the ventral surface of the frontal lobe .
From there , the axons split to travel to several brain regions .
Some travel to the cerebrum , specifically to the primary olfactory cortex that is located in the inferior and medial areas of the temporal lobe .
Others project to structures within the limbic system and hypothalamus , where smells become associated with long-term memory and emotional responses .
This is how certain smells trigger emotional memories , such as the smell of food associated with one ’ s birthplace .
Smell is the one sensory modality that does not synapse in the thalamus before connecting to the cerebral cortex .
This intimate connection between the olfactory system and the cerebral cortex is one reason why smell can be a potent trigger of memories and emotion .
The nasal epithelium , including the olfactory cells , can be harmed by airborne toxic chemicals .
Therefore , the olfactory neurons are regularly replaced within the nasal epithelium , after which the axons of the new neurons must find their appropriate connections in the olfactory bulb .
These new axons grow along the axons that are already in place in the cranial nerve .
Blunt force trauma to the face , such as that common in many car accidents , can lead to the loss of the olfactory nerve , and subsequently , loss of the sense of smell .
This condition is known as anosmia .
When the frontal lobe of the brain moves relative to the ethmoid bone , the olfactory tract axons may be sheared apart .
Professional fighters often experience anosmia because of repeated trauma to face and head .
In addition , certain pharmaceuticals , such as antibiotics , can cause anosmia by killing all the olfactory neurons at once .
If no axons are in place within the olfactory nerve , then the axons from newly formed olfactory neurons have no guide to lead them to their connections within the olfactory bulb .
There are temporary causes of anosmia , as well , such as those caused by inflammatory responses related to respiratory infections or allergies .
Loss of the sense of smell can result in food tasting bland .
A person with an impaired sense of smell may require additional spice and seasoning levels for food to be tasted .
Anosmia may also be related to some presentations of mild depression , because the loss of enjoyment of food may lead to a general sense of despair .
The ability of olfactory neurons to replace themselves decreases with age , leading to age-related anosmia .
This explains why some elderly people salt their food more than younger people do .
However , this increased sodium intake can increase blood volume and blood pressure , increasing the risk of cardiovascular diseases in the elderly .
Hearing , or audition , is the transduction of sound waves into a neural signal that is made possible by the structures of the ear ( Figure 14.5 ) .
The large , fleshy structure on the lateral aspect of the head is known as the auricle .
Some sources will also refer to this structure as the pinna , though that term is more appropriate for a structure that can be moved , such as the external ear of a cat .
The C-shaped curves of the auricle direct sound waves toward the auditory canal .
The canal enters the skull through the external auditory meatus of the temporal bone .
At the end of the auditory canal is the tympanic membrane , or ear drum , which vibrates after it is struck by sound waves .
The auricle , ear canal , and tympanic membrane are often referred to as the external ear .
The middle ear consists of a space spanned by three small bones called the ossicles .
The three ossicles are the malleus , incus , and stapes , which are Latin names that roughly translate to hammer , anvil , and stirrup .
The malleus is attached to the tympanic membrane and articulates with the incus .
The incus , in turn , articulates with the stapes .
The stapes is then attached to the inner ear , where the sound waves will be transduced into a neural signal .
The middle ear is connected to the pharynx through the Eustachian tube , which helps equilibrate air pressure across the tympanic membrane .
The tube is normally closed but will pop open when the muscles of the pharynx contract during swallowing or yawning .
The inner ear is often described as a bony labyrinth , as it is composed of a series of canals embedded within the temporal bone .
It has two separate regions , the cochlea and the vestibule , which are responsible for hearing and balance , respectively .
The neural signals from these two regions are relayed to the brain stem through separate fiber bundles .
However , these two distinct bundles travel together from the inner ear to the brain stem as the vestibulocochlear nerve .
Sound is transduced into neural signals within the cochlear region of the inner ear , which contains the sensory neurons of the spiral ganglia .
These ganglia are located within the spiral-shaped cochlea of the inner ear .
The cochlea is attached to the stapes through the oval window .
The oval window is located at the beginning of a fluid-filled tube within the cochlea called the scala vestibuli .
The scala vestibuli extends from the oval window , travelling above the cochlear duct , which is the central cavity of the cochlea that contains the sound-transducing neurons .
At the uppermost tip of the cochlea , the scala vestibuli curves over the top of the cochlear duct .
The fluid-filled tube , now called the scala tympani , returns to the base of the cochlea , this time travelling under the cochlear duct .
The scala tympani ends at the round window , which is covered by a membrane that contains the fluid within the scala .
As vibrations of the ossicles travel through the oval window , the fluid of the scala vestibuli and scala tympani moves in a wave-like motion .
The frequency of the fluid waves match the frequencies of the sound waves ( Figure 14.6 ) .
The membrane covering the round window will bulge out or pucker in with the movement of the fluid within the scala tympani .
A cross-sectional view of the cochlea shows that the scala vestibuli and scala tympani run along both sides of the cochlear duct ( Figure 14.7 ) .
The cochlear duct contains several organs of Corti , which tranduce the wave motion of the two scala into neural signals .
The organs of Corti lie on top of the basilar membrane , which is the side of the cochlear duct located between the organs of Corti and the scala tympani .
As the fluid waves move through the scala vestibuli and scala tympani , the basilar membrane moves at a specific spot , depending on the frequency of the waves .
Higher frequency waves move the region of the basilar membrane that is close to the base of the cochlea .
Lower frequency waves move the region of the basilar membrane that is near the tip of the cochlea .
The organs of Corti contain hair cells , which are named for the hair-like stereocilia extending from the cell ’ s apical surfaces ( Figure 14.8 ) .
The stereocilia are an array of microvilli-like structures arranged from tallest to shortest .
Protein fibers tether adjacent hairs together within each array , such that the array will bend in response to movements of the basilar membrane .
The stereocilia extend up from the hair cells to the overlying tectorial membrane , which is attached medially to the organ of Corti .
When the pressure waves from the scala move the basilar membrane , the tectorial membrane slides across the stereocilia .
This bends the stereocilia either toward or away from the tallest member of each array .
When the stereocilia bend toward the tallest member of their array , tension in the protein tethers opens ion channels in the hair cell membrane .
This will depolarize the hair cell membrane , triggering nerve impulses that travel down the afferent nerve fibers attached to the hair cells .
When the stereocilia bend toward the shortest member of their array , the tension on the tethers slackens and the ion channels close .
When no sound is present , and the stereocilia are standing straight , a small amount of tension still exists on the tethers , keeping the membrane potential of the hair cell slightly depolarized .
the University of Michigan WebScope http : //virtualslides.med.umich.edu/Histology/ View Central % 20Nervous % 20System/080a_HISTO_40X.svs/view.apml ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/cochleaMG ) to explore the tissue sample in greater detail .
The basilar membrane is the thin membrane that extends from the central core of the cochlea to the edge .
What is anchored to this membrane so that they can be activated by movement of the fluids within the cochlea ?
at As stated above , a given region of the basilar membrane will only move if the incoming sound is at a specific frequency .
Because the tectorial membrane only moves where the basilar membrane moves , the hair cells in this region will also only respond to sounds of this specific frequency .
Therefore , as the frequency of a sound changes , different hair cells are activated all along the basilar membrane .
The cochlea encodes auditory stimuli for frequencies between 20 and 20,000 Hz , which is the range of sound that human ears can detect .
The unit of Hertz measures the frequency of sound waves in terms of cycles produced per second .
Frequencies as low as 20 Hz are detected by hair cells at the apex , or tip , of the cochlea .
Frequencies in the higher ranges of 20 KHz are encoded by hair cells at the base of the cochlea , close to the round and oval windows ( Figure 14.10 ) .
Most auditory stimuli contain a mixture of sounds at a variety of frequencies and intensities ( represented by the amplitude of the sound wave ) .
The hair cells along the length of the cochlear duct , which are each sensitive to a particular frequency , allow the cochlea to separate auditory stimuli by frequency , just as a prism separates visible light into its component colors .
Watch this video ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/ear1 ) to learn more about how the structures of the ear convert sound waves into a neural signal by moving the “ hairs , ” or stereocilia , of the cochlear duct .
Specific locations along the length of the duct encode specific frequencies , or pitches .
The brain interprets the meaning of the sounds we hear as music , speech , noise , etc .
Which ear structures are responsible for the amplification and transfer of sound from the external ear to the inner ear ?
Watch this animation ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/ear2 ) to learn more about the inner ear and to see the cochlea unroll , with the base at the back of the image and the apex at the front .
Specific wavelengths of sound cause specific regions of the basilar membrane to vibrate , much like the keys of a piano produce sound at different frequencies .
Based on the animation , where do frequencies—from high to low pitches—cause activity in the hair cells within the cochlear duct ?
Along with audition , the inner ear is responsible for encoding information about equilibrium , the sense of balance .
A similar mechanoreceptor—a hair cell with stereocilia—senses head position , head movement , and whether our bodies are in motion .
These cells are located within the vestibule of the inner ear .
Head position is sensed by the utricle and saccule , whereas head movement is sensed by the semicircular canals .
The neural signals generated in the vestibular ganglion are transmitted through the vestibulocochlear nerve to the brain stem and cerebellum .
The utricle and saccule are both largely composed of macula tissue ( plural = maculae ) .
The macula is composed of hair cells surrounded by support cells .
The stereocilia of the hair cells extend into a viscous gel called the otolithic membrane ( Figure 14.11 ) .
On top of the otolithic membrane is a layer of calcium carbonate crystals , called otoliths .
The otoliths essentially make the otolithic membrane top-heavy .
The otolithic membrane moves separately from the macula in response to head movements .
Tilting the head causes the otolithic membrane to slide over the macula in the direction of gravity .
The moving otolithic membrane , in turn , bends the sterocilia , causing some hair cells to depolarize as others hyperpolarize .
The exact position of the head is interpreted by the brain based on the pattern of hair-cell depolarization .
The semicircular canals are three ring-like extensions of the vestibule .
One is oriented in the horizontal plane , whereas the other two are oriented in the vertical plane .
The anterior and posterior vertical canals are oriented at approximately 45 degrees relative to the sagittal plane ( Figure 14.12 ) .
The base of each semicircular canal , where it meets with the vestibule , connects to an enlarged region known as the ampulla .
The ampulla contains the hair cells that respond to rotational movement , such as turning the head while saying “ no. ” The stereocilia of these hair cells extend into the cupula , a membrane that attaches to the top of the ampulla .
As the head rotates in a plane parallel to the semicircular canal , the fluid lags , deflecting the cupula in the direction opposite to the head movement .
The semicircular canals contain several ampullae , with some oriented horizontally and others oriented vertically .
By comparing the relative movements of both the horizontal and vertical ampullae , the vestibular system can detect the direction of most head movements within threedimensional ( 3-D ) space .
Somatosensation is considered a general sense , as opposed to the special senses discussed in this section .
Somatosensation is the group of sensory modalities that are associated with touch , proprioception , and interoception .
These modalities include pressure , vibration , light touch , tickle , itch , temperature , pain , proprioception , and kinesthesia .
This means that its receptors are not associated with a specialized organ , but are instead spread throughout the body in a variety of organs .
Many of the somatosensory receptors are located in the skin , but receptors are also found in muscles , tendons , joint capsules , ligaments , and in the walls of visceral organs .
Two types of somatosensory signals that are transduced by free nerve endings are pain and temperature .
These two modalities use thermoreceptors and nociceptors to transduce temperature and pain stimuli , respectively .
Temperature receptors are stimulated when local temperatures differ from body temperature .
Some thermoreceptors are sensitive to just cold and others to just heat .
Nociception is the sensation of potentially damaging stimuli .
Mechanical , chemical , or thermal stimuli beyond a set threshold will elicit painful sensations .
Stressed or damaged tissues release chemicals that activate receptor proteins in the nociceptors .
For example , the sensation of heat associated with spicy foods involves capsaicin , the active molecule in hot peppers .
Capsaicin molecules bind to a transmembrane ion channel in nociceptors that is sensitive to temperatures above 37°C .
The dynamics of capsaicin binding with this transmembrane ion channel is unusual in that the molecule remains bound for a long time .
Because of this , it will decrease the ability of other stimuli to elicit pain sensations through the activated nociceptor .
For this reason , capsaicin can be used as a topical analgesic , such as in products such as Icy Hot™ .
If you drag your finger across a textured surface , the skin of your finger will vibrate .
Such low frequency vibrations are sensed by mechanoreceptors called Merkel cells , also known as type I cutaneous mechanoreceptors .
Merkel cells are located in the stratum basale of the epidermis .
Deep pressure and vibration is transduced by lamellated ( Pacinian ) corpuscles , which are receptors with encapsulated endings found deep in the dermis , or subcutaneous tissue .
Light touch is transduced by the encapsulated endings known as tactile ( Meissner ) corpuscles .
Follicles are also wrapped in a plexus of nerve endings known as the hair follicle plexus .
These nerve endings detect the movement of hair at the surface of the skin , such as when an insect may be walking along the skin .
Stretching of the skin is transduced by stretch receptors known as bulbous corpuscles .
Bulbous corpuscles are also known as Ruffini corpuscles , or type II cutaneous mechanoreceptors .
Other somatosensory receptors are found in the joints and muscles .
Stretch receptors monitor the stretching of tendons , muscles , and the components of joints .
For example , have you ever stretched your muscles before or after exercise and noticed that you can only stretch so far before your muscles spasm back to a less stretched state ?
This spasm is a reflex that is initiated by stretch receptors to avoid muscle tearing .
Such stretch receptors can also prevent over-contraction of a muscle .
In skeletal muscle tissue , these stretch receptors are called muscle spindles .
Golgi tendon organs similarly transduce the stretch levels of tendons .
Bulbous corpuscles are also present in joint capsules , where they measure stretch in the components of the skeletal system within the joint .
The types of nerve endings , their locations , and the stimuli they transduce are presented in Table 14.1 .
Vision is the special sense of sight that is based on the transduction of light stimuli received through the eyes .
The eyes are located within either orbit in the skull .
The bony orbits surround the eyeballs , protecting them and anchoring the soft tissues of the eye ( Figure 14.13 ) .
The eyelids , with lashes at their leading edges , help to protect the eye from abrasions by blocking particles that may land on the surface of the eye .
The inner surface of each lid is a thin membrane known as the palpebral conjunctiva .
The conjunctiva extends over the white areas of the eye ( the sclera ) , connecting the eyelids to the eyeball .
Tears are produced by the lacrimal gland , located beneath the lateral edges of the nose .
Tears produced by this gland flow through the lacrimal duct to the medial corner of the eye , where the tears flow over the conjunctiva , washing away foreign particles .
Movement of the eye within the orbit is accomplished by the contraction of six extraocular muscles that originate from the bones of the orbit and insert into the surface of the eyeball ( Figure 14.14 ) .
Four of the muscles are arranged at the cardinal points around the eye and are named for those locations .
They are the superior rectus , medial rectus , inferior rectus , and lateral rectus .
When each of these muscles contract , the eye to moves toward the contracting muscle .
For example , when the superior rectus contracts , the eye rotates to look up .
The superior oblique originates at the posterior orbit , near the origin of the four rectus muscles .
However , the tendon of the oblique muscles threads through a pulley-like piece of cartilage known as the trochlea .
The tendon inserts obliquely into the superior surface of the eye .
The angle of the tendon through the trochlea means that contraction of the superior oblique rotates the eye medially .
The inferior oblique muscle originates from the floor of the orbit and inserts into the inferolateral surface of the eye .
When it contracts , it laterally rotates the eye , in opposition to the superior oblique .
Rotation of the eye by the two oblique muscles is necessary because the eye is not perfectly aligned on the sagittal plane .
When the eye looks up or down , the eye must also rotate slightly to compensate for the superior rectus pulling at approximately a 20-degree angle , rather than straight up .
The same is true for the inferior rectus , which is compensated by contraction of the inferior oblique .
A seventh muscle in the orbit is the levator palpebrae superioris , which is responsible for elevating and retracting the upper eyelid , a movement that usually occurs in concert with elevation of the eye by the superior rectus ( see Figure 14.13 ) .
The extraocular muscles are innervated by three cranial nerves .
The lateral rectus , which causes abduction of the eye , is innervated by the abducens nerve .
The superior oblique is innervated by the trochlear nerve .
All of the other muscles are innervated by the oculomotor nerve , as is the levator palpebrae superioris .
The motor nuclei of these cranial nerves connect to the brain stem , which coordinates eye movements .
The eye itself is a hollow sphere composed of three layers of tissue .
The outermost layer is the fibrous tunic , which includes the white sclera and clear cornea .
The sclera accounts for five sixths of the surface of the eye , most of which is not visible , though humans are unique compared with many other species in having so much of the “ white of the eye ” visible ( Figure 14.15 ) .
The transparent cornea covers the anterior tip of the eye and allows light to enter the eye .
The middle layer of the eye is the vascular tunic , which is mostly composed of the choroid , ciliary body , and iris .
The choroid is a layer of highly vascularized connective tissue that provides a blood supply to the eyeball .
The choroid is posterior to the ciliary body , a muscular structure that is attached to the lens by suspensory ligaments , or zonule fibers .
These two structures bend the lens , allowing it to focus light on the back of the eye .
Overlaying the ciliary body , and visible in the anterior eye , is the iris —the colored part of the eye .
The iris is a smooth muscle that opens or closes the pupil , which is the hole at the center of the eye that allows light to enter .
The iris constricts the pupil in response to bright light and dilates the pupil in response to dim light .
The innermost layer of the eye is the neural tunic , or retina , which contains the nervous tissue responsible for photoreception .
The eye is also divided into two cavities : the anterior cavity and the posterior cavity .
The anterior cavity is the space between the cornea and lens , including the iris and ciliary body .
It is filled with a watery fluid called the aqueous humor .
The posterior cavity is the space behind the lens that extends to the posterior side of the interior eyeball , where the retina is located .
The posterior cavity is filled with a more viscous fluid called the vitreous humor .
The retina is composed of several layers and contains specialized cells for the initial processing of visual stimuli .
The photoreceptors ( rods and cones ) change their membrane potential when stimulated by light energy .
The change in membrane potential alters the amount of neurotransmitter that the photoreceptor cells release onto bipolar cells in the outer synaptic layer .
It is the bipolar cell in the retina that connects a photoreceptor to a retinal ganglion cell ( RGC ) in the inner synaptic layer .
There , amacrine cells additionally contribute to retinal processing before an action potential is produced by the RGC .
The axons of RGCs , which lie at the innermost layer of the retina , collect at the optic disc and leave the eye as the optic nerve ( see Figure 14.15 ) .
Because these axons pass through the retina , there are no photoreceptors at the very back of the eye , where the optic nerve begins .
This creates a “ blind spot ” in the retina , and a corresponding blind spot in our visual field .
Note that the photoreceptors in the retina ( rods and cones ) are located behind the axons , RGCs , bipolar cells , and retinal blood vessels .
A significant amount of light is absorbed by these structures before the light reaches the photoreceptor cells .
However , at the exact center of the retina is a small area known as the fovea .
At the fovea , the retina lacks the supporting cells and blood vessels , and only contains photoreceptors .
Therefore , visual acuity , or the sharpness of vision , is greatest at the fovea .
This is because the fovea is where the least amount of incoming light is absorbed by other retinal structures ( see Figure 14.15 ) .
As one moves in either direction from this central point of the retina , visual acuity drops significantly .
In addition , each photoreceptor cell of the fovea is connected to a single RGC .
Therefore , this RGC does not have to integrate inputs from multiple photoreceptors , which reduces the accuracy of visual transduction .
Toward the edges of the retina , several photoreceptors converge on RGCs ( through the bipolar cells ) up to a ratio of 50 to 1 .
The difference in visual acuity between the fovea and peripheral retina is easily evidenced by looking directly at a word in the middle of this paragraph .
The visual stimulus in the middle of the field of view falls on the fovea and is in the sharpest focus .
Without moving your eyes off that word , notice that words at the beginning or end of the paragraph are not in focus .
The images in your peripheral vision are focused by the peripheral retina , and have vague , blurry edges and words that are not as clearly identified .
As a result , a large part of the neural function of the eyes is concerned with moving the eyes and head so that important visual stimuli are centered on the fovea .
Light falling on the retina causes chemical changes to pigment molecules in the photoreceptors , ultimately leading to a change in the activity of the RGCs .
Photoreceptor cells have two parts , the inner segment and the outer segment ( Figure 14.16 ) .
The inner segment contains the nucleus and other common organelles of a cell , whereas the outer segment is a specialized region in which photoreception takes place .
There are two types of photoreceptors—rods and cones—which differ in the shape of their outer segment .
The rod-shaped outer segments of the rod photoreceptor contain a stack of membrane-bound discs that contain the photosensitive pigment rhodopsin .
The cone-shaped outer segments of the cone photoreceptor contain their photosensitive pigments in infoldings of the cell membrane .
There are three cone photopigments , called opsins , which are each sensitive to a particular wavelength of light .
The wavelength of visible light determines its color .
The pigments in human eyes are specialized in perceiving three different primary colors : red , green , and blue .
At the molecular level , visual stimuli cause changes in the photopigment molecule that lead to changes in membrane potential of the photoreceptor cell .
A single unit of light is called a photon , which is described in physics as a packet of energy with properties of both a particle and a wave .
The energy of a photon is represented by its wavelength , with each wavelength of visible light corresponding to a particular color .
Visible light is electromagnetic radiation with a wavelength between 380 and 720 nm .
Wavelengths of electromagnetic radiation longer than 720 nm fall into the infrared range , whereas wavelengths shorter than 380 nm fall into the ultraviolet range .
Light with a wavelength of 380 nm is blue whereas light with a wavelength of 720 nm is dark red .
All other colors fall between red and blue at various points along the wavelength scale .
Opsin pigments are actually transmembrane proteins that contain a cofactor known as retinal .
Retinal is a hydrocarbon molecule related to vitamin A .
When a photon hits retinal , the long hydrocarbon chain of the molecule is biochemically altered .
Specifically , photons cause some of the double-bonded carbons within the chain to switch from a cis to a trans conformation .
This process is called photoisomerization .
Before interacting with a photon , retinal ’ s flexible double-bonded carbons are in the cis conformation .
This molecule is referred to as 11cis -retinal .
A photon interacting with the molecule causes the flexible double-bonded carbons to change to the trans conformation , forming alltrans -retinal , which has a straight hydrocarbon chain ( Figure 14.17 ) .
The shape change of retinal in the photoreceptors initiates visual transduction in the retina .
Activation of retinal and the opsin proteins result in activation of a G protein .
The G protein changes the membrane potential of the photoreceptor cell , which then releases less neurotransmitter into the outer synaptic layer of the retina .
Until the retinal molecule is changed back to the 11cis -retinal shape , the opsin can not respond to light energy , which is called bleaching .
When a large group of photopigments is bleached , the retina will send information as if opposing visual information is being perceived .
After a bright flash of light , afterimages are usually seen in negative .
The photoisomerization is reversed by a series of enzymatic changes so that the retinal responds to more light energy .
The opsins are sensitive to limited wavelengths of light .
Rhodopsin , the photopigment in rods , is most sensitive to light at a wavelength of 498 nm .
The three color opsins have peak sensitivities of 564 nm , 534 nm , and 420 nm corresponding roughly to the primary colors of red , green , and blue ( Figure 14.18 ) .
The absorbance of rhodopsin in the rods is much more sensitive than in the cone opsins ; specifically , rods are sensitive to vision in low light conditions , and cones are sensitive to brighter conditions .
In normal sunlight , rhodopsin will be constantly bleached while the cones are active .
In a darkened room , there is not enough light to activate cone opsins , and vision is entirely dependent on rods .
Rods are so sensitive to light that a single photon can result in an action potential from a rod ’ s corresponding RGC .
The three types of cone opsins , being sensitive to different wavelengths of light , provide us with color vision .
By comparing the activity of the three different cones , the brain can extract color information from visual stimuli .
For example , a bright blue light that has a wavelength of approximately 450 nm would activate the “ red ” cones minimally , the “ green ” cones marginally , and the “ blue ” cones predominantly .
The relative activation of the three different cones is calculated by the brain , which perceives the color as blue .
However , cones can not react to low-intensity light , and rods do not sense the color of light .
Therefore , our low-light vision is—in essence—in grayscale .
In other words , in a dark room , everything appears as a shade of gray .
If you think that you can see colors in the dark , it is most likely because your brain knows what color something is and is relying on that memory .
Watch this video ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/occipital ) to learn more about a transverse section through the brain that depicts the visual pathway from the eye to the occipital cortex .
The first half of the pathway is the projection from the RGCs through the optic nerve to the lateral geniculate nucleus in the thalamus on either side .
This first fiber in the pathway synapses on a thalamic cell that then projects to the visual cortex in the occipital lobe where “ seeing , ” or visual perception , takes place .
This video gives an abbreviated overview of the visual system by concentrating on the pathway from the eyes to the occipital lobe .
The video makes the statement ( at 0:45 ) that “ specialized cells in the retina called ganglion cells convert the light rays into electrical signals. ” What aspect of retinal processing is simplified by that statement ?
Explain your answer .
Once any sensory cell transduces a stimulus into a nerve impulse , that impulse has to travel along axons to reach the CNS .
In many of the special senses , the axons leaving the sensory receptors have a topographical arrangement , meaning that the location of the sensory receptor relates to the location of the axon in the nerve .
For example , in the retina , axons from RGCs in the fovea are located at the center of the optic nerve , where they are surrounded by axons from the more peripheral RGCs .
Generally , spinal nerves contain afferent axons from sensory receptors in the periphery , such as from the skin , mixed with efferent axons travelling to the muscles or other effector organs .
As the spinal nerve nears the spinal cord , it splits into dorsal and ventral roots .
The dorsal root contains only the axons of sensory neurons , whereas the ventral roots contain only the axons of the motor neurons .
Some of the branches will synapse with local neurons in the dorsal root ganglion , posterior ( dorsal ) horn , or even the anterior ( ventral ) horn , at the level of the spinal cord where they enter .
Other branches will travel a short distance up or down the spine to interact with neurons at other levels of the spinal cord .
A branch may also turn into the posterior ( dorsal ) column of the white matter to connect with the brain .
For the sake of convenience , we will use the terms ventral and dorsal in reference to structures within the spinal cord that are part of these pathways .
This will help to underscore the relationships between the different components .
Typically , spinal nerve systems that connect to the brain are contralateral , in that the right side of the body is connected to the left side of the brain and the left side of the body to the right side of the brain .
Cranial nerves convey specific sensory information from the head and neck directly to the brain .
For sensations below the neck , the right side of the body is connected to the left side of the brain and the left side of the body to the right side of the brain .
Whereas spinal information is contralateral , cranial nerve systems are mostly ipsilateral , meaning that a cranial nerve on the right side of the head is connected to the right side of the brain .
Some cranial nerves contain only sensory axons , such as the olfactory , optic , and vestibulocochlear nerves .
Other cranial nerves contain both sensory and motor axons , including the trigeminal , facial , glossopharyngeal , and vagus nerves ( however , the vagus nerve is not associated with the somatic nervous system ) .
The general senses of somatosensation for the face travel through the trigeminal system .
A simple case is a reflex caused by a synapse between a dorsal sensory neuron axon and a motor neuron in the ventral horn .
More complex arrangements are possible to integrate peripheral sensory information with higher processes .
The important regions of the CNS that play a role in somatic processes can be separated into the spinal cord brain stem , diencephalon , cerebral cortex , and subcortical structures .
A sensory pathway that carries peripheral sensations to the brain is referred to as an ascending pathway , or ascending tract .
The various sensory modalities each follow specific pathways through the CNS .
Tactile and other somatosensory stimuli activate receptors in the skin , muscles , tendons , and joints throughout the entire body .
However , the somatosensory pathways are divided into two separate systems on the basis of the location of the receptor neurons .
Somatosensory stimuli from below the neck pass along the sensory pathways of the spinal cord , whereas somatosensory stimuli from the head and neck travel through the cranial nerves—specifically , the trigeminal system .
The dorsal column system ( sometimes referred to as the dorsal column–medial lemniscus ) and the spinothalamic tract are two major pathways that bring sensory information to the brain ( Figure 14.19 ) .
The sensory pathways in each of these systems are composed of three successive neurons .
The dorsal column system begins with the axon of a dorsal root ganglion neuron entering the dorsal root and joining the dorsal column white matter in the spinal cord .
As axons of this pathway enter the dorsal column , they take on a positional arrangement so that axons from lower levels of the body position themselves medially , whereas axons from upper levels of the body position themselves laterally .
The dorsal column is separated into two component tracts , the fasciculus gracilis that contains axons from the legs and lower body , and the fasciculus cuneatus that contains axons from the upper body and arms .
The axons in the dorsal column terminate in the nuclei of the medulla , where each synapses with the second neuron in their respective pathway .
The nucleus gracilis is the target of fibers in the fasciculus gracilis , whereas the nucleus cuneatus is the target of fibers in the fasciculus cuneatus .
The second neuron in the system projects from one of the two nuclei and then decussates , or crosses the midline of the medulla .
These axons then continue to ascend the brain stem as a bundle called the medial lemniscus .
These axons terminate in the thalamus , where each synapses with the third neuron in their respective pathway .
The third neuron in the system projects its axons to the postcentral gyrus of the cerebral cortex , where somatosensory stimuli are initially processed and the conscious perception of the stimulus occurs .
The spinothalamic tract also begins with neurons in a dorsal root ganglion .
These neurons extend their axons to the dorsal horn , where they synapse with the second neuron in their respective pathway .
The name “ spinothalamic ” comes from this second neuron , which has its cell body in the spinal cord gray matter and connects to the thalamus .
Axons from these second neurons then decussate within the spinal cord and ascend to the brain and enter the thalamus , where each synapses with the third neuron in its respective pathway .
The neurons in the thalamus then project their axons to the spinothalamic tract , which synapses in the postcentral gyrus of the cerebral cortex .
These two systems are similar in that they both begin with dorsal root ganglion cells , as with most general sensory information .
The dorsal column system is primarily responsible for touch sensations and proprioception , whereas the spinothalamic tract pathway is primarily responsible for pain and temperature sensations .
Another similarity is that the second neurons in both of these pathways are contralateral , because they project across the midline to the other side of the brain or spinal cord .
In the dorsal column system , this decussation takes place in the brain stem ; in the spinothalamic pathway , it takes place in the spinal cord at the same spinal cord level at which the information entered .
The third neurons in the two pathways are essentially the same .
In both , the second neuron synapses in the thalamus , and the thalamic neuron projects to the somatosensory cortex .
The trigeminal pathway carries somatosensory information from the face , head , mouth , and nasal cavity .
As with the previously discussed nerve tracts , the sensory pathways of the trigeminal pathway each involve three successive neurons .
First , axons from the trigeminal ganglion enter the brain stem at the level of the pons .
These axons project to one of three locations .
The spinal trigeminal nucleus of the medulla receives information similar to that carried by spinothalamic tract , such as pain and temperature sensations .
Other axons go to either the chief sensory nucleus in the pons or the mesencephalic nuclei in the midbrain .
These nuclei receive information like that carried by the dorsal column system , such as touch , pressure , vibration , and proprioception .
Axons from the second neuron decussate and ascend to the thalamus along the trigeminothalamic tract .
In the thalamus , each axon synapses with the third neuron in its respective pathway .
Axons from the third neuron then project from the thalamus to the primary somatosensory cortex of the cerebrum .
The sensory pathway for gustation travels along the facial and glossopharyngeal cranial nerves , which synapse with neurons of the solitary nucleus in the brain stem .
Axons from the solitary nucleus then project to the ventral posterior nucleus of the thalamus .
Finally , axons from the ventral posterior nucleus project to the gustatory cortex of the cerebral cortex , where taste is processed and consciously perceived .
The sensory pathway for audition travels along the vestibulocochlear nerve , which synapses with neurons in the cochlear nuclei of the superior medulla .
Within the brain stem , input from either ear is combined to extract location information from the auditory stimuli .
Whereas the initial auditory stimuli received at the cochlea strictly represent the frequency—or pitch—of the stimuli , the locations of sounds can be determined by comparing information arriving at both ears .
Sound localization is a feature of central processing in the auditory nuclei of the brain stem .
Sound localization is achieved by the brain calculating the interaural time difference and the interaural intensity difference .
A sound originating from a specific location will arrive at each ear at different times , unless the sound is directly in front of the listener .
If the sound source is slightly to the left of the listener , the sound will arrive at the left ear microseconds before it arrives at the right ear ( Figure 14.20 ) .
This time difference is an example of an interaural time difference .
Also , the sound will be slightly louder in the left ear than in the right ear because some of the sound waves reaching the opposite ear are blocked by the head .
This is an example of an interaural intensity difference .
Auditory processing continues on to a nucleus in the midbrain called the inferior colliculus .
Axons from the inferior colliculus project to two locations , the thalamus and the superior colliculus .
The medial geniculate nucleus of the thalamus receives the auditory information and then projects that information to the auditory cortex in the temporal lobe of the cerebral cortex .
The superior colliculus receives input from the visual and somatosensory systems , as well as the ears , to initiate stimulation of the muscles that turn the head and neck toward the auditory stimulus .
Balance is coordinated through the vestibular system , the nerves of which are composed of axons from the vestibular ganglion that carries information from the utricle , saccule , and semicircular canals .
The system contributes to controlling head and neck movements in response to vestibular signals .
An important function of the vestibular system is coordinating eye and head movements to maintain visual attention .
Most of the axons terminate in the vestibular nuclei of the medulla .
Some axons project from the vestibular ganglion directly to the cerebellum , with no intervening synapse in the vestibular nuclei .
The cerebellum is primarily responsible for initiating movements on the basis of equilibrium information .
Neurons in the vestibular nuclei project their axons to targets in the brain stem .
One target is the reticular formation , which influences respiratory and cardiovascular functions in relation to body movements .
A second target of the axons of neurons in the vestibular nuclei is the spinal cord , which initiates the spinal reflexes involved with posture and balance .
To assist the visual system , fibers of the vestibular nuclei project to the oculomotor , trochlear , and abducens nuclei to influence signals sent along the cranial nerves .
These connections constitute the pathway of the vestibulo-ocular reflex ( VOR ) , which compensates for head and body movement by stabilizing images on the retina ( Figure 14.21 ) .
Finally , the vestibular nuclei project to the thalamus to join the proprioceptive pathway of the dorsal column system , allowing conscious perception of equilibrium .
The connections of the optic nerve are more complicated than those of other cranial nerves .
Instead of the connections being between each eye and the brain , visual information is segregated between the left and right sides of the visual field .
In addition , some of the information from one side of the visual field projects to the opposite side of the brain .
Within each eye , the axons projecting from the medial side of the retina decussate at the optic chiasm .
For example , the axons from the medial retina of the left eye cross over to the right side of the brain at the optic chiasm .
However , within each eye , the axons projecting from the lateral side of the retina do not decussate .
For example , the axons from the lateral retina of the right eye project back to the right side of the brain .
Therefore the left field of view of each eye is processed on the right side of the brain , whereas the right field of view of each eye is processed on the left side of the brain ( Figure 14.22 ) .
A unique clinical presentation that relates to this anatomic arrangement is the loss of lateral peripheral vision , known as bilateral hemianopia .
This is different from “ tunnel vision ” because the superior and inferior peripheral fields are not lost .
Visual field deficits can be disturbing for a patient , but in this case , the cause is not within the visual system itself .
A growth of the pituitary gland presses against the optic chiasm and interferes with signal transmission .
However , the axons projecting to the same side of the brain are unaffected .
Therefore , the patient loses the outermost areas of their field of vision and can not see objects to their right and left .
Extending from the optic chiasm , the axons of the visual system are referred to as the optic tract instead of the optic nerve .
The optic tract has three major targets , two in the diencephalon and one in the midbrain .
The connection between the eyes and diencephalon is demonstrated during development , in which the neural tissue of the retina differentiates from that of the diencephalon by the growth of the secondary vesicles .
The connections of the retina into the CNS are a holdover from this developmental association .
The majority of the connections of the optic tract are to the thalamus—specifically , the lateral geniculate nucleus .
Axons from this nucleus then project to the visual cortex of the cerebrum , located in the occipital lobe .
Another target of the optic tract is the superior colliculus .
In addition , a very small number of RGC axons project from the optic chiasm to the suprachiasmatic nucleus of the hypothalamus .
These RGCs are photosensitive , in that they respond to the presence or absence of light .
Unlike the photoreceptors , however , these photosensitive RGCs can not be used to perceive images .
By simply responding to the absence or presence of light , these RGCs can send information about day length .
The perceived proportion of sunlight to darkness establishes the circadian rhythm of our bodies , allowing certain physiological events to occur at approximately the same time every day .
The diencephalon is beneath the cerebrum and includes the thalamus and hypothalamus .
In the somatic nervous system , the thalamus is an important relay for communication between the cerebrum and the rest of the nervous system .
The hypothalamus has both somatic and autonomic functions .
In addition , the hypothalamus communicates with the limbic system , which controls emotions and memory functions .
Sensory input to the thalamus comes from most of the special senses and ascending somatosensory tracts .
Each sensory system is relayed through a particular nucleus in the thalamus .
The thalamus is a required transfer point for most sensory tracts that reach the cerebral cortex , where conscious sensory perception begins .
The one exception to this rule is the olfactory system .
The olfactory tract axons from the olfactory bulb project directly to the cerebral cortex , along with the limbic system and hypothalamus .
The thalamus is a collection of several nuclei that can be categorized into three anatomical groups .
White matter running through the thalamus defines the three major regions of the thalamus , which are an anterior nucleus , a medial nucleus , and a lateral group of nuclei .
The anterior nucleus serves as a relay between the hypothalamus and the emotion and memoryproducing limbic system .
The medial nuclei serve as a relay for information from the limbic system and basal ganglia to the cerebral cortex .
This allows memory creation during learning , but also determines alertness .
The special and somatic senses connect to the lateral nuclei , where their information is relayed to the appropriate sensory cortex of the cerebrum .
As described earlier , many of the sensory axons are positioned in the same way as their corresponding receptor cells in the body .
This allows identification of the position of a stimulus on the basis of which receptor cells are sending information .
The cerebral cortex also maintains this sensory topography in the particular areas of the cortex that correspond to the position of the receptor cells .
The somatosensory cortex provides an example in which , in essence , the locations of the somatosensory receptors in the body are mapped onto the somatosensory cortex .
This mapping is often depicted using a sensory homunculus ( Figure 14.23 ) .
The term homunculus comes from the Latin word for “ little man ” and refers to a map of the human body that is laid across a portion of the cerebral cortex .
In the somatosensory cortex , the external genitals , feet , and lower legs are represented on the medial face of the gyrus within the longitudinal fissure .
As the gyrus curves out of the fissure and along the surface of the parietal lobe , the body map continues through the thighs , hips , trunk , shoulders , arms , and hands .
The head and face are just lateral to the fingers as the gyrus approaches the lateral sulcus .
The representation of the body in this topographical map is medial to lateral from the lower to upper body .
It is a continuation of the topographical arrangement seen in the dorsal column system , where axons from the lower body are carried in the fasciculus gracilis , whereas axons from the upper body are carried in the fasciculus cuneatus .
As the dorsal column system continues into the medial lemniscus , these relationships are maintained .
Also , the head and neck axons running from the trigeminal nuclei to the thalamus run adjacent to the upper body fibers .
The connections through the thalamus maintain topography such that the anatomic information is preserved .
Note that this correspondence does not result in a perfectly miniature scale version of the body , but rather exaggerates the more sensitive areas of the body , such as the fingers and lower face .
Less sensitive areas of the body , such as the shoulders and back , are mapped to smaller areas on the cortex .
Likewise , the topographic relationship between the retina and the visual cortex is maintained throughout the visual pathway .
The visual field is projected onto the two retinae , as described above , with sorting at the optic chiasm .
The right peripheral visual field falls on the medial portion of the right retina and the lateral portion of the left retina .
The right medial retina then projects across the midline through the optic chiasm .
This results in the right visual field being processed in the left visual cortex .
Likewise , the left visual field is processed in the right visual cortex ( see Figure 14.22 ) .
Though the chiasm is helping to sort right and left visual information , superior and inferior visual information is maintained topographically in the visual pathway .
Light from the superior visual field falls on the inferior retina , and light from the inferior visual field falls on the superior retina .
This topography is maintained such that the superior region of the visual cortex processes the inferior visual field and vice versa .
Therefore , the visual field information is inverted and reversed as it enters the visual cortex—up is down , and left is right .
However , the cortex processes the visual information such that the final conscious perception of the visual field is correct .
The topographic relationship is evident in that information from the foveal region of the retina is processed in the center of the primary visual cortex .
Information from the peripheral regions of the retina are correspondingly processed toward the edges of the visual cortex .
Similar to the exaggerations in the sensory homunculus of the somatosensory cortex , the foveal-processing area of the visual cortex is disproportionately larger than the areas processing peripheral vision .
In an experiment performed in the 1960s , subjects wore prism glasses so that the visual field was inverted before reaching the eye .
On the first day of the experiment , subjects would duck when walking up to a table , thinking it was suspended from the ceiling .
However , after a few days of acclimation , the subjects behaved as if everything were represented correctly .
Therefore , the visual cortex is somewhat flexible in adapting to the information it receives from our eyes ( Figure 14.24 ) .
The cortex has been described as having specific regions that are responsible for processing specific information ; there is the visual cortex , somatosensory cortex , gustatory cortex , etc .
However , our experience of these senses is not divided .
Instead , we experience what can be referred to as a seamless percept .
Our perceptions of the various sensory modalities—though distinct in their content—are integrated by the brain so that we experience the world as a continuous whole .
In the cerebral cortex , sensory processing begins at the primary sensory cortex , then proceeds to an association area , and finally , into a multimodal integration area .
For example , the visual pathway projects from the retinae through the thalamus to the primary visual cortex in the occipital lobe .
This area is primarily in the medial wall within the longitudinal fissure .
Here , visual stimuli begin to be recognized as basic shapes .
Edges of objects are recognized and built into more complex shapes .
Also , inputs from both eyes are compared to extract depth information .
Because of the overlapping field of view between the two eyes , the brain can begin to estimate the distance of stimuli based on binocular depth cues .
Watch this video ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/l_3-D1 ) to learn more about how the brain perceives 3-D motion .
Similar to how retinal disparity offers 3-D moviegoers a way to extract 3-D information from the two-dimensional visual field projected onto the retina , the brain can extract information about movement in space by comparing what the two eyes see .
If movement of a visual stimulus is leftward in one eye and rightward in the opposite eye , the brain interprets this as movement toward ( or away ) from the face along the midline .
If both eyes see an object moving in the same direction , but at different rates , what would that mean for spatial movement ?
The visual field is projected onto the retinal surface , where photoreceptors transduce light energy into neural signals for the brain to interpret .
The retina is a two-dimensional surface , so it does not encode three-dimensional information .
However , we can perceive depth .
How is that accomplished ?
Two ways in which we can extract depth information from the two-dimensional retinal signal are based on monocular cues and binocular cues , respectively .
Monocular depth cues are those that are the result of information within the twodimensional visual field .
One object that overlaps another object has to be in front .
Relative size differences are also a cue .
For example , if a basketball appears larger than the basket , then the basket must be further away .
On the basis of experience , we can estimate how far away the basket is .
Binocular depth cues compare information represented in the two retinae because they do not see the visual field exactly the same .
The centers of the two eyes are separated by a small distance , which is approximately 6 to 6.5 cm in most people .
Because of this offset , visual stimuli do not fall on exactly the same spot on both retinae unless we are fixated directly on them and they fall on the fovea of each retina .
All other objects in the visual field , either closer or farther away than the fixated object , will fall on different spots on the retina .
When vision is fixed on an object in space , closer objects will fall on the lateral retina of each eye , and more distant objects will fall on the medial retina of either eye ( Figure 14.25 ) .
This is easily observed by holding a finger up in front of your face as you look at a more distant object .
You will see two images of your finger that represent the two disparate images that are falling on either retina .
These depth cues , both monocular and binocular , can be exploited to make the brain think there are three dimensions in two-dimensional information .
This is the basis of 3-D movies .
The projected image on the screen is two dimensional , but it has disparate information embedded in it .
The 3-D glasses that are available at the theater filter the information so that only one eye sees one version of what is on the screen , and the other eye sees the other version .
If you take the glasses off , the image on the screen will have varying amounts of blur because both eyes are seeing both layers of information , and the third dimension will not be evident .
Some optical illusions can take advantage of depth cues as well , though those are more often using monocular cues to fool the brain into seeing different parts of the scene as being at different depths .
There are two main regions that surround the primary cortex that are usually referred to as areas V2 and V3 ( the primary visual cortex is area V1 ) .
These surrounding areas are the visual association cortex .
The visual association regions develop more complex visual perceptions by adding color and motion information .
The information processed in these areas is then sent to regions of the temporal and parietal lobes .
Visual processing has two separate streams of processing : one into the temporal lobe and one into the parietal lobe .
These are the ventral and dorsal streams , respectively ( Figure 14.26 ) .
The ventral stream identifies visual stimuli and their significance .
Because the ventral stream uses temporal lobe structures , it begins to interact with the non-visual cortex and may be important in visual stimuli becoming part of memories .
The dorsal stream locates objects in space and helps in guiding movements of the body in response to visual inputs .
The dorsal stream enters the parietal lobe , where it interacts with somatosensory cortical areas that are important for our perception of the body and its movements .
The dorsal stream can then influence frontal lobe activity where motor functions originate .
The failures of sensory perception can be unusual and debilitating .
A particular sensory deficit that inhibits an important social function of humans is prosopagnosia , or face blindness .
The word comes from the Greek words prosopa , that means “ faces , ” and agnosia , that means “ not knowing. ” Some people may feel that they can not recognize people easily by their faces .
However , a person with prosopagnosia can not recognize the most recognizable people in their respective cultures .
They would not recognize the face of a celebrity , an important historical figure , or even a family member like their mother .
They may not even recognize their own face .
Prosopagnosia can be caused by trauma to the brain , or it can be present from birth .
The exact cause of proposagnosia and the reason that it happens to some people is unclear .
A study of the brains of people born with the deficit found that a specific region of the brain , the anterior fusiform gyrus of the temporal lobe , is often underdeveloped .
This region of the brain is concerned with the recognition of visual stimuli and its possible association with memories .
Though the evidence is not yet definitive , this region is likely to be where facial recognition occurs .
Though this can be a devastating condition , people who suffer from it can get by—often by using other cues to recognize the people they see .
Often , the sound of a person ’ s voice , or the presence of unique cues such as distinct facial features ( a mole , for example ) or hair color can help the sufferer recognize a familiar person .
In the video on prosopagnosia provided in this section , a woman is shown having trouble recognizing celebrities , family members , and herself .
In some situations , she can use other cues to help her recognize faces .
The inability to recognize people by their faces is a troublesome problem .
It can be caused by trauma , or it may be inborn .
Watch this video ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/faces ) to learn more about a person who lost the ability to recognize faces as the result of an injury .
She can not recognize the faces of close family members or herself .
What other information can a person suffering from prosopagnosia use to figure out whom they are seeing ?
Somatic senses inform the nervous system about the external environment , but the response to that is through voluntary muscle movement .
The term “ voluntary ” suggests that there is a conscious decision to make a movement .
However , some aspects of the somatic system use voluntary muscles without conscious control .
One example is the ability of our breathing to switch to unconscious control while we are focused on another task .
However , the muscles that are responsible for the basic process of breathing are also utilized for speech , which is entirely voluntary .
Let ’ s start with sensory stimuli that have been registered through receptor cells and the information relayed to the CNS along ascending pathways .
In the cerebral cortex , the initial processing of sensory perception progresses to associative processing and then integration in multimodal areas of cortex .
These levels of processing can lead to the incorporation of sensory perceptions into memory , but more importantly , they lead to a response .
The completion of cortical processing through the primary , associative , and integrative sensory areas initiates a similar progression of motor processing , usually in different cortical areas .
Whereas the sensory cortical areas are located in the occipital , temporal , and parietal lobes , motor functions are largely controlled by the frontal lobe .
The most anterior regions of the frontal lobe—the prefrontal areas—are important for executive functions , which are those cognitive functions that lead to goal-directed behaviors .
These higher cognitive processes include working memory , which has been called a “ mental scratch pad , ” that can help organize and represent information that is not in the immediate environment .
The prefrontal lobe is responsible for aspects of attention , such as inhibiting distracting thoughts and actions so that a person can focus on a goal and direct behavior toward achieving that goal .
The functions of the prefrontal cortex are integral to the personality of an individual , because it is largely responsible for what a person intends to do and how they accomplish those plans .
A famous case of damage to the prefrontal cortex is that of Phineas Gage , dating back to 1848 .
He was a railroad worker who had a metal spike impale his prefrontal cortex ( Figure 14.27 ) .
He survived the accident , but according to second-hand accounts , his personality changed drastically .
Friends described him as no longer acting like himself .
Whereas he was a hardworking , amiable man before the accident , he turned into an irritable , temperamental , and lazy man after the accident .
Many of the accounts of his change may have been inflated in the retelling , and some behavior was likely attributable to alcohol used as a pain medication .
However , the accounts suggest that some aspects of his personality did change .
Also , there is new evidence that though his life changed dramatically , he was able to become a functioning stagecoach driver , suggesting that the brain has the ability to recover even from major trauma such as this .
In generating motor responses , the executive functions of the prefrontal cortex will need to initiate actual movements .
One way to define the prefrontal area is any region of the frontal lobe that does not elicit movement when electrically stimulated .
These are primarily in the anterior part of the frontal lobe .
The regions of the frontal lobe that remain are the regions of the cortex that produce movement .
The prefrontal areas project into the secondary motor cortices , which include the premotor cortex and the supplemental motor area .
Two important regions that assist in planning and coordinating movements are located adjacent to the primary motor cortex .
The premotor cortex is more lateral , whereas the supplemental motor area is more medial and superior .
The premotor area aids in controlling movements of the core muscles to maintain posture during movement , whereas the supplemental motor area is hypothesized to be responsible for planning and coordinating movement .
The supplemental motor area also manages sequential movements that are based on prior experience ( that is , learned movements ) .
Neurons in these areas are most active leading up to the initiation of movement .
For example , these areas might prepare the body for the movements necessary to drive a car in anticipation of a traffic light changing .
Adjacent to these two regions are two specialized motor planning centers .
The frontal eye fields are responsible for moving the eyes in response to visual stimuli .
There are direct connections between the frontal eye fields and the superior colliculus .
Also , anterior to the premotor cortex and primary motor cortex is Broca ’ s area .
This area is responsible for controlling movements of the structures of speech production .
The area is named after a French surgeon and anatomist who studied patients who could not produce speech .
They did not have impairments to understanding speech , only to producing speech sounds , suggesting a damaged or underdeveloped Broca ’ s area .
The primary motor cortex is located in the precentral gyrus of the frontal lobe .
A neurosurgeon , Walter Penfield , described much of the basic understanding of the primary motor cortex by electrically stimulating the surface of the cerebrum .
Penfield would probe the surface of the cortex while the patient was only under local anesthesia so that he could observe responses to the stimulation .
This led to the belief that the precentral gyrus directly stimulated muscle movement .
We now know that the primary motor cortex receives input from several areas that aid in planning movement , and its principle output stimulates spinal cord neurons to stimulate skeletal muscle contraction .
The primary motor cortex is arranged in a similar fashion to the primary somatosensory cortex , in that it has a topographical map of the body , creating a motor homunculus ( see Figure 14.23 ) .
The neurons responsible for musculature in the feet and lower legs are in the medial wall of the precentral gyrus , with the thighs , trunk , and shoulder at the crest of the longitudinal fissure .
The hand and face are in the lateral face of the gyrus .
Also , the relative space allotted for the different regions is exaggerated in muscles that have greater enervation .
The greatest amount of cortical space is given to muscles that perform fine , agile movements , such as the muscles of the fingers and the lower face .
The “ power muscles ” that perform coarser movements , such as the buttock and back muscles , occupy much less space on the motor cortex .
The motor output from the cortex descends into the brain stem and to the spinal cord to control the musculature through motor neurons .
Neurons located in the primary motor cortex , named Betz cells , are large cortical neurons that synapse with lower motor neurons in the brain stem or in the spinal cord .
The two descending pathways travelled by the axons of Betz cells are the corticobulbar tract and the corticospinal tract , respectively .
Both tracts are named for their origin in the cortex and their targets—either the brain stem ( the term “ bulbar ” refers to the brain stem as the bulb , or enlargement , at the top of the spinal cord ) or the spinal cord .
These two descending pathways are responsible for the conscious or voluntary movements of skeletal muscles .
Any motor command from the primary motor cortex is sent down the axons of the Betz cells to activate upper motor neurons in either the cranial motor nuclei or in the ventral horn of the spinal cord .
The axons of the corticobulbar tract are ipsilateral , meaning they project from the cortex to the motor nucleus on the same side of the nervous system .
Conversely , the axons of the corticospinal tract are largely contralateral , meaning that they cross the midline of the brain stem or spinal cord and synapse on the opposite side of the body .
Therefore , the right motor cortex of the cerebrum controls muscles on the left side of the body , and vice versa .
The corticospinal tract descends from the cortex through the deep white matter of the cerebrum .
It then passes between the caudate nucleus and putamen of the basal nuclei as a bundle called the internal capsule .
The tract then passes through the midbrain as the cerebral peduncles , after which it burrows through the pons .
Upon entering the medulla , the tracts make up the large white matter tract referred to as the pyramids ( Figure 14.28 ) .
The defining landmark of the medullaryspinal border is the pyramidal decussation , which is where most of the fibers in the corticospinal tract cross over to the opposite side of the brain .
At this point , the tract separates into two parts , which have control over different domains of the musculature .
The lateral corticospinal tract is composed of the fibers that cross the midline at the pyramidal decussation ( see Figure 14.28 ) .
The axons cross over from the anterior position of the pyramids in the medulla to the lateral column of the spinal cord .
These axons are responsible for controlling appendicular muscles .
This influence over the appendicular muscles means that the lateral corticospinal tract is responsible for moving the muscles of the arms and legs .
The ventral horn in both the lower cervical spinal cord and the lumbar spinal cord both have wider ventral horns , representing the greater number of muscles controlled by these motor neurons .
The cervical enlargement is particularly large because there is greater control over the fine musculature of the upper limbs , particularly of the fingers .
The lumbar enlargement is not as significant in appearance because there is less fine motor control of the lower limbs .
The anterior corticospinal tract is responsible for controlling the muscles of the body trunk ( see Figure 14.28 ) .
These axons do not decussate in the medulla .
Instead , they remain in an anterior position as they descend the brain stem and enter the spinal cord .
These axons then travel to the spinal cord level at which they synapse with a lower motor neuron .
Upon reaching the appropriate level , the axons decussate , entering the ventral horn on the opposite side of the spinal cord from which they entered .
In the ventral horn , these axons synapse with their corresponding lower motor neurons .
The lower motor neurons are located in the medial regions of the ventral horn , because they control the axial muscles of the trunk .
Because movements of the body trunk involve both sides of the body , the anterior corticospinal tract is not entirely contralateral .
Some collateral branches of the tract will project into the ipsilateral ventral horn to control synergistic muscles on that side of the body , or to inhibit antagonistic muscles through interneurons within the ventral horn .
Through the influence of both sides of the body , the anterior corticospinal tract can coordinate postural muscles in broad movements of the body .
These coordinating axons in the anterior corticospinal tract are often considered bilateral , as they are both ipsilateral and contralateral .
Watch this video ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/motorpathway ) to learn more about the descending motor pathway for the somatic nervous system .
The autonomic connections are mentioned , which are covered in another chapter .
From this brief video , only some of the descending motor pathway of the somatic nervous system is described .
Which division of the pathway is described and which division is left out ?
Other descending connections between the brain and the spinal cord are called the extrapyramidal system .
The name comes from the fact that this system is outside the corticospinal pathway , which includes the pyramids in the medulla .
A few pathways originating from the brain stem contribute to this system .
The tectospinal tract projects from the midbrain to the spinal cord and is important for postural movements that are driven by the superior colliculus .
The name of the tract comes from an alternate name for the superior colliculus , which is the tectum .
The reticulospinal tract connects the reticular system , a diffuse region of gray matter in the brain stem , with the spinal cord .
This tract influences trunk and proximal limb muscles related to posture and locomotion .
The reticulospinal tract also contributes to muscle tone and influences autonomic functions .
The vestibulospinal tract connects the brain stem nuclei of the vestibular system with the spinal cord .
This allows posture , movement , and balance to be modulated on the basis of equilibrium information provided by the vestibular system .
The pathways of the extrapyramidal system are influenced by subcortical structures .
For example , connections between the secondary motor cortices and the extrapyramidal system modulate spine and cranium movements .
The basal nuclei , which are important for regulating movement initiated by the CNS , influence the extrapyramidal system as well as its thalamic feedback to the motor cortex .
The conscious movement of our muscles is more complicated than simply sending a single command from the precentral gyrus down to the proper motor neurons .
During the movement of any body part , our muscles relay information back to the brain , and the brain is constantly sending “ revised ” instructions back to the muscles .
The cerebellum is important in contributing to the motor system because it compares cerebral motor commands with proprioceptive feedback .
The corticospinal fibers that project to the ventral horn of the spinal cord have branches that also synapse in the pons , which project to the cerebellum .
Also , the proprioceptive sensations of the dorsal column system have a collateral projection to the medulla that projects to the cerebellum .
These two streams of information are compared in the cerebellar cortex .
Conflicts between the motor commands sent by the cerebrum and body position information provided by the proprioceptors cause the cerebellum to stimulate the red nucleus of the midbrain .
The red nucleus then sends corrective commands to the spinal cord along the rubrospinal tract .
The name of this tract comes from the word for red that is seen in the English word “ ruby. ” A good example of how the cerebellum corrects cerebral motor commands can be illustrated by walking in water .
An original motor command from the cerebrum to walk will result in a highly coordinated set of learned movements .
However , in water , the body can not actually perform a typical walking movement as instructed .
The cerebellum can alter the motor command , stimulating the leg muscles to take larger steps to overcome the water resistance .
The cerebellum can make the necessary changes through the rubrospinal tract .
Modulating the basic command to walk also relies on spinal reflexes , but the cerebellum is responsible for calculating the appropriate response .
When the cerebellum does not work properly , coordination and balance are severely affected .
The most dramatic example of this is during the overconsumption of alcohol .
Alcohol inhibits the ability of the cerebellum to interpret proprioceptive feedback , making it more difficult to coordinate body movements , such as walking a straight line , or guide the movement of the hand to touch the tip of the nose .
Visit this site ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/NYTmotor ) to read about an elderly woman who starts to lose the ability to control fine movements , such as speech and the movement of limbs .
Many of the usual causes were ruled out .
It was not a stroke , Parkinson ’ s disease , diabetes , or thyroid dysfunction .
The next most obvious cause was medication , so her pharmacist had to be consulted .
The side effect of a drug meant to help her sleep had resulted in changes in motor control .
What regions of the nervous system are likely to be the focus of haloperidol side effects ?
The somatic nervous system provides output strictly to skeletal muscles .
The lower motor neurons , which are responsible for the contraction of these muscles , are found in the ventral horn of the spinal cord .
These large , multipolar neurons have a corona of dendrites surrounding the cell body and an axon that extends out of the ventral horn .
This axon travels through the ventral nerve root to join the emerging spinal nerve .
The axon is relatively long because it needs to reach muscles in the periphery of the body .
The diameters of cell bodies may be on the order of hundreds of micrometers to support the long axon ; some axons are a meter in length , such as the lumbar motor neurons that innervate muscles in the first digits of the feet .
The axons will also branch to innervate multiple muscle fibers .
Together , the motor neuron and all the muscle fibers that it controls make up a motor unit .
Motor units vary in size .
Some may contain up to 1000 muscle fibers , such as in the quadriceps , or they may only have 10 fibers , such as in an extraocular muscle .
The number of muscle fibers that are part of a motor unit corresponds to the precision of control of that muscle .
Also , muscles that have finer motor control have more motor units connecting to them , and this requires a larger topographical field in the primary motor cortex .
Motor neuron axons connect to muscle fibers at a neuromuscular junction .
This is a specialized synaptic structure at which multiple axon terminals synapse with the muscle fiber sarcolemma .
The synaptic end bulbs of the motor neurons secrete acetylcholine , which binds to receptors on the sarcolemma .
The binding of acetylcholine opens ligand-gated ion channels , increasing the movement of cations across the sarcolemma .
This depolarizes the sarcolemma , initiating muscle contraction .
Whereas other synapses result in graded potentials that must reach a threshold in the postsynaptic target , activity at the neuromuscular junction reliably leads to muscle fiber contraction with every nerve impulse received from a motor neuron .
However , the strength of contraction and the number of fibers that contract can be affected by the frequency of the motor neuron impulses .
This chapter began by introducing reflexes as an example of the basic elements of the somatic nervous system .
Simple somatic reflexes do not include the higher centers discussed for conscious or voluntary aspects of movement .
Reflexes can be spinal or cranial , depending on the nerves and central components that are involved .
The example described at the beginning of the chapter involved heat and pain sensations from a hot stove causing withdrawal of the arm through a connection in the spinal cord that leads to contraction of the biceps brachii .
The description of this withdrawal reflex was simplified , for the sake of the introduction , to emphasize the parts of the somatic nervous system .
But to consider reflexes fully , more attention needs to be given to this example .
As you withdraw your hand from the stove , you do not want to slow that reflex down .
As the biceps brachii contracts , the antagonistic triceps brachii needs to relax .
Because the neuromuscular junction is strictly excitatory , the biceps will contract when the motor nerve is active .
Skeletal muscles do not actively relax .
Instead the motor neuron needs to “ quiet down , ” or be inhibited .
In the hot-stove withdrawal reflex , this occurs through an interneuron in the spinal cord .
The interneuron ’ s cell body is located in the dorsal horn of the spinal cord .
The interneuron receives a synapse from the axon of the sensory neuron that detects that the hand is being burned .
In response to this stimulation from the sensory neuron , the interneuron then inhibits the motor neuron that controls the triceps brachii .
This is done by releasing a neurotransmitter or other signal that hyperpolarizes the motor neuron connected to the triceps brachii , making it less likely to initiate an action potential .
With this motor neuron being inhibited , the triceps brachii relaxes .
Without the antagonistic contraction , withdrawal from the hot stove is faster and keeps further tissue damage from occurring .
Another example of a withdrawal reflex occurs when you step on a painful stimulus , like a tack or a sharp rock .
The nociceptors that are activated by the painful stimulus activate the motor neurons responsible for contraction of the tibialis anterior muscle .
This causes dorsiflexion of the foot .
An inhibitory interneuron , activated by a collateral branch of the nociceptor fiber , will inhibit the motor neurons of the gastrocnemius and soleus muscles to cancel plantar flexion .
An important difference in this reflex is that plantar flexion is most likely in progress as the foot is pressing down onto the tack .
Contraction of the tibialis anterior is not the most important aspect of the reflex , as continuation of plantar flexion will result in further damage from stepping onto the tack .
Another type of reflex is a stretch reflex .
In this reflex , when a skeletal muscle is stretched , a muscle spindle receptor is activated .
The axon from this receptor structure will cause direct contraction of the muscle .
A collateral of the muscle spindle fiber will also inhibit the motor neuron of the antagonist muscles .
The reflex helps to maintain muscles at a constant length .
A common example of this reflex is the knee jerk that is elicited by a rubber hammer struck against the patellar ligament in a physical exam .
A specialized reflex to protect the surface of the eye is the corneal reflex , or the eye blink reflex .
When the cornea is stimulated by a tactile stimulus , or even by bright light in a related reflex , blinking is initiated .
The sensory component travels through the trigeminal nerve , which carries somatosensory information from the face , or through the optic nerve , if the stimulus is bright light .
The motor response travels through the facial nerve and innervates the orbicularis oculi on the same side .
This reflex is commonly tested during a physical exam using an air puff or a gentle touch of a cotton-tipped applicator .
Watch this video ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/reflexarc ) to learn more about the reflex arc of the corneal reflex .
When the right cornea senses a tactile stimulus , what happens to the left eye ?
Explain your answer .
Watch this video ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/newreflex ) to learn more about newborn reflexes .
Newborns have a set of reflexes that are expected to have been crucial to survival before the modern age .
These reflexes disappear as the baby grows , as some of them may be unnecessary as they age .
The video demonstrates a reflex called the Babinski reflex , in which the foot flexes dorsally and the toes splay out when the sole of the foot is lightly scratched .
This is normal for newborns , but it is a sign of reduced myelination of the spinal tract in adults .
Why would this reflex be a problem for an adult ?
To suggest what this means , consider the ( very unlikely ) situation of seeing a lioness hunting out on the savannah .
Though this is not a common threat that humans deal with in the modern world , it represents the type of environment in which the human species thrived and adapted .
The spread of humans around the world to the present state of the modern age occurred much more quickly than any species would adapt to environmental pressures such as predators .
However , the reactions modern humans have in the modern world are based on these prehistoric situations .
If your boss is walking down the hallway on Friday afternoon looking for “ volunteers ” to come in on the weekend , your response is the same as the prehistoric human seeing the lioness running across the savannah : fight or flight .
Most likely , your response to your boss—not to mention the lioness—would be flight .
The autonomic system is responsible for the physiological response to make that possible , and hopefully successful .
Adrenaline starts to flood your circulatory system .
Your heart rate increases .
Sweat glands become active .
The bronchi of the lungs dilate to allow more air exchange .
Pupils dilate to increase visual information .
Blood pressure increases in general , and blood vessels dilate in skeletal muscles .
Time to run .
Similar physiological responses would occur in preparation for fighting off the threat .
This response should sound a bit familiar .
The autonomic nervous system is tied into emotional responses as well , and the fight-or-flight response probably sounds like a panic attack .
In the modern world , these sorts of reactions are associated with anxiety as much as with response to a threat .
It is engrained in the nervous system to respond like this .
In fact , the adaptations of the autonomic nervous system probably predate the human species and are likely to be common to all mammals , and perhaps shared by many animals .
That lioness might herself be threatened in some other situation .
However , the autonomic nervous system is not just about responding to threats .
Besides the fight-or-flight response , there are the responses referred to as “ rest and digest. ” If that lioness is successful in her hunting , then she is going to rest from the exertion .
Her heart rate will slow .
Breathing will return to normal .
The digestive system has a big job to do .
Much of the function of the autonomic system is based on the connections within an autonomic , or visceral , reflex .
The major differences between the two systems are evident in the responses that each produces .
The somatic nervous system causes contraction of skeletal muscles .
The autonomic nervous system controls cardiac and smooth muscle , as well as glandular tissue .
The somatic nervous system is associated with voluntary responses ( though many can happen without conscious awareness , like breathing ) , and the autonomic nervous system is associated with involuntary responses , such as those related to homeostasis .
The autonomic nervous system regulates many of the internal organs through a balance of two aspects , or divisions .
In addition to the endocrine system , the autonomic nervous system is instrumental in homeostatic mechanisms in the body .
The two divisions of the autonomic nervous system are the sympathetic division and the parasympathetic division .
The sympathetic system is associated with the fight-or-flight response , and parasympathetic activity is referred to by the epithet of rest and digest .
Homeostasis is the balance between the two systems .
At each target effector , dual innervation determines activity .
For example , the heart receives connections from both the sympathetic and parasympathetic divisions .
One causes heart rate to increase , whereas the other causes heart rate to decrease .
Watch this video ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/fightflight ) to learn more about adrenaline and the fight-or-flight response .
When someone is said to have a rush of adrenaline , the image of bungee jumpers or skydivers usually comes to mind .
But adrenaline , also known as epinephrine , is an important chemical in coordinating the body ’ s fight-or-flight response .
In this video , you look inside the physiology of the fight-or-flight response , as envisioned for a firefighter .
His body ’ s reaction is the result of the sympathetic division of the autonomic nervous system causing system-wide changes as it prepares for extreme responses .
What two changes does adrenaline bring about to help the skeletal muscle response ?
To respond to a threat—to fight or to run away—the sympathetic system causes divergent effects as many different effector organs are activated together for a common purpose .
More oxygen needs to be inhaled and delivered to skeletal muscle .
The respiratory , cardiovascular , and musculoskeletal systems are all activated together .
Additionally , sweating keeps the excess heat that comes from muscle contraction from causing the body to overheat .
The digestive system shuts down so that blood is not absorbing nutrients when it should be delivering oxygen to skeletal muscles .
To coordinate all these responses , the connections in the sympathetic system diverge from a limited region of the central nervous system ( CNS ) to a wide array of ganglia that project to the many effector organs simultaneously .
The complex set of structures that compose the output of the sympathetic system make it possible for these disparate effectors to come together in a coordinated , systemic change .
The sympathetic division of the autonomic nervous system influences the various organ systems of the body through connections emerging from the thoracic and upper lumbar spinal cord .
It is referred to as the thoracolumbar system to reflect this anatomical basis .
A central neuron in the lateral horn of any of these spinal regions projects to ganglia adjacent to the vertebral column through the ventral spinal roots .
The majority of ganglia of the sympathetic system belong to a network of sympathetic chain ganglia that runs alongside the vertebral column .
The ganglia appear as a series of clusters of neurons linked by axonal bridges .
There are typically 23 ganglia in the chain on either side of the spinal column .
Three correspond to the cervical region , 12 are in the thoracic region , four are in the lumbar region , and four correspond to the sacral region .
The cervical and sacral levels are not connected to the spinal cord directly through the spinal roots , but through ascending or descending connections through the bridges within the chain .
A diagram that shows the connections of the sympathetic system is somewhat like a circuit diagram that shows the electrical connections between different receptacles and devices .
In Figure 15.2 , the “ circuits ” of the sympathetic system are intentionally simplified .
To continue with the analogy of the circuit diagram , there are three different types of “ junctions ” that operate within the sympathetic system ( Figure 15.3 ) .
The first type is most direct : the sympathetic nerve projects to the chain ganglion at the same level as the target effector ( the organ , tissue , or gland to be innervated ) .
An example of this type is spinal nerve T1 that synapses with the T1 chain ganglion to innervate the trachea .
The fibers of this branch are called white rami communicantes ( singular = ramus communicans ) ; they are myelinated and therefore referred to as white ( see Figure 15.3a ) .
The axon from the central neuron ( the preganglionic fiber shown as a solid line ) synapses with the ganglionic neuron ( with the postganglionic fiber shown as a dashed line ) .
This neuron then projects to a target effector—in this case , the trachea—via gray rami communicantes , which are unmyelinated axons .
In some cases , the target effectors are located superior or inferior to the spinal segment at which the preganglionic fiber emerges .
With respect to the “ wiring ” involved , the synapse with the ganglionic neuron occurs at chain ganglia superior or inferior to the location of the central neuron .
An example of this is spinal nerve T1 that innervates the eye .
The spinal nerve tracks up through the chain until it reaches the superior cervical ganglion , where it synapses with the postganglionic neuron ( see Figure 15.3b ) .
The cervical ganglia are referred to as paravertebral ganglia , given their location adjacent to prevertebral ganglia in the sympathetic chain .
Not all axons from the central neurons terminate in the chain ganglia .
Additional branches from the ventral nerve root continue through the chain and on to one of the collateral ganglia as the greater splanchnic nerve or lesser splanchnic nerve .
For example , the greater splanchnic nerve at the level of T5 synapses with a collateral ganglion outside the chain before making the connection to the postganglionic nerves that innervate the stomach ( see Figure 15.3c ) .
Collateral ganglia , also called prevertebral ganglia , are situated anterior to the vertebral column and receive inputs from splanchnic nerves as well as central sympathetic neurons .
They are associated with controlling organs in the abdominal cavity , and are also considered part of the enteric nervous system .
The three collateral ganglia are the celiac ganglion , the superior mesenteric ganglion , and the inferior mesenteric ganglion ( see Figure 15.2 ) .
The word celiac is derived from the Latin word “ coelom , ” which refers to a body cavity ( in this case , the abdominal cavity ) , and the word mesenteric refers to the digestive system .
An axon from the central neuron that projects to a sympathetic ganglion is referred to as a preganglionic fiber or neuron , and represents the output from the CNS to the ganglion .
Because the sympathetic ganglia are adjacent to the vertebral column , preganglionic sympathetic fibers are relatively short , and they are myelinated .
A postganglionic fiber —the axon from a ganglionic neuron that projects to the target effector—represents the output of a ganglion that directly influences the organ .
Compared with the preganglionic fibers , postganglionic sympathetic fibers are long because of the relatively greater distance from the ganglion to the target effector .
These fibers are unmyelinated .
( Note that the term “ postganglionic neuron ” may be used to describe the projection from a ganglion to the target .
The problem with that usage is that the cell body is in the ganglion , and only the fiber is postganglionic .
Typically , the term neuron applies to the entire cell . )
One type of preganglionic sympathetic fiber does not terminate in a ganglion .
These are the axons from central sympathetic neurons that project to the adrenal medulla , the interior portion of the adrenal gland .
These axons are still referred to as preganglionic fibers , but the target is not a ganglion .
The adrenal medulla releases signaling molecules into the bloodstream , rather than using axons to communicate with target structures .
The cells in the adrenal medulla that are contacted by the preganglionic fibers are called chromaffin cells .
These cells are neurosecretory cells that develop from the neural crest along with the sympathetic ganglia , reinforcing the idea that the gland is , functionally , a sympathetic ganglion .
The projections of the sympathetic division of the autonomic nervous system diverge widely , resulting in a broad influence of the system throughout the body .
As a response to a threat , the sympathetic system would increase heart rate and breathing rate and cause blood flow to the skeletal muscle to increase and blood flow to the digestive system to decrease .
Sweat gland secretion should also increase as part of an integrated response .
All of those physiological changes are going to be required to occur together to run away from the hunting lioness , or the modern equivalent .
This divergence is seen in the branching patterns of preganglionic sympathetic neurons—a single preganglionic sympathetic neuron may have 10–20 targets .
An axon that leaves a central neuron of the lateral horn in the thoracolumbar spinal cord will pass through the white ramus communicans and enter the sympathetic chain , where it will branch toward a variety of targets .
At the level of the spinal cord at which the preganglionic sympathetic fiber exits the spinal cord , a branch will synapse on a neuron in the adjacent chain ganglion .
Some branches will extend up or down to a different level of the chain ganglia .
Other branches will pass through the chain ganglia and project through one of the splanchnic nerves to a collateral ganglion .
Finally , some branches may project through the splanchnic nerves to the adrenal medulla .
All of these branches mean that one preganglionic neuron can influence different regions of the sympathetic system very broadly , by acting on widely distributed organs .
The parasympathetic division of the autonomic nervous system is named because its central neurons are located on either side of the thoracolumbar region of the spinal cord ( para= “ beside ” or “ near ” ) .
The parasympathetic system can also be referred to as the craniosacral system ( or outflow ) because the preganglionic neurons are located in nuclei of the brain stem and the lateral horn of the sacral spinal cord .
The connections , or “ circuits , ” of the parasympathetic division are similar to the general layout of the sympathetic division with a few specific differences ( Figure 15.4 ) .
The preganglionic fibers from the cranial region travel in cranial nerves , whereas preganglionic fibers from the sacral region travel in spinal nerves .
The targets of these fibers are terminal ganglia , which are located near—or even within—the target effector .
These ganglia are often referred to as intramural ganglia when they are found within the walls of the target organ .
The postganglionic fiber projects from the terminal ganglia a short distance to the target effector , or to the specific target tissue within the organ .
Comparing the relative lengths of axons in the parasympathetic system , the preganglionic fibers are long and the postganglionic fibers are short because the ganglia are close to—and sometimes within—the target effectors .
The cranial component of the parasympathetic system is based in particular nuclei of the brain stem .
In the midbrain , the Edinger–Westphal nucleus is part of the oculomotor complex , and axons from those neurons travel with the fibers in the oculomotor nerve ( cranial nerve III ) that innervate the extraocular muscles .
The preganglionic parasympathetic fibers within cranial nerve III terminate in the ciliary ganglion , which is located in the posterior orbit .
The postganglionic parasympathetic fibers then project to the smooth muscle of the iris to control pupillary size .
In the upper medulla , the salivatory nuclei contain neurons with axons that project through the facial and glossopharyngeal nerves to ganglia that control salivary glands .
Tear production is influenced by parasympathetic fibers in the facial nerve , which activate a ganglion , and ultimately the lacrimal ( tear ) gland .
Neurons in the dorsal nucleus of the vagus nerve and the nucleus ambiguus project through the vagus nerve ( cranial nerve X ) to the terminal ganglia of the thoracic and abdominal cavities .
Parasympathetic preganglionic fibers primarily influence the heart , bronchi , and esophagus in the thoracic cavity and the stomach , liver , pancreas , gall bladder , and small intestine of the abdominal cavity .
The postganglionic fibers from the ganglia activated by the vagus nerve are often incorporated into the structure of the organ , such as the mesenteric plexus of the digestive tract organs and the intramural ganglia .
Where an autonomic neuron connects with a target , there is a synapse .
The electrical signal of the action potential causes the release of a signaling molecule , which will bind to receptor proteins on the target cell .
Synapses of the autonomic system are classified as either cholinergic , meaning that acetylcholine ( ACh ) is released , or adrenergic , meaning that norepinephrine is released .
The terms cholinergic and adrenergic refer not only to the signaling molecule that is released but also to the class of receptors that each binds .
The cholinergic system includes two classes of receptor : the nicotinic receptor and the muscarinic receptor .
Both receptor types bind to ACh and cause changes in the target cell .
The nicotinic receptor is a ligand-gated cation channel and the muscarinic receptor is a G protein–coupled receptor .
The receptors are named for , and differentiated by , other molecules that bind to them .
Whereas nicotine will bind to the nicotinic receptor , and muscarine will bind to the muscarinic receptor , there is no cross-reactivity between the receptors .
The situation is similar to locks and keys .
Imagine two locks—one for a classroom and the other for an office—that are opened by two separate keys .
The classroom key will not open the office door and the office key will not open the classroom door .
This is similar to the specificity of nicotine and muscarine for their receptors .
However , a master key can open multiple locks , such as a master key for the Biology Department that opens both the classroom and the office doors .
This is similar to ACh that binds to both types of receptors .
The molecules that define these receptors are not crucial—they are simply tools for researchers to use in the laboratory .
These molecules are exogenous , meaning that they are made outside of the human body , so a researcher can use them without any confounding endogenous results ( results caused by the molecules produced in the body ) .
The adrenergic system also has two types of receptors , named the alpha ( α ) -adrenergic receptor and beta ( β ) -adrenergic receptor .
Unlike cholinergic receptors , these receptor types are not classified by which drugs can bind to them .
All of them are G protein–coupled receptors .
There are three types of α-adrenergic receptors , termed α , α , and α , and there are two types of β-adrenergic receptors , termed β and β .
An additional aspect of the adrenergic system is that there is a second signaling molecule called epinephrine .
The chemical difference between norepinephrine and epinephrine is the addition of a methyl group ( CH ) in epinephrine .
The prefix “ nor- ” actually refers to this chemical difference , in which a methyl group is missing .
The term adrenergic should remind you of the word adrenaline , which is associated with the fight-or-flight response described at the beginning of the chapter .
Adrenaline and epinephrine are two names for the same molecule .
The adrenal gland ( in Latin , ad= “ on top of ” ; renal = “ kidney ” ) secretes adrenaline .
The ending “ -ine ” refers to the chemical being derived , or extracted , from the adrenal gland .
A similar construction from Greek instead of Latin results in the word epinephrine ( epi= “ above ” ; nephr= “ kidney ” ) .
In scientific usage , epinephrine is preferred in the United States , whereas adrenaline is preferred in Great Britain , because “ adrenalin ” was once a registered , proprietary drug name in the United States .
Though the drug is no longer sold , the convention of referring to this molecule by the two different names persists .
Similarly , norepinephrine and noradrenaline are two names for the same molecule .
Having understood the cholinergic and adrenergic systems , their role in the autonomic system is relatively simple to understand .
All preganglionic fibers , both sympathetic and parasympathetic , release ACh .
All ganglionic neurons—the targets of these preganglionic fibers—have nicotinic receptors in their cell membranes .
The nicotinic receptor is a ligandgated cation channel that results in depolarization of the postsynaptic membrane .
The postganglionic parasympathetic fibers also release ACh , but the receptors on their targets are muscarinic receptors , which are G protein–coupled receptors and do not exclusively cause depolarization of the postsynaptic membrane .
Postganglionic sympathetic fibers release norepinephrine , except for fibers that project to sweat glands and to blood vessels associated with skeletal muscles , which release ACh ( Table 15.1 ) .
Signaling molecules can belong to two broad groups .
Neurotransmitters are released at synapses , whereas hormones are released into the bloodstream .
These are simplistic definitions , but they can help to clarify this point .
Acetylcholine can be considered a neurotransmitter because it is released by axons at synapses .
The adrenergic system , however , presents a challenge .
Postganglionic sympathetic fibers release norepinephrine , which can be considered a neurotransmitter .
But the adrenal medulla releases epinephrine and norepinephrine into circulation , so they should be considered hormones .
What are referred to here as synapses may not fit the strictest definition of synapse .
Some sources will refer to the connection between a postganglionic fiber and a target effector as neuroeffector junctions ; neurotransmitters , as defined above , would be called neuromodulators .
The structure of postganglionic connections are not the typical synaptic end bulb that is found at the neuromuscular junction , but rather are chains of swellings along the length of a postganglionic fiber called a varicosity ( Figure 15.5 ) .
The original usage of the epithet “ fight or flight ” comes from a scientist named Walter Cannon who worked at Harvard in 1915 .
The concept of homeostasis and the functioning of the sympathetic system had been introduced in France in the previous century .
Cannon expanded the idea , and introduced the idea that an animal responds to a threat by preparing to stand and fight or run away .
The nature of this response was thoroughly explained in a book on the physiology of pain , hunger , fear , and rage .
When students learn about the sympathetic system and the fight-or-flight response , they often stop and wonder about other responses .
If you were faced with a lioness running toward you as pictured at the beginning of this chapter , would you run or would you stand your ground ?
Some people would say that they would freeze and not know what to do .
So isn ’ t there really more to what the autonomic system does than fight , flight , rest , or digest .
What about fear and paralysis in the face of a threat ?
The sympathetic system is responsible for the physiological responses to emotional states .
The name “ sympathetic ” can be said to mean that ( sym= “ together ” ; -pathos = “ pain , ” “ suffering , ” or “ emotion ” ) .
Watch this video ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/nervsystem1 ) to learn more about the nervous system .
As described in this video , the nervous system has a way to deal with threats and stress that is separate from the conscious control of the somatic nervous system .
The system comes from a time when threats were about survival , but in the modern age , these responses become part of stress and anxiety .
This video describes how the autonomic system is only part of the response to threats , or stressors .
What other organ system gets involved , and what part of the brain coordinates the two systems for the entire response , including epinephrine ( adrenaline ) and cortisol ?
The main difference between the somatic and autonomic systems is in what target tissues are effectors .
Somatic responses are solely based on skeletal muscle contraction .
The autonomic system , however , targets cardiac and smooth muscle , as well as glandular tissue .
Whereas the basic circuit is a reflex arc , there are differences in the structure of those reflexes for the somatic and autonomic systems .
One difference between a somatic reflex , such as the withdrawal reflex , and a visceral reflex , which is an autonomic reflex , is in the efferent branch .
The output of a somatic reflex is the lower motor neuron in the ventral horn of the spinal cord that projects directly to a skeletal muscle to cause its contraction .
The output of a visceral reflex is a two-step pathway starting with the preganglionic fiber emerging from a lateral horn neuron in the spinal cord , or a cranial nucleus neuron in the brain stem , to a ganglion—followed by the postganglionic fiber projecting to a target effector .
The other part of a reflex , the afferent branch , is often the same between the two systems .
Sensory neurons receiving input from the periphery—with cell bodies in the sensory ganglia , either of a cranial nerve or a dorsal root ganglion adjacent to the spinal cord—project into the CNS to initiate the reflex ( Figure 15.6 ) .
Many of the inputs to visceral reflexes are from special or somatic senses , but particular senses are associated with the viscera that are not part of the conscious perception of the environment through the somatic nervous system .
For example , there is a specific type of mechanoreceptor , called a baroreceptor , in the walls of the aorta and carotid sinuses that senses the stretch of those organs when blood volume or pressure increases .
You do not have a conscious perception of having high blood pressure , but that is an important afferent branch of the cardiovascular and , particularly , vasomotor reflexes .
The sensory neuron is essentially the same as any other general sensory neuron .
The baroreceptor apparatus is part of the ending of a unipolar neuron that has a cell body in a sensory ganglion .
The baroreceptors from the carotid arteries have axons in the glossopharyngeal nerve , and those from the aorta have axons in the vagus nerve .
Though visceral senses are not primarily a part of conscious perception , those sensations sometimes make it to conscious awareness .
If a visceral sense is strong enough , it will be perceived .
The sensory homunculus—the representation of the body in the primary somatosensory cortex—only has a small region allotted for the perception of internal stimuli .
If you swallow a large bolus of food , for instance , you will probably feel the lump of that food as it pushes through your esophagus , or even if your stomach is distended after a large meal .
If you inhale especially cold air , you can feel it as it enters your larynx and trachea .
These sensations are not the same as feeling high blood pressure or blood sugar levels .
When particularly strong visceral sensations rise to the level of conscious perception , the sensations are often felt in unexpected places .
For example , strong visceral sensations of the heart will be felt as pain in the left shoulder and left arm .
This irregular pattern of projection of conscious perception of visceral sensations is called referred pain .
Depending on the organ system affected , the referred pain will project to different areas of the body ( Figure 15.7 ) .
The location of referred pain is not random , but a definitive explanation of the mechanism has not been established .
The most broadly accepted theory for this phenomenon is that the visceral sensory fibers enter into the same level of the spinal cord as the somatosensory fibers of the referred pain location .
Projections from the medial and inferior divisions of the cervical ganglia do enter the spinal cord at the middle to lower cervical levels , which is where the somatosensory fibers enter .
Kehr ’ s sign is the presentation of pain in the left shoulder , chest , and neck regions following rupture of the spleen .
The spleen is in the upper-left abdominopelvic quadrant , but the pain is more in the shoulder and neck .
How can this be ?
The sympathetic fibers connected to the spleen are from the celiac ganglion , which would be from the mid-thoracic to lower thoracic region whereas parasympathetic fibers are found in the vagus nerve , which connects in the medulla of the brain stem .
However , the neck and shoulder would connect to the spinal cord at the mid-cervical level of the spinal cord .
These connections do not fit with the expected correspondence of visceral and somatosensory fibers entering at the same level of the spinal cord .
The incorrect assumption would be that the visceral sensations are coming from the spleen directly .
In fact , the visceral fibers are coming from the diaphragm .
The nerve connecting to the diaphragm takes a special route .
The phrenic nerve is connected to the spinal cord at cervical levels 3 to 5 .
The motor fibers that make up this nerve are responsible for the muscle contractions that drive ventilation .
These fibers have left the spinal cord to enter the phrenic nerve , meaning that spinal cord damage below the mid-cervical level is not fatal by making ventilation impossible .
Therefore , the visceral fibers from the diaphragm enter the spinal cord at the same level as the somatosensory fibers from the neck and shoulder .
The diaphragm plays a role in Kehr ’ s sign because the spleen is just inferior to the diaphragm in the upper-left quadrant of the abdominopelvic cavity .
When the spleen ruptures , blood spills into this region .
The accumulating hemorrhage then puts pressure on the diaphragm .
The visceral sensation is actually in the diaphragm , so the referred pain is in a region of the body that corresponds to the diaphragm , not the spleen .
The efferent branch of the visceral reflex arc begins with the projection from the central neuron along the preganglionic fiber .
This fiber then makes a synapse on the ganglionic neuron that projects to the target effector .
The effector organs that are the targets of the autonomic system range from the iris and ciliary body of the eye to the urinary bladder and reproductive organs .
The thoracolumbar output , through the various sympathetic ganglia , reaches all of these organs .
The cranial component of the parasympathetic system projects from the eye to part of the intestines .
The sacral component picks up with the majority of the large intestine and the pelvic organs of the urinary and reproductive systems .
Somatic reflexes involve sensory neurons that connect sensory receptors to the CNS and motor neurons that project back out to the skeletal muscles .
Visceral reflexes that involve the thoracolumbar or craniosacral systems share similar connections .
However , there are reflexes that do not need to involve any CNS components .
A long reflex has afferent branches that enter the spinal cord or brain and involve the efferent branches , as previously explained .
A short reflex is completely peripheral and only involves the local integration of sensory input with motor output ( Figure 15.8 ) .
The difference between short and long reflexes is in the involvement of the CNS .
Somatic reflexes always involve the CNS , even in a monosynaptic reflex in which the sensory neuron directly activates the motor neuron .
That synapse is in the spinal cord or brain stem , so it has to involve the CNS .
However , in the autonomic system there is the possibility that the CNS is not involved .
Because the efferent branch of a visceral reflex involves two neurons—the central neuron and the ganglionic neuron—a “ short circuit ” can be possible .
If a sensory neuron projects directly to the ganglionic neuron and causes it to activate the effector target , then the CNS is not involved .
A division of the nervous system that is related to the autonomic nervous system is the enteric nervous system .
The word enteric refers to the digestive organs , so this represents the nervous tissue that is part of the digestive system .
There are a few myenteric plexuses in which the nervous tissue in the wall of the digestive tract organs can directly influence digestive function .
If stretch receptors in the stomach are activated by the filling and distension of the stomach , a short reflex will directly activate the smooth muscle fibers of the stomach wall to increase motility to digest the excessive food in the stomach .
No CNS involvement is needed because the stretch receptor is directly activating a neuron in the wall of the stomach that causes the smooth muscle to contract .
That neuron , connected to the smooth muscle , is a postganglionic parasympathetic neuron that can be controlled by a fiber found in the vagus nerve .
Read this article ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/strokespell ) to learn about a teenager who experiences a series of spells that suggest a stroke .
He undergoes endless tests and seeks input from multiple doctors .
In the end , one expert , one question , and a simple blood pressure cuff answers the question .
Why would the heart have to beat faster when the teenager changes his body position from lying down to sitting , and then to standing ?
The autonomic nervous system is important for homeostasis because its two divisions compete at the target effector .
The balance of homeostasis is attributable to the competing inputs from the sympathetic and parasympathetic divisions ( dual innervation ) .
At the level of the target effector , the signal of which system is sending the message is strictly chemical .
A signaling molecule binds to a receptor that causes changes in the target cell , which in turn causes the tissue or organ to respond to the changing conditions of the body .
The postganglionic fibers of the sympathetic and parasympathetic divisions both release neurotransmitters that bind to receptors on their targets .
Postganglionic sympathetic fibers release norepinephrine , with a minor exception , whereas postganglionic parasympathetic fibers release ACh .
For any given target , the difference in which division of the autonomic nervous system is exerting control is just in what chemical binds to its receptors .
The target cells will have adrenergic and muscarinic receptors .
If norepinephrine is released , it will bind to the adrenergic receptors present on the target cell , and if ACh is released , it will bind to the muscarinic receptors on the target cell .
In the sympathetic system , there are exceptions to this pattern of dual innervation .
The postganglionic sympathetic fibers that contact the blood vessels within skeletal muscle and that contact sweat glands do not release norepinephrine , they release ACh .
This does not create any problem because there is no parasympathetic input to the sweat glands .
Sweat glands have muscarinic receptors and produce and secrete sweat in response to the presence of ACh .
At most of the other targets of the autonomic system , the effector response is based on which neurotransmitter is released and what receptor is present .
For example , regions of the heart that establish heart rate are contacted by postganglionic fibers from both systems .
If norepinephrine is released onto those cells , it binds to an adrenergic receptor that causes the cells to depolarize faster , and the heart rate increases .
If ACh is released onto those cells , it binds to a muscarinic receptor that causes the cells to hyperpolarize so that they can not reach threshold as easily , and the heart rate slows .
Without this parasympathetic input , the heart would work at a rate of approximately 100 beats per minute ( bpm ) .
The sympathetic system speeds that up , as it would during exercise , to 120–140 bpm , for example .
The parasympathetic system slows it down to the resting heart rate of 60–80 bpm .
Another example is in the control of pupillary size ( Figure 15.9 ) .
The afferent branch responds to light hitting the retina .
Photoreceptors are activated , and the signal is transferred to the retinal ganglion cells that send an action potential along the optic nerve into the diencephalon .
If light levels are low , the sympathetic system sends a signal out through the upper thoracic spinal cord to the superior cervical ganglion of the sympathetic chain .
The postganglionic fiber then projects to the iris , where it releases norepinephrine onto the radial fibers of the iris ( a smooth muscle ) .
When those fibers contract , the pupil dilates—increasing the amount of light hitting the retina .
If light levels are too high , the parasympathetic system sends a signal out from the Eddinger–Westphal nucleus through the oculomotor nerve .
This fiber synapses in the ciliary ganglion in the posterior orbit .
The postganglionic fiber then projects to the iris , where it releases ACh onto the circular fibers of the iris—another smooth muscle .
When those fibers contract , the pupil constricts to limit the amount of light hitting the retina .
In this example , the autonomic system is controlling how much light hits the retina .
It is a homeostatic reflex mechanism that keeps the activation of photoreceptors within certain limits .
In the context of avoiding a threat like the lioness on the savannah , the sympathetic response for fight or flight will increase pupillary diameter so that more light hits the retina and more visual information is available for running away .
Likewise , the parasympathetic response of rest reduces the amount of light reaching the retina , allowing the photoreceptors to cycle through bleaching and be regenerated for further visual perception ; this is what the homeostatic process is attempting to maintain .
Watch this video ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/pupillary ) to learn about the pupillary reflexes .
The pupillary light reflex involves sensory input through the optic nerve and motor response through the oculomotor nerve to the ciliary ganglion , which projects to the circular fibers of the iris .
As shown in this short animation , pupils will constrict to limit the amount of light falling on the retina under bright lighting conditions .
What constitutes the afferent and efferent branches of the competing reflex ( dilation ) ?
Organ systems are balanced between the input from the sympathetic and parasympathetic divisions .
When something upsets that balance , the homeostatic mechanisms strive to return it to its regular state .
For each organ system , there may be more of a sympathetic or parasympathetic tendency to the resting state , which is known as the autonomic tone of the system .
For example , the heart rate was described above .
Because the resting heart rate is the result of the parasympathetic system slowing the heart down from its intrinsic rate of 100 bpm , the heart can be said to be in parasympathetic tone .
In a similar fashion , another aspect of the cardiovascular system is primarily under sympathetic control .
Blood pressure is partially determined by the contraction of smooth muscle in the walls of blood vessels .
These tissues have adrenergic receptors that respond to the release of norepinephrine from postganglionic sympathetic fibers by constricting and increasing blood pressure .
The hormones released from the adrenal medulla—epinephrine and norepinephrine—will also bind to these receptors .
Those hormones travel through the bloodstream where they can easily interact with the receptors in the vessel walls .
The parasympathetic system has no significant input to the systemic blood vessels , so the sympathetic system determines their tone .
There are a limited number of blood vessels that respond to sympathetic input in a different fashion .
Blood vessels in skeletal muscle , particularly those in the lower limbs , are more likely to dilate .
It does not have an overall effect on blood pressure to alter the tone of the vessels , but rather allows for blood flow to increase for those skeletal muscles that will be active in the fight-or-flight response .
The blood vessels that have a parasympathetic projection are limited to those in the erectile tissue of the reproductive organs .
Acetylcholine released by these postganglionic parasympathetic fibers cause the vessels to dilate , leading to the engorgement of the erectile tissue .
Have you ever stood up quickly and felt dizzy for a moment ?
This is because , for one reason or another , blood is not getting to your brain so it is briefly deprived of oxygen .
When you change position from sitting or lying down to standing , your cardiovascular system has to adjust for a new challenge , keeping blood pumping up into the head while gravity is pulling more and more blood down into the legs .
The reason for this is a sympathetic reflex that maintains the output of the heart in response to postural change .
When a person stands up , proprioceptors indicate that the body is changing position .
A signal goes to the CNS , which then sends a signal to the upper thoracic spinal cord neurons of the sympathetic division .
The sympathetic system then causes the heart to beat faster and the blood vessels to constrict .
Both changes will make it possible for the cardiovascular system to maintain the rate of blood delivery to the brain .
Blood is being pumped superiorly through the internal branch of the carotid arteries into the brain , against the force of gravity .
Gravity is not increasing while standing , but blood is more likely to flow down into the legs as they are extended for standing .
This sympathetic reflex keeps the brain well oxygenated so that cognitive and other neural processes are not interrupted .
Sometimes this does not work properly .
If the sympathetic system can not increase cardiac output , then blood pressure into the brain will decrease , and a brief neurological loss can be felt .
This can be brief , as a slight “ wooziness ” when standing up too quickly , or a loss of balance and neurological impairment for a period of time .
The name for this is orthostatic hypotension , which means that blood pressure goes below the homeostatic set point when standing .
It can be the result of standing up faster than the reflex can occur , which may be referred to as a benign “ head rush , ” or it may be the result of an underlying cause .
There are two basic reasons that orthostatic hypotension can occur .
First , blood volume is too low and the sympathetic reflex is not effective .
This hypovolemia may be the result of dehydration or medications that affect fluid balance , such as diuretics or vasodilators .
Both of these medications are meant to lower blood pressure , which may be necessary in the case of systemic hypertension , and regulation of the medications may alleviate the problem .
Sometimes increasing fluid intake or water retention through salt intake can improve the situation .
The second underlying cause of orthostatic hypotension is autonomic failure .
There are several disorders that result in compromised sympathetic functions .
The disorders range from diabetes to multiple system atrophy ( a loss of control over many systems in the body ) , and addressing the underlying condition can improve the hypotension .
For example , with diabetes , peripheral nerve damage can occur , which would affect the postganglionic sympathetic fibers .
Getting blood glucose levels under control can improve neurological deficits associated with diabetes .
This is visual sensation , because the afferent branch of this reflex is simply sharing the special sense pathway .
Bright light hitting the retina leads to the parasympathetic response , through the oculomotor nerve , followed by the postganglionic fiber from the ciliary ganglion , which stimulates the circular fibers of the iris to contract and constrict the pupil .
When light hits the retina in one eye , both pupils contract .
When that light is removed , both pupils dilate again back to the resting position .
When the stimulus is unilateral ( presented to only one eye ) , the response is bilateral ( both eyes ) .
The same is not true for somatic reflexes .
If you touch a hot radiator , you only pull that arm back , not both .
Central control of autonomic reflexes is different than for somatic reflexes .
The hypothalamus , along with other CNS locations , controls the autonomic system .
Autonomic control is based on the visceral reflexes , composed of the afferent and efferent branches .
These homeostatic mechanisms are based on the balance between the two divisions of the autonomic system , which results in tone for various organs that is based on the predominant input from the sympathetic or parasympathetic systems .
Coordinating that balance requires integration that begins with forebrain structures like the hypothalamus and continues into the brain stem and spinal cord .
The hypothalamus is the control center for many homeostatic mechanisms .
It regulates both autonomic function and endocrine function .
The roles it plays in the pupillary reflexes demonstrates the importance of this control center .
The optic nerve projects primarily to the thalamus , which is the necessary relay to the occipital cortex for conscious visual perception .
Another projection of the optic nerve , however , goes to the hypothalamus .
The hypothalamus then uses this visual system input to drive the pupillary reflexes .
If the retina is activated by high levels of light , the hypothalamus stimulates the parasympathetic response .
If the optic nerve message shows that low levels of light are falling on the retina , the hypothalamus activates the sympathetic response .
Output from the hypothalamus follows two main tracts , the dorsal longitudinal fasciculus and the medial forebrain bundle ( Figure 15.11 ) .
Along these two tracts , the hypothalamus can influence the Eddinger–Westphal nucleus of the oculomotor complex or the lateral horns of the thoracic spinal cord .
These two tracts connect the hypothalamus with the major parasympathetic nuclei in the brain stem and the preganglionic ( central ) neurons of the thoracolumbar spinal cord .
The hypothalamus also receives input from other areas of the forebrain through the medial forebrain bundle .
The olfactory cortex , the septal nuclei of the basal forebrain , and the amygdala project into the hypothalamus through the medial forebrain bundle .
These forebrain structures inform the hypothalamus about the state of the nervous system and can influence the regulatory processes of homeostasis .
A good example of this is found in the amygdala , which is found beneath the cerebral cortex of the temporal lobe and plays a role in our ability to remember and feel emotions .
The amygdala is a group of nuclei in the medial region of the temporal lobe that is part of the limbic lobe ( Figure 15.12 ) .
The limbic lobe includes structures that are involved in emotional responses , as well as structures that contribute to memory function .
The limbic lobe has strong connections with the hypothalamus and influences the state of its activity on the basis of emotional state .
For example , when you are anxious or scared , the amygdala will send signals to the hypothalamus along the medial forebrain bundle that will stimulate the sympathetic fight-or-flight response .
The hypothalamus will also stimulate the release of stress hormones through its control of the endocrine system in response to amygdala input .
The medulla contains nuclei referred to as the cardiovascular center , which controls the smooth and cardiac muscle of the cardiovascular system through autonomic connections .
When the homeostasis of the cardiovascular system shifts , such as when blood pressure changes , the coordination of the autonomic system can be accomplished within this region .
Furthermore , when descending inputs from the hypothalamus stimulate this area , the sympathetic system can increase activity in the cardiovascular system , such as in response to anxiety or stress .
The preganglionic sympathetic fibers that are responsible for increasing heart rate are referred to as the cardiac accelerator nerves , whereas the preganglionic sympathetic fibers responsible for constricting blood vessels compose the vasomotor nerves .
Several brain stem nuclei are important for the visceral control of major organ systems .
One brain stem nucleus involved in cardiovascular function is the solitary nucleus .
It receives sensory input about blood pressure and cardiac function from the glossopharyngeal and vagus nerves , and its output will activate sympathetic stimulation of the heart or blood vessels through the upper thoracic lateral horn .
In addition to its association with the fight-or-flight response and rest-and-digest functions , the autonomic system is responsible for certain everyday functions .
For example , it comes into play when homeostatic mechanisms dynamically change , such as the physiological changes that accompany exercise .
Getting on the treadmill and putting in a good workout will cause the heart rate to increase , breathing to be stronger and deeper , sweat glands to activate , and the digestive system to suspend activity .
These are the same physiological changes associated with the fight-orflight response , but there is nothing chasing you on that treadmill .
This is not a simple homeostatic mechanism at work because “ maintaining the internal environment ” would mean getting all those changes back to their set points .
Instead , the sympathetic system has become active during exercise so that your body can cope with what is happening .
A homeostatic mechanism is dealing with the conscious decision to push the body away from a resting state .
The heart , actually , is moving away from its homeostatic set point .
Without any input from the autonomic system , the heart would beat at approximately 100 bpm , and the parasympathetic system slows that down to the resting rate of approximately 70 bpm .
But in the middle of a good workout , you should see your heart rate at 120–140 bpm .
You could say that the body is stressed because of what you are doing to it .
Homeostatic mechanisms are trying to keep blood pH in the normal range , or to keep body temperature under control , but those are in response to the choice to exercise .
Watch this video ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/emotions ) to learn about physical responses to emotion .
The autonomic system , which is important for regulating the homeostasis of the organ systems , is also responsible for our physiological responses to emotions such as fear .
The video summarizes the extent of the body ’ s reactions and describes several effects of the autonomic system in response to fear .
On the basis of what you have already studied about autonomic function , which effect would you expect to be associated with parasympathetic , rather than sympathetic , activity ?
This can be considered in terms of how drugs change autonomic function .
These effects will primarily be based on how drugs act at the receptors of the autonomic system neurochemistry .
The signaling molecules of the nervous system interact with proteins in the cell membranes of various target cells .
In fact , no effect can be attributed to just the signaling molecules themselves without considering the receptors .
A chemical that the body produces to interact with those receptors is called an endogenous chemical , whereas a chemical introduced to the system from outside is an exogenous chemical .
Exogenous chemicals may be of a natural origin , such as a plant extract , or they may be synthetically produced in a pharmaceutical laboratory .
One important drug that affects the autonomic system broadly is not a pharmaceutical therapeutic agent associated with the system .
This drug is nicotine .
The effects of nicotine on the autonomic nervous system are important in considering the role smoking can play in health .
All ganglionic neurons of the autonomic system , in both sympathetic and parasympathetic ganglia , are activated by ACh released from preganglionic fibers .
The ACh receptors on these neurons are of the nicotinic type , meaning that they are ligand-gated ion channels .
When the neurotransmitter released from the preganglionic fiber binds to the receptor protein , a channel opens to allow positive ions to cross the cell membrane .
The result is depolarization of the ganglia .
Nicotine acts as an ACh analog at these synapses , so when someone takes in the drug , it binds to these ACh receptors and activates the ganglionic neurons , causing them to depolarize .
Ganglia of both divisions are activated equally by the drug .
For many target organs in the body , this results in no net change .
The competing inputs to the system cancel each other out and nothing significant happens .
For example , the sympathetic system will cause sphincters in the digestive tract to contract , limiting digestive propulsion , but the parasympathetic system will cause the contraction of other muscles in the digestive tract , which will try to push the contents of the digestive system along .
The end result is that the food does not really move along and the digestive system has not appreciably changed .
The system in which this can be problematic is in the cardiovascular system , which is why smoking is a risk factor for cardiovascular disease .
First , there is no significant parasympathetic regulation of blood pressure .
Only a limited number of blood vessels are affected by parasympathetic input , so nicotine will preferentially cause the vascular tone to become more sympathetic , which means blood pressure will be increased .
Second , the autonomic control of the heart is special .
Unlike skeletal or smooth muscles , cardiac muscle is intrinsically active , meaning that it generates its own action potentials .
The autonomic system does not cause the heart to beat , it just speeds it up ( sympathetic ) or slows it down ( parasympathetic ) .
The mechanisms for this are not mutually exclusive , so the heart receives conflicting signals , and the rhythm of the heart can be affected ( Figure 15.13 ) .
The neurochemistry of the sympathetic system is based on the adrenergic system .
Norepinephrine and epinephrine influence target effectors by binding to the α-adrenergic or β-adrenergic receptors .
Drugs that affect the sympathetic system affect these chemical systems .
The drugs can be classified by whether they enhance the functions of the sympathetic system or interrupt those functions .
A drug that enhances adrenergic function is known as a sympathomimetic drug , whereas a drug that interrupts adrenergic function is a sympatholytic drug .
When the sympathetic system is not functioning correctly or the body is in a state of homeostatic imbalance , these drugs act at postganglionic terminals and synapses in the sympathetic efferent pathway .
These drugs either bind to particular adrenergic receptors and mimic norepinephrine at the synapses between sympathetic postganglionic fibers and their targets , or they increase the production and release of norepinephrine from postganglionic fibers .
Also , to increase the effectiveness of adrenergic chemicals released from the fibers , some of these drugs may block the removal or reuptake of the neurotransmitter from the synapse .
A common sympathomimetic drug is phenylephrine , which is a common component of decongestants .
It can also be used to dilate the pupil and to raise blood pressure .
Phenylephrine is known as an α -adrenergic agonist , meaning that it binds to a specific adrenergic receptor , stimulating a response .
In this role , phenylephrine will bind to the adrenergic receptors in bronchioles of the lungs and cause them to dilate .
By opening these structures , accumulated mucus can be cleared out of the lower respiratory tract .
Phenylephrine is often paired with other pharmaceuticals , such as analgesics , as in the “ sinus ” version of many over-the-counter drugs , such as Tylenol Sinus or Excedrin Sinus , or in expectorants for chest congestion such as in Robitussin CF .
A related molecule , called pseudoephedrine , was much more commonly used in these applications than was phenylephrine , until the molecule became useful in the illicit production of amphetamines .
Phenylephrine is not as effective as a drug because it can be partially broken down in the digestive tract before it is ever absorbed .
Like the adrenergic agents , phenylephrine is effective in dilating the pupil , known as mydriasis ( Figure 15.14 ) .
Phenylephrine is used during an eye exam in an ophthalmologist ’ s or optometrist ’ s office for this purpose .
It can also be used to increase blood pressure in situations in which cardiac function is compromised , such as under anesthesia or during septic shock .
Other drugs that enhance adrenergic function are not associated with therapeutic uses , but affect the functions of the sympathetic system in a similar fashion .
Cocaine primarily interferes with the uptake of dopamine at the synapse and can also increase adrenergic function .
Caffeine is an antagonist to a different neurotransmitter receptor , called the adenosine receptor .
Adenosine will suppress adrenergic activity , specifically the release of norepinephrine at synapses , so caffeine indirectly increases adrenergic activity .
There is some evidence that caffeine can aid in the therapeutic use of drugs , perhaps by potentiating ( increasing ) sympathetic function , as is suggested by the inclusion of caffeine in over-the-counter analgesics such as Excedrin .
Drugs that interfere with sympathetic function are referred to as sympatholytic , or sympathoplegic , drugs .
They primarily work as an antagonist to the adrenergic receptors .
They block the ability of norepinephrine or epinephrine to bind to the receptors so that the effect is “ cut ” or “ takes a blow , ” to refer to the endings “ -lytic ” and “ -plegic , ” respectively .
The various drugs of this class will be specific to α-adrenergic or β-adrenergic receptors , or to their receptor subtypes .
Possibly the most familiar type of sympatholytic drug are the β-blockers .
These drugs are often used to treat cardiovascular disease because they block the β-receptors associated with vasoconstriction and cardioacceleration .
By allowing blood vessels to dilate , or keeping heart rate from increasing , these drugs can improve cardiac function in a compromised system , such as for a person with congestive heart failure or who has previously suffered a heart attack .
A couple of common versions of β-blockers are metoprolol , which specifically blocks the β -receptor , and propanolol , which nonspecifically blocks β-receptors .
There are other drugs that are α-blockers and can affect the sympathetic system in a similar way .
Other uses for sympatholytic drugs are as antianxiety medications .
A common example of this is clonidine , which is an α-agonist .
The sympathetic system is tied to anxiety to the point that the sympathetic response can be referred to as “ fight , flight , or fright. ” Clonidine is used for other treatments aside from hypertension and anxiety , including pain conditions and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder .
Drugs affecting parasympathetic functions can be classified into those that increase or decrease activity at postganglionic terminals .
Parasympathetic postganglionic fibers release ACh , and the receptors on the targets are muscarinic receptors .
There are several types of muscarinic receptors , M1–M5 , but the drugs are not usually specific to the specific types .
Parasympathetic drugs can be either muscarinic agonists or antagonists , or have indirect effects on the cholinergic system .
Drugs that enhance cholinergic effects are called parasympathomimetic drugs , whereas those that inhibit cholinergic effects are referred to as anticholinergic drugs .
Pilocarpine is a nonspecific muscarinic agonist commonly used to treat disorders of the eye .
It reverses mydriasis , such as is caused by phenylephrine , and can be administered after an eye exam .
Along with constricting the pupil through the smooth muscle of the iris , pilocarpine will also cause the ciliary muscle to contract .
This will open perforations at the base of the cornea , allowing for the drainage of aqueous humor from the anterior compartment of the eye and , therefore , reducing intraocular pressure related to glaucoma .
Atropine and scopolamine are part of a class of muscarinic antagonists that come from the Atropa genus of plants that include belladonna or deadly nightshade ( Figure 15.15 ) .
The name of one of these plants , belladonna , refers to the fact that extracts from this plant were used cosmetically for dilating the pupil .
The active chemicals from this plant block the muscarinic receptors in the iris and allow the pupil to dilate , which is considered attractive because it makes the eyes appear larger .
Humans are instinctively attracted to anything with larger eyes , which comes from the fact that the ratio of eye-tohead size is different in infants ( or baby animals ) and can elicit an emotional response .
The cosmetic use of belladonna extract was essentially acting on this response .
Atropine is no longer used in this cosmetic capacity for reasons related to the other name for the plant , which is deadly nightshade .
Suppression of parasympathetic function , especially when it becomes systemic , can be fatal .
Autonomic regulation is disrupted and anticholinergic symptoms develop .
The berries of this plant are highly toxic , but can be mistaken for other berries .
The antidote for atropine or scopolamine poisoning is pilocarpine .
Approximately 33 percent of people experience a mild problem with motion sickness , whereas up to 66 percent experience motion sickness under extreme conditions , such as being on a tossing boat with no view of the horizon .
Connections between regions in the brain stem and the autonomic system result in the symptoms of nausea , cold sweats , and vomiting .
The part of the brain responsible for vomiting , or emesis , is known as the area postrema .
It is located next to the fourth ventricle and is not restricted by the blood–brain barrier , which allows it to respond to chemicals in the bloodstream—namely , toxins that will stimulate emesis .
There are significant connections between this area , the solitary nucleus , and the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus nerve .
These autonomic system and nuclei connections are associated with the symptoms of motion sickness .
Motion sickness is the result of conflicting information from the visual and vestibular systems .
If motion is perceived by the visual system without the complementary vestibular stimuli , or through vestibular stimuli without visual confirmation , the brain stimulates emesis and the associated symptoms .
The area postrema , by itself , appears to be able to stimulate emesis in response to toxins in the blood , but it is also connected to the autonomic system and can trigger a similar response to motion .
Autonomic drugs are used to combat motion sickness .
Though it is often described as a dangerous and deadly drug , scopolamine is used to treat motion sickness .
A popular treatment for motion sickness is the transdermal scopolamine patch .
Scopolamine is one of the substances derived from the Atropa genus along with atropine .
At higher doses , those substances are thought to be poisonous and can lead to an extreme sympathetic syndrome .
However , the transdermal patch regulates the release of the drug , and the concentration is kept very low so that the dangers are avoided .
For those who are concerned about using “ The Most Dangerous Drug , ” as some websites will call it , antihistamines such as dimenhydrinate ( Dramamine ) can be used .
Watch this video ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/3Dmovies ) to learn about the side effects of 3-D movies .
As discussed in this video , movies that are shot in 3-D can cause motion sickness , which elicits the autonomic symptoms of nausea and sweating .
The disconnection between the perceived motion on the screen and the lack of any change in equilibrium stimulates these symptoms .
Why do you think sitting close to the screen or right in the middle of the theater makes motion sickness during a 3-D movie worse ?
The most likely explanation is that he has suffered a stroke , which has caused a loss of oxygen to a particular part of the central nervous system ( CNS ) .
The problem is finding where in the entire nervous system the stroke has occurred .
By checking reflexes , sensory responses , and motor control , a health care provider can focus on what abilities the patient may have lost as a result of the stroke and can use this information to determine where the injury occurred .
In the emergency department of the hospital , this kind of rapid assessment of neurological function is key to treating trauma to the nervous system .
In the classroom , the neurological exam is a valuable tool for learning the anatomy and physiology of the nervous system because it allows you to relate the functions of the system to particular locations in the nervous system .
As a student of anatomy and physiology , you may be planning to go into an allied health field , perhaps nursing or physical therapy .
You could be in the emergency department treating a patient such as the one just described .
An important part of this course is to understand the nervous system .
This can be especially challenging because you need to learn about the nervous system using your own nervous system .
The first chapter in this unit about the nervous system began with a quote : “ If the human brain were simple enough for us to understand , we would be too simple to understand it. ” However , you are being asked to understand aspects of it .
A healthcare provider can pinpoint problems with the nervous system in minutes by running through the series of tasks to test neurological function that are described in this chapter .
You can use the same approach , though not as quickly , to learn about neurological function and its relationship to the structures of the nervous system .
Nervous tissue is different from other tissues in that it is not classified into separate tissue types .
It does contain two types of cells , neurons and glia , but it is all just nervous tissue .
White matter and gray matter are not types of nervous tissue , but indications of different specializations within the nervous tissue .
However , not all nervous tissue performs the same function .
Furthermore , specific functions are not wholly localized to individual brain structures in the way that other bodily functions occur strictly within specific organs .
In the CNS , we must consider the connections between cells over broad areas , not just the function of cells in one particular nucleus or region .
In a broad sense , the nervous system is responsible for the majority of electrochemical signaling in the body , but the use of those signals is different in various regions .
The nervous system is made up of the brain and spinal cord as the central organs , and the ganglia and nerves as organs in the periphery .
The brain and spinal cord can be thought of as a collection of smaller organs , most of which would be the nuclei ( such as the oculomotor nuclei ) , but white matter structures play an important role ( such as the corpus callosum ) .
Studying the nervous system requires an understanding of the varied physiology of the nervous system .
For example , the hypothalamus plays a very different role than the visual cortex .
The neurological exam provides a way to elicit behavior that represents those varied functions .
It can be performed in a short time—sometimes as quickly as 5 minutes—to establish neurological function .
In the emergency department , this rapid assessment can make the difference with respect to proper treatment and the extent of recovery that is possible .
The exam is a series of subtests separated into five major sections .
The first of these is the mental status exam , which assesses the higher cognitive functions such as memory , orientation , and language .
Then there is the cranial nerve exam , which tests the function of the 12 cranial nerves and , therefore , the central and peripheral structures associated with them .
The cranial nerve exam tests the sensory and motor functions of each of the nerves , as applicable .
Two major sections , the sensory exam and the motor exam , test the sensory and motor functions associated with spinal nerves .
Finally , the coordination exam tests the ability to perform complex and coordinated movements .
The gait exam , which is often considered a sixth major exam , specifically assesses the motor function of walking and can be considered part of the coordination exam because walking is a coordinated movement .
Localization of function is the concept that circumscribed locations are responsible for specific functions .
The neurological exam highlights this relationship .
For example , the cognitive functions that are assessed in the mental status exam are based on functions in the cerebrum , mostly in the cerebral cortex .
Several of the subtests examine language function .
Deficits in neurological function uncovered by these examinations usually point to damage to the left cerebral cortex .
In the majority of individuals , language function is localized to the left hemisphere between the superior temporal lobe and the posterior frontal lobe , including the intervening connections through the inferior parietal lobe .
The five major sections of the neurological exam are related to the major regions of the CNS ( Figure 16.2 ) .
The mental status exam assesses functions related to the cerebrum .
The cranial nerve exam is for the nerves that connect to the diencephalon and brain stem ( as well as the olfactory connections to the forebrain ) .
The coordination exam and the related gait exam primarily assess the functions of the cerebellum .
The motor and sensory exams are associated with the spinal cord and its connections through the spinal nerves .
Part of the power of the neurological exam is this link between structure and function .
Testing the various functions represented in the exam allows an accurate estimation of where the nervous system may be damaged .
Consider the patient described in the chapter introduction .
In the emergency department , he is given a quick exam to find where the deficit may be localized .
Knowledge of where the damage occurred will lead to the most effective therapy .
In rapid succession , he is asked to smile , raise his eyebrows , stick out his tongue , and shrug his shoulders .
The doctor tests muscular strength by providing resistance against his arms and legs while he tries to lift them .
With his eyes closed , he has to indicate when he feels the tip of a pen touch his legs , arms , fingers , and face .
He follows the tip of a pen as the doctor moves it through the visual field and finally toward his face .
A formal mental status exam is not needed at this point ; the patient will demonstrate any possible deficits in that area during normal interactions with the interviewer .
If cognitive or language deficits are apparent , the interviewer can pursue mental status in more depth .
All of this takes place in less than 5 minutes .
The patient reports that he feels pins and needles in his left arm and leg , and has trouble feeling the tip of the pen when he is touched on those limbs .
This suggests a problem with the sensory systems between the spinal cord and the brain .
The emergency department has a lead to follow before a CT scan is performed .
He is put on aspirin therapy to limit the possibility of blood clots forming , in case the cause is an embolus —an obstruction such as a blood clot that blocks the flow of blood in an artery or vein .
Watch this video ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/neuroexam ) to see a demonstration of the neurological exam—a series of tests that can be performed rapidly when a patient is initially brought into an emergency department .
The exam can be repeated on a regular basis to keep a record of how and if neurological function changes over time .
In what order were the sections of the neurological exam tested in this video , and which section seemed to be left out ?
Damage to the nervous system can be limited to individual structures or can be distributed across broad areas of the brain and spinal cord .
Localized , limited injury to the nervous system is most often the result of circulatory problems .
Neurons are very sensitive to oxygen deprivation and will start to deteriorate within 1 or 2 minutes , and permanent damage ( cell death ) could result within a few hours .
The loss of blood flow to part of the brain is known as a stroke , or a cerebrovascular accident ( CVA ) .
There are two main types of stroke , depending on how the blood supply is compromised : ischemic and hemorrhagic .
An ischemic stroke is the loss of blood flow to an area because vessels are blocked or narrowed .
This is often caused by an embolus , which may be a blood clot or fat deposit .
Ischemia may also be the result of thickening of the blood vessel wall , or a drop in blood volume in the brain known as hypovolemia .
A related type of CVA is known as a transient ischemic attack ( TIA ) , which is similar to a stroke although it does not last as long .
The diagnostic definition of a stroke includes effects that last at least 24 hours .
Any stroke symptoms that are resolved within a 24-hour period because of restoration of adequate blood flow are classified as a TIA .
A hemorrhagic stroke is bleeding into the brain because of a damaged blood vessel .
Accumulated blood fills a region of the cranial vault and presses against the tissue in the brain ( Figure 16.3 ) .
Physical pressure on the brain can cause the loss of function , as well as the squeezing of local arteries resulting in compromised blood flow beyond the site of the hemorrhage .
As blood pools in the nervous tissue and the vasculature is damaged , the blood-brain barrier can break down and allow additional fluid to accumulate in the region , which is known as edema .
Whereas hemorrhagic stroke may involve bleeding into a large region of the CNS , such as into the deep white matter of a cerebral hemisphere , other events can cause widespread damage and loss of neurological functions .
Infectious diseases can lead to loss of function throughout the CNS as components of nervous tissue , specifically astrocytes and microglia , react to the disease .
Blunt force trauma , such as from a motor vehicle accident , can physically damage the CNS .
In diseases like Alzheimer ’ s , Parkinson ’ s , or ALS , neurons die ; in diseases like MS , myelin is affected .
Some of these disorders affect motor function , and others present with dementia .
The causes of these disorders are also varied .
Some are the result of genetics , such as Huntington ’ s disease , or the result of autoimmunity , such as MS ; others are not entirely understood , such as Alzheimer ’ s and Parkinson ’ s diseases .
Current research suggests that many of these diseases are related in how the degeneration takes place and may be treated by common therapies .
Finally , a common cause of neurological changes is observed in developmental disorders .
Whether the result of genetic factors or the environment during development , there are certain situations that result in neurological functions being different from the expected norms .
Developmental disorders are difficult to define because they are caused by defects that existed in the past and disrupted the normal development of the CNS .
These defects probably involve multiple environmental and genetic factors—most of the time , we don ’ t know what the cause is other than that it is more complex than just one factor .
Furthermore , each defect on its own may not be a problem , but when several are added together , they can disrupt growth processes that are not well understand in the first place .
For instance , it is possible for a stroke to damage a specific region of the brain and lead to the loss of the ability to recognize faces ( prosopagnosia ) .
The link between cell death in the fusiform gyrus and the symptom is relatively easy to understand .
In contrast , similar deficits can be seen in children with the developmental disorder , autism spectrum disorder ( ASD ) .
However , these children do not lack a fusiform gyrus , nor is there any damage or defect visible to this brain region .
We conclude , rather poorly , that this brain region is not connected properly to other brain regions .
Infection , trauma , and congenital disorders can all lead to significant signs , as identified through the neurological exam .
It is important to differentiate between an acute event , such as stroke , and a chronic or global condition such as blunt force trauma .
Responses seen in the neurological exam can help .
A loss of language function observed in all its aspects is more likely a global event as opposed to a discrete loss of one function , such as not being able to say certain types of words .
A concern , however , is that a specific function—such as controlling the muscles of speech—may mask other language functions .
The various subtests within the mental status exam can address these finer points and help clarify the underlying cause of the neurological loss .
Watch this video ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/neuroexam2 ) for an introduction to the neurological exam .
Studying the neurological exam can give insight into how structure and function in the nervous system are interdependent .
This is a tool both in the clinic and in the classroom , but for different reasons .
In the clinic , this is a powerful but simple tool to assess a patient ’ s neurological function .
In the classroom , it is a different way to think about the nervous system .
Though medical technology provides noninvasive imaging and real-time functional data , the presenter says these can not replace the history at the core of the medical examination .
What does history mean in the context of medical practice ?
Ultimately , this is accomplished by assessing behavior .
Tremors related to intentional movements , incoordination , or the neglect of one side of the body can be indicative of failures of the connections of the cerebrum either within the hemispheres , or from the cerebrum to other portions of the nervous system .
There is no strict test for what the cerebrum does alone , but rather in what it does through its control of the rest of the CNS , the peripheral nervous system ( PNS ) , and the musculature .
Sometimes eliciting a behavior is as simple as asking a question .
If the answer to “ What is your name ? ” is “ Santa Claus , ” the person may have a problem understanding reality .
If the person just stares at the examiner with a confused look on their face , the person may have a problem understanding or producing speech .
The cerebrum is the seat of many of the higher mental functions , such as memory and learning , language , and conscious perception , which are the subjects of subtests of the mental status exam .
The cerebral cortex is the thin layer of gray matter on the outside of the cerebrum .
It is approximately a millimeter thick in most regions and highly folded to fit within the limited space of the cranial vault .
These higher functions are distributed across various regions of the cortex , and specific locations can be said to be responsible for particular functions .
There is a limited set of regions , for example , that are involved in language function , and they can be subdivided on the basis of the particular part of language function that each governs .
The basis for parceling out areas of the cortex and attributing them to various functions has its root in pure anatomical underpinnings .
Brodmann made preparations of many different regions of the cerebral cortex to view with a microscope .
He compared the size , shape , and number of neurons to find anatomical differences in the various parts of the cerebral cortex .
Continued investigation into these anatomical areas over the subsequent 100 or more years has demonstrated a strong correlation between the structures and the functions attributed to those structures .
For example , the first three areas in Brodmann ’ s list—which are in the postcentral gyrus—compose the primary somatosensory cortex .
Within this area , finer separation can be made on the basis of the concept of the sensory homunculus , as well as the different submodalities of somatosensation such as touch , vibration , pain , temperature , or proprioception .
Today , we more frequently refer to these regions by their function ( i.e. , primary sensory cortex ) than by the number Brodmann assigned to them , but in some situations the use of Brodmann numbers persists .
Area 17 , as Brodmann described it , is also known as the primary visual cortex .
Adjacent to that are areas 18 and 19 , which constitute subsequent regions of visual processing .
Area 22 is the primary auditory cortex , and it is followed by area 23 , which further processes auditory information .
Area 4 is the primary motor cortex in the precentral gyrus , whereas area 6 is the premotor cortex .
These areas suggest some specialization within the cortex for functional processing , both in sensory and motor regions .
The fact that Brodmann ’ s areas correlate so closely to functional localization in the cerebral cortex demonstrates the strong link between structure and function in these regions .
Areas 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 17 , and 22 are each described as primary cortical areas .
The adjoining regions are each referred to as association areas .
Primary areas are where sensory information is initially received from the thalamus for conscious perception , or—in the case of the primary motor cortex—where descending commands are sent down to the brain stem or spinal cord to execute movements ( Figure 16.5 ) .
A number of other regions , which extend beyond these primary or association areas of the cortex , are referred to as integrative areas .
These areas are found in the spaces between the domains for particular sensory or motor functions , and they integrate multisensory information , or process sensory or motor information in more complex ways .
Consider , for example , the posterior parietal cortex that lies between the somatosensory cortex and visual cortex regions .
This has been ascribed to the coordination of visual and motor functions , such as reaching to pick up a glass .
The somatosensory function that would be part of this is the proprioceptive feedback from moving the arm and hand .
The weight of the glass , based on what it contains , will influence how those movements are executed .
Assessment of cerebral functions is directed at cognitive abilities .
The abilities assessed through the mental status exam can be separated into four groups : orientation and memory , language and speech , sensorium , and judgment and abstract reasoning .
Orientation is the patient ’ s awareness of his or her immediate circumstances .
It is awareness of time , not in terms of the clock , but of the date and what is occurring around the patient .
It is awareness of place , such that a patient should know where he or she is and why .
It is also awareness of who the patient is—recognizing personal identity and being able to relate that to the examiner .
There are also specific tasks to address memory .
One is the three-word recall test .
The patient is given three words to recall , such as book , clock , and shovel .
After a short interval , during which other parts of the interview continue , the patient is asked to recall the three words .
Memory is largely a function of the temporal lobe , along with structures beneath the cerebral cortex such as the hippocampus and the amygdala .
The storage of memory requires these structures of the medial temporal lobe .
A famous case of a man who had both medial temporal lobes removed to treat intractable epilepsy provided insight into the relationship between the structures of the brain and the function of memory .
Henry Molaison , who was referred to as patient HM when he was alive , had epilepsy localized to both of his medial temporal lobes .
In 1953 , a bilateral lobectomy was performed that alleviated the epilepsy but resulted in the inability for HM to form new memories—a condition called anterograde amnesia .
HM was able to recall most events from before his surgery , although there was a partial loss of earlier memories , which is referred to as retrograde amnesia .
HM became the subject of extensive studies into how memory works .
What he was unable to do was form new memories of what happened to him , what are now called episodic memory .
Episodic memory is autobiographical in nature , such as remembering riding a bicycle as a child around the neighborhood , as opposed to the procedural memory of how to ride a bike .
HM also retained his short-term memory , such as what is tested by the three-word task described above .
After a brief period , those memories would dissipate or decay and not be stored in the long-term because the medial temporal lobe structures were removed .
The difference in short-term , procedural , and episodic memory , as evidenced by patient HM , suggests that there are different parts of the brain responsible for those functions .
The long-term storage of episodic memory requires the hippocampus and related medial temporal structures , and the location of those memories is in the multimodal integration areas of the cerebral cortex .
However , short-term memory—also called working or active memory—is localized to the prefrontal lobe .
The prefrontal cortex can also be tested for the ability to organize information .
In one subtest of the mental status exam called set generation , the patient is asked to generate a list of words that all start with the same letter , but not to include proper nouns or names .
The expectation is that a person can generate such a list of at least 10 words within 1 minute .
Many people can likely do this much more quickly , but the standard separates the accepted normal from those with compromised prefrontal cortices .
Read this article ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/3word ) to learn about a young man who texts his fiancée in a panic as he finds that he is having trouble remembering things .
At the hospital , a neurologist administers the mental status exam , which is mostly normal except for the three-word recall test .
The young man could not recall them even 30 seconds after hearing them and repeating them back to the doctor .
An undiscovered mass in the mediastinum region was found to be Hodgkin ’ s lymphoma , a type of cancer that affects the immune system and likely caused antibodies to attack the nervous system .
The patient eventually regained his ability to remember , though the events in the hospital were always elusive .
Considering that the effects on memory were temporary , but resulted in the loss of the specific events of the hospital stay , what regions of the brain were likely to have been affected by the antibodies and what type of memory does that represent ?
Language is , arguably , a very human aspect of neurological function .
There are certainly strides being made in understanding communication in other species , but much of what makes the human experience seemingly unique is its basis in language .
Formulating an understanding of yourself is largely describing who you are to yourself .
It is a confusing topic to delve into , but language is certainly at the core of what it means to be self-aware .
The neurological exam has two specific subtests that address language .
Language , however , is important in so many ways in the neurological exam .
An important example of multimodal integrative areas is associated with language function ( Figure 16.6 ) .
Adjacent to the auditory association cortex , at the end of the lateral sulcus just anterior to the visual cortex , is Wernicke ’ s area .
In the lateral aspect of the frontal lobe , just anterior to the region of the motor cortex associated with the head and neck , is Broca ’ s area .
Both regions were originally described on the basis of losses of speech and language , which is called aphasia .
The aphasia associated with Broca ’ s area is known as an expressive aphasia , which means that speech production is compromised .
This type of aphasia is often described as non-fluency because the ability to say some words leads to broken or halting speech .
Grammar can also appear to be lost .
The aphasia associated with Wernicke ’ s area is known as a receptive aphasia , which is not a loss of speech production , but a loss of understanding of content .
Patients , after recovering from acute forms of this aphasia , report not being able to understand what is said to them or what they are saying themselves , but they often can not keep from talking .
The two regions are connected by white matter tracts that run between the posterior temporal lobe and the lateral aspect of the frontal lobe .
Conduction aphasia associated with damage to this connection refers to the problem of connecting the understanding of language to the production of speech .
This is a very rare condition , but is likely to present as an inability to faithfully repeat spoken language .
Those parts of the brain involved in the reception and interpretation of sensory stimuli are referred to collectively as the sensorium .
The cerebral cortex has several regions that are necessary for sensory perception .
From the primary cortical areas of the somatosensory , visual , auditory , and gustatory senses to the association areas that process information in these modalities , the cerebral cortex is the seat of conscious sensory perception .
In contrast , sensory information can also be processed by deeper brain regions , which we may vaguely describe as subconscious—for instance , we are not constantly aware of the proprioceptive information that the cerebellum uses to maintain balance .
Several of the subtests can reveal activity associated with these sensory modalities , such as being able to hear a question or see a picture .
Two subtests assess specific functions of these cortical areas .
The first is praxis , a practical exercise in which the patient performs a task completely on the basis of verbal description without any demonstration from the examiner .
For example , the patient can be told to take their left hand and place it palm down on their left thigh , then flip it over so the palm is facing up , and then repeat this four times .
The examiner describes the activity without any movements on their part to suggest how the movements are to be performed .
The patient needs to understand the instructions , transform them into movements , and use sensory feedback , both visual and proprioceptive , to perform the movements correctly .
The second subtest for sensory perception is gnosis , which involves two tasks .
The first task , known as stereognosis , involves the naming of objects strictly on the basis of the somatosensory information that comes from manipulating them .
The patient keeps their eyes closed and is given a common object , such as a coin , that they have to identify .
The patient should be able to indicate the particular type of coin , such as a dime versus a penny , or a nickel versus a quarter , on the basis of the sensory cues involved .
For example , the size , thickness , or weight of the coin may be an indication , or to differentiate the pairs of coins suggested here , the smooth or corrugated edge of the coin will correspond to the particular denomination .
The second task , graphesthesia , is to recognize numbers or letters written on the palm of the hand with a dull pointer , such as a pen cap .
Praxis and gnosis are related to the conscious perception and cortical processing of sensory information .
Being able to transform verbal commands into a sequence of motor responses , or to manipulate and recognize a common object and associate it with a name for that object .
Both subtests have language components because language function is integral to these functions .
The relationship between the words that describe actions , or the nouns that represent objects , and the cerebral location of these concepts is suggested to be localized to particular cortical areas .
Certain aphasias can be characterized by a deficit of verbs or nouns , known as V impairment or N impairment , or may be classified as V–N dissociation .
Patients have difficulty using one type of word over the other .
To describe what is happening in a photograph as part of the expressive language subtest , a patient will use activeor image-based language .
The lack of one or the other of these components of language can relate to the ability to use verbs or nouns .
Damage to the region at which the frontal and temporal lobes meet , including the region known as the insula , is associated with V impairment ; damage to the middle and inferior temporal lobe is associated with N impairment .
Planning and producing responses requires an ability to make sense of the world around us .
Making judgments and reasoning in the abstract are necessary to produce movements as part of larger responses .
For example , when your alarm goes off , do you hit the snooze button or jump out of bed ?
Is 10 extra minutes in bed worth the extra rush to get ready for your day ?
Will hitting the snooze button multiple times lead to feeling more rested or result in a panic as you run late ?
How you mentally process these questions can affect your whole day .
The prefrontal cortex is responsible for the functions responsible for planning and making decisions .
In the mental status exam , the subtest that assesses judgment and reasoning is directed at three aspects of frontal lobe function .
The prefrontal cortex is composed of the regions of the frontal lobe that are not directly related to specific motor functions .
The most posterior region of the frontal lobe , the precentral gyrus , is the primary motor cortex .
Anterior to that are the premotor cortex , Broca ’ s area , and the frontal eye fields , which are all related to planning certain types of movements .
Anterior to what could be described as motor association areas are the regions of the prefrontal cortex .
They are the regions in which judgment , abstract reasoning , and working memory are localized .
The antecedents to planning certain movements are judging whether those movements should be made , as in the example of deciding whether to hit the snooze button .
To an extent , the prefrontal cortex may be related to personality .
The neurological exam does not necessarily assess personality , but it can be within the realm of neurology or psychiatry .
A clinical situation that suggests this link between the prefrontal cortex and personality comes from the story of Phineas Gage , the railroad worker from the mid-1800s who had a metal spike impale his prefrontal cortex .
There are suggestions that the steel rod led to changes in his personality .
A man who was a quiet , dependable railroad worker became a raucous , irritable drunkard .
Later anecdotal evidence from his life suggests that he was able to support himself , although he had to relocate and take on a different career as a stagecoach driver .
A psychiatric practice to deal with various disorders was the prefrontal lobotomy .
This procedure was common in the 1940s and early 1950s , until antipsychotic drugs became available .
The connections between the prefrontal cortex and other regions of the brain were severed .
The disorders associated with this procedure included some aspects of what are now referred to as personality disorders , but also included mood disorders and psychoses .
Depictions of lobotomies in popular media suggest a link between cutting the white matter of the prefrontal cortex and changes in a patient ’ s mood and personality , though this correlation is not well understood .
Popular media often refer to right-brained and left-brained people , as if the brain were two independent halves that work differently for different people .
This is a popular misinterpretation of an important neurological phenomenon .
As an extreme measure to deal with a debilitating condition , the corpus callosum may be sectioned to overcome intractable epilepsy .
When the connections between the two cerebral hemispheres are cut , interesting effects can be observed .
If a person with an intact corpus callosum is asked to put their hands in their pockets and describe what is there on the basis of what their hands feel , they might say that they have keys in their right pocket and loose change in the left .
They may even be able to count the coins in their pocket and say if they can afford to buy a candy bar from the vending machine .
If a person with a sectioned corpus callosum is given the same instructions , they will do something quite peculiar .
They will only put their right hand in their pocket and say they have keys there .
They will not even move their left hand , much less report that there is loose change in the left pocket .
The reason for this is that the language functions of the cerebral cortex are localized to the left hemisphere in 95 percent of the population .
Additionally , the left hemisphere is connected to the right side of the body through the corticospinal tract and the ascending tracts of the spinal cord .
Motor commands from the precentral gyrus control the opposite side of the body , whereas sensory information processed by the postcentral gyrus is received from the opposite side of the body .
For a verbal command to initiate movement of the right arm and hand , the left side of the brain needs to be connected by the corpus callosum .
Language is processed in the left side of the brain and directly influences the left brain and right arm motor functions , but is sent to influence the right brain and left arm motor functions through the corpus callosum .
Likewise , the left-handed sensory perception of what is in the left pocket travels across the corpus callosum from the right brain , so no verbal report on those contents would be possible if the hand happened to be in the pocket .
Watch the video ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/2brains ) titled “ The Man With Two Brains ” to see the neuroscientist Michael Gazzaniga introduce a patient he has worked with for years who has had his corpus callosum cut , separating his two cerebral hemispheres .
A few tests are run to demonstrate how this manifests in tests of cerebral function .
Unlike normal people , this patient can perform two independent tasks at the same time because the lines of communication between the right and left sides of his brain have been removed .
Whereas a person with an intact corpus callosum can not overcome the dominance of one hemisphere over the other , this patient can .
If the left cerebral hemisphere is dominant in the majority of people , why would right-handedness be most common ?
The cerebrum , particularly the cerebral cortex , is the location of important cognitive functions that are the focus of the mental status exam .
The regionalization of the cortex , initially described on the basis of anatomical evidence of cytoarchitecture , reveals the distribution of functionally distinct areas .
Cortical regions can be described as primary sensory or motor areas , association areas , or multimodal integration areas .
The functions attributed to these regions include attention , memory , language , speech , sensation , judgment , and abstract reasoning .
The mental status exam addresses these cognitive abilities through a series of subtests designed to elicit particular behaviors ascribed to these functions .
The loss of neurological function can illustrate the location of damage to the cerebrum .
Memory functions are attributed to the temporal lobe , particularly the medial temporal lobe structures known as the hippocampus and amygdala , along with the adjacent cortex .
Evidence of the importance of these structures comes from the side effects of a bilateral temporal lobectomy that were studied in detail in patient HM .
Losses of language and speech functions , known as aphasias , are associated with damage to the important integration areas in the left hemisphere known as Broca ’ s or Wernicke ’ s areas , as well as the connections in the white matter between them .
Different types of aphasia are named for the particular structures that are damaged .
Assessment of the functions of the sensorium includes praxis and gnosis .
The subtests related to these functions depend on multimodal integration , as well as language-dependent processing .
The prefrontal cortex contains structures important for planning , judgment , reasoning , and working memory .
Damage to these areas can result in changes to personality , mood , and behavior .
The famous case of Phineas Gage suggests a role for this cortex in personality , as does the outdated practice of prefrontal lobectomy .
But knowing the names of the nerves in order often leaves much to be desired in understanding what the nerves do .
The nerves can be categorized by functions , and subtests of the cranial nerve exam can clarify these functional groupings .
Three of the nerves are strictly responsible for special senses whereas four others contain fibers for special and general senses .
Three nerves are connected to the extraocular muscles resulting in the control of gaze .
Four nerves connect to muscles of the face , oral cavity , and pharynx , controlling facial expressions , mastication , swallowing , and speech .
Four nerves make up the cranial component of the parasympathetic nervous system responsible for pupillary constriction , salivation , and the regulation of the organs of the thoracic and upper abdominal cavities .
Finally , one nerve controls the muscles of the neck , assisting with spinal control of the movement of the head and neck .
The cranial nerve exam allows directed tests of forebrain and brain stem structures .
The twelve cranial nerves serve the head and neck .
The vagus nerve ( cranial nerve X ) has autonomic functions in the thoracic and superior abdominal cavities .
The special senses are served through the cranial nerves , as well as the general senses of the head and neck .
The movement of the eyes , face , tongue , throat , and neck are all under the control of cranial nerves .
Preganglionic parasympathetic nerve fibers that control pupillary size , salivary glands , and the thoracic and upper abdominal viscera are found in four of the nerves .
Tests of these functions can provide insight into damage to specific regions of the brain stem and may uncover deficits in adjacent regions .
The olfactory , optic , and vestibulocochlear nerves ( cranial nerves I , II , and VIII ) are dedicated to four of the special senses : smell , vision , equilibrium , and hearing , respectively .
Taste sensation is relayed to the brain stem through fibers of the facial and glossopharyngeal nerves .
The trigeminal nerve is a mixed nerve that carries the general somatic senses from the head , similar to those coming through spinal nerves from the rest of the body .
Testing smell is straightforward , as common smells are presented to one nostril at a time .
The patient should be able to recognize the smell of coffee or mint , indicating the proper functioning of the olfactory system .
Loss of the sense of smell is called anosmia and can be lost following blunt trauma to the head or through aging .
The short axons of the first cranial nerve regenerate on a regular basis .
The neurons in the olfactory epithelium have a limited life span , and new cells grow to replace the ones that die off .
The axons from these neurons grow back into the CNS by following the existing axons—representing one of the few examples of such growth in the mature nervous system .
If all of the fibers are sheared when the brain moves within the cranium , such as in a motor vehicle accident , then no axons can find their way back to the olfactory bulb to reestablish connections .
If the nerve is not completely severed , the anosmia may be temporary as new neurons can eventually reconnect .
Olfaction is not the pre-eminent sense , but its loss can be quite detrimental .
The enjoyment of food is largely based on our sense of smell .
Anosmia means that food will not seem to have the same taste , though the gustatory sense is intact , and food will often be described as being bland .
However , the taste of food can be improved by adding ingredients ( e.g. , salt ) that stimulate the gustatory sense .
Testing vision relies on the tests that are common in an optometry office .
The Snellen chart ( Figure 16.7 ) demonstrates visual acuity by presenting standard Roman letters in a variety of sizes .
The result of this test is a rough generalization of the acuity of a person based on the normal accepted acuity , such that a letter that subtends a visual angle of 5 minutes of an arc at 20 feet can be seen .
To have 20/60 vision , for example , means that the smallest letters that a person can see at a 20-foot distance could be seen by a person with normal acuity from 60 feet away .
Testing the extent of the visual field means that the examiner can establish the boundaries of peripheral vision as simply as holding their hands out to either side and asking the patient when the fingers are no longer visible without moving the eyes to track them .
If it is necessary , further tests can establish the perceptions in the visual fields .
Physical inspection of the optic disk , or where the optic nerve emerges from the eye , can be accomplished by looking through the pupil with an ophthalmoscope .
The optic nerves from both sides enter the cranium through the respective optic canals and meet at the optic chiasm at which fibers sort such that the two halves of the visual field are processed by the opposite sides of the brain .
Deficits in visual field perception often suggest damage along the length of the optic pathway between the orbit and the diencephalon .
For example , loss of peripheral vision may be the result of a pituitary tumor pressing on the optic chiasm ( Figure 16.8 ) .
The pituitary , seated in the sella turcica of the sphenoid bone , is directly inferior to the optic chiasm .
The axons that decussate in the chiasm are from the medial retinae of either eye , and therefore carry information from the peripheral visual field .
The vestibulocochlear nerve ( CN VIII ) carries both equilibrium and auditory sensations from the inner ear to the medulla .
Though the two senses are not directly related , anatomy is mirrored in the two systems .
Problems with balance , such as vertigo , and deficits in hearing may both point to problems with the inner ear .
Within the petrous region of the temporal bone is the bony labyrinth of the inner ear .
The vestibule is the portion for equilibrium , composed of the utricle , saccule , and the three semicircular canals .
The cochlea is responsible for transducing sound waves into a neural signal .
The sensory nerves from these two structures travel side-by-side as the vestibulocochlear nerve , though they are really separate divisions .
They both emerge from the inner ear , pass through the internal auditory meatus , and synapse in nuclei of the superior medulla .
Though they are part of distinct sensory systems , the vestibular nuclei and the cochlear nuclei are close neighbors with adjacent inputs .
Deficits in one or both systems could occur from damage that encompasses structures close to both .
Damage to structures near the two nuclei can result in deficits to one or both systems .
Balance or hearing deficits may be the result of damage to the middle or inner ear structures .
Ménière 's disease is a disorder that can affect both equilibrium and audition in a variety of ways .
The patient can suffer from vertigo , a low-frequency ringing in the ears , or a loss of hearing .
From patient to patient , the exact presentation of the disease can be different .
Additionally , within a single patient , the symptoms and signs may change as the disease progresses .
Use of the neurological exam subtests for the vestibulocochlear nerve illuminates the changes a patient may go through .
The disease appears to be the result of accumulation , or over-production , of fluid in the inner ear , in either the vestibule or cochlea .
Tests of equilibrium are important for coordination and gait and are related to other aspects of the neurological exam .
The vestibulo-ocular reflex involves the cranial nerves for gaze control .
Balance and equilibrium , as tested by the Romberg test , are part of spinal and cerebellar processes and involved in those components of the neurological exam , as discussed later .
Hearing is tested by using a tuning fork in a couple of different ways .
The Rinne test involves using a tuning fork to distinguish between conductive hearing and sensorineural hearing .
Conductive hearing relies on vibrations being conducted through the ossicles of the middle ear .
Sensorineural hearing is the transmission of sound stimuli through the neural components of the inner ear and cranial nerve .
A vibrating tuning fork is placed on the mastoid process and the patient indicates when the sound produced from this is no longer present .
Then the fork is immediately moved to just next to the ear canal so the sound travels through the air .
If the sound is not heard through the ear , meaning the sound is conducted better through the temporal bone than through the ossicles , a conductive hearing deficit is present .
The Weber test also uses a tuning fork to differentiate between conductive versus sensorineural hearing loss .
In this test , the tuning fork is placed at the top of the skull , and the sound of the tuning fork reaches both inner ears by travelling through bone .
In a healthy patient , the sound would appear equally loud in both ears .
With unilateral conductive hearing loss , however , the tuning fork sounds louder in the ear with hearing loss .
This is because the sound of the tuning fork has to compete with background noise coming from the outer ear , but in conductive hearing loss , the background noise is blocked in the damaged ear , allowing the tuning fork to sound relatively louder in that ear .
With unilateral sensorineural hearing loss , however , damage to the cochlea or associated nervous tissue means that the tuning fork sounds quieter in that ear .
The trigeminal system of the head and neck is the equivalent of the ascending spinal cord systems of the dorsal column and the spinothalamic pathways .
Somatosensation of the face is conveyed along the nerve to enter the brain stem at the level of the pons .
Synapses of those axons , however , are distributed across nuclei found throughout the brain stem .
The mesencephalic nucleus processes proprioceptive information of the face , which is the movement and position of facial muscles .
It is the sensory component of the jaw-jerk reflex , a stretch reflex of the masseter muscle .
The chief nucleus , located in the pons , receives information about light touch as well as proprioceptive information about the mandible , which are both relayed to the thalamus and , ultimately , to the postcentral gyrus of the parietal lobe .
The spinal trigeminal nucleus , located in the medulla , receives information about crude touch , pain , and temperature to be relayed to the thalamus and cortex .
Essentially , the projection through the chief nucleus is analogous to the dorsal column pathway for the body , and the projection through the spinal trigeminal nucleus is analogous to the spinothalamic pathway .
Subtests for the sensory component of the trigeminal system are the same as those for the sensory exam targeting the spinal nerves .
The primary sensory subtest for the trigeminal system is sensory discrimination .
A cotton-tipped applicator , which is cotton attached to the end of a thin wooden stick , can be used easily for this .
The wood of the applicator can be snapped so that a pointed end is opposite the soft cotton-tipped end .
The cotton end provides a touch stimulus , while the pointed end provides a painful , or sharp , stimulus .
While the patient ’ s eyes are closed , the examiner touches the two ends of the applicator to the patient ’ s face , alternating randomly between them .
The patient must identify whether the stimulus is sharp or dull .
These stimuli are processed by the trigeminal system separately .
Contact with the cotton tip of the applicator is a light touch , relayed by the chief nucleus , but contact with the pointed end of the applicator is a painful stimulus relayed by the spinal trigeminal nucleus .
Failure to discriminate these stimuli can localize problems within the brain stem .
If a patient can not recognize a painful stimulus , that might indicate damage to the spinal trigeminal nucleus in the medulla .
The medulla also contains important regions that regulate the cardiovascular , respiratory , and digestive systems , as well as being the pathway for ascending and descending tracts between the brain and spinal cord .
Damage , such as a stroke , that results in changes in sensory discrimination may indicate these unrelated regions are affected as well .
The three nerves that control the extraocular muscles are the oculomotor , trochlear , and abducens nerves , which are the third , fourth , and sixth cranial nerves .
As the name suggests , the abducens nerve is responsible for abducting the eye , which it controls through contraction of the lateral rectus muscle .
The trochlear nerve controls the superior oblique muscle to rotate the eye along its axis in the orbit medially , which is called intorsion , and is a component of focusing the eyes on an object close to the face .
The oculomotor nerve controls all the other extraocular muscles , as well as a muscle of the upper eyelid .
Movements of the two eyes need to be coordinated to locate and track visual stimuli accurately .
When moving the eyes to locate an object in the horizontal plane , or to track movement horizontally in the visual field , the lateral rectus muscle of one eye and medial rectus muscle of the other eye are both active .
The lateral rectus is controlled by neurons of the abducens nucleus in the superior medulla , whereas the medial rectus is controlled by neurons in the oculomotor nucleus of the midbrain .
Coordinated movement of both eyes through different nuclei requires integrated processing through the brain stem .
In the midbrain , the superior colliculus integrates visual stimuli with motor responses to initiate eye movements .
The paramedian pontine reticular formation ( PPRF ) will initiate a rapid eye movement , or saccade , to bring the eyes to bear on a visual stimulus quickly .
These areas are connected to the oculomotor , trochlear , and abducens nuclei by the medial longitudinal fasciculus ( MLF ) that runs through the majority of the brain stem .
The MLF allows for conjugate gaze , or the movement of the eyes in the same direction , during horizontal movements that require the lateral and medial rectus muscles .
Control of conjugate gaze strictly in the vertical direction is contained within the oculomotor complex .
To elevate the eyes , the oculomotor nerve on either side stimulates the contraction of both superior rectus muscles ; to depress the eyes , the oculomotor nerve on either side stimulates the contraction of both inferior rectus muscles .
Purely vertical movements of the eyes are not very common .
Movements are often at an angle , so some horizontal components are necessary , adding the medial and lateral rectus muscles to the movement .
The rapid movement of the eyes used to locate and direct the fovea onto visual stimuli is called a saccade .
Notice that the paths that are traced in Figure 16.9 are not strictly vertical .
The movements between the nose and the mouth are closest , but still have a slant to them .
Also , the superior and inferior rectus muscles are not perfectly oriented with the line of sight .
The origin for both muscles is medial to their insertions , so elevation and depression may require the lateral rectus muscles to compensate for the slight adduction inherent in the contraction of those muscles , requiring MLF activity as well .
Testing eye movement is simply a matter of having the patient track the tip of a pen as it is passed through the visual field .
This may appear similar to testing visual field deficits related to the optic nerve , but the difference is that the patient is asked to not move the eyes while the examiner moves a stimulus into the peripheral visual field .
Here , the extent of movement is the point of the test .
The examiner is watching for conjugate movements representing proper function of the related nuclei and the MLF .
Failure of one eye to abduct while the other adducts in a horizontal movement is referred to as internuclear ophthalmoplegia .
When this occurs , the patient will experience diplopia , or double vision , as the two eyes are temporarily pointed at different stimuli .
Diplopia is not restricted to failure of the lateral rectus , because any of the extraocular muscles may fail to move one eye in perfect conjugation with the other .
The final aspect of testing eye movements is to move the tip of the pen in toward the patient ’ s face .
As visual stimuli move closer to the face , the two medial recti muscles cause the eyes to move in the one nonconjugate movement that is part of gaze control .
When the two eyes move to look at something closer to the face , they both adduct , which is referred to as convergence .
To keep the stimulus in focus , the eye also needs to change the shape of the lens , which is controlled through the parasympathetic fibers of the oculomotor nerve .
The change in focal power of the eye is referred to as accommodation .
Accommodation ability changes with age ; focusing on nearer objects , such as the written text of a book or on a computer screen , may require corrective lenses later in life .
Coordination of the skeletal muscles for convergence and coordination of the smooth muscles of the ciliary body for accommodation are referred to as the accommodation–convergence reflex .
A crucial function of the cranial nerves is to keep visual stimuli centered on the fovea of the retina .
The vestibulo-ocular reflex ( VOR ) coordinates all of the components ( Figure 16.10 ) , both sensory and motor , that make this possible .
If the head rotates in one direction—for example , to the right—the horizontal pair of semicircular canals in the inner ear indicate the movement by increased activity on the right and decreased activity on the left .
The information is sent to the abducens nuclei and oculomotor nuclei on either side to coordinate the lateral and medial rectus muscles .
The left lateral rectus and right medial rectus muscles will contract , rotating the eyes in the opposite direction of the head , while nuclei controlling the right lateral rectus and left medial rectus muscles will be inhibited to reduce antagonism of the contracting muscles .
These actions stabilize the visual field by compensating for the head rotation with opposite rotation of the eyes in the orbits .
Deficits in the VOR may be related to vestibular damage , such as in Ménière ’ s disease , or from dorsal brain stem damage that would affect the eye movement nuclei or their connections through the MLF .
Whereas this portion of a medical exam inspects for signs of infection , such as in tonsillitis , it is also the means to test the functions of the cranial nerves that are associated with the oral cavity .
The facial and glossopharyngeal nerves convey gustatory stimulation to the brain .
Testing this is as simple as introducing salty , sour , bitter , or sweet stimuli to either side of the tongue .
The patient should respond to the taste stimulus before retracting the tongue into the mouth .
Stimuli applied to specific locations on the tongue will dissolve into the saliva and may stimulate taste buds connected to either the left or right of the nerves , masking any lateral deficits .
Along with taste , the glossopharyngeal nerve relays general sensations from the pharyngeal walls .
These sensations , along with certain taste stimuli , can stimulate the gag reflex .
If the examiner moves the tongue depressor to contact the lateral wall of the fauces , this should elicit the gag reflex .
Stimulation of either side of the fauces should elicit an equivalent response .
The motor response , through contraction of the muscles of the pharynx , is mediated through the vagus nerve .
Normally , the vagus nerve is considered autonomic in nature .
The vagus nerve directly stimulates the contraction of skeletal muscles in the pharynx and larynx to contribute to the swallowing and speech functions .
Further testing of vagus motor function has the patient repeating consonant sounds that require movement of the muscles around the fauces .
The patient is asked to say “ lah-kahpah ” or a similar set of alternating sounds while the examiner observes the movements of the soft palate and arches between the palate and tongue .
The facial and glossopharyngeal nerves are also responsible for the initiation of salivation .
Neurons in the salivary nuclei of the medulla project through these two nerves as preganglionic fibers , and synapse in ganglia located in the head .
The parasympathetic fibers of the facial nerve synapse in the pterygopalatine ganglion , which projects to the submandibular gland and sublingual gland .
The parasympathetic fibers of the glossopharyngeal nerve synapse in the otic ganglion , which projects to the parotid gland .
Salivation in response to food in the oral cavity is based on a visceral reflex arc within the facial or glossopharyngeal nerves .
Other stimuli that stimulate salivation are coordinated through the hypothalamus , such as the smell and sight of food .
The hypoglossal nerve is the motor nerve that controls the muscles of the tongue , except for the palatoglossus muscle , which is controlled by the vagus nerve .
There are two sets of muscles of the tongue .
The extrinsic muscles of the tongue are connected to other structures , whereas the intrinsic muscles of the tongue are completely contained within the lingual tissues .
While examining the oral cavity , movement of the tongue will indicate whether hypoglossal function is impaired .
The test for hypoglossal function is the “ stick out your tongue ” part of the exam .
The genioglossus muscle is responsible for protrusion of the tongue .
If the hypoglossal nerves on both sides are working properly , then the tongue will stick straight out .
If the nerve on one side has a deficit , the tongue will stick out to that side—pointing to the side with damage .
Loss of function of the tongue can interfere with speech and swallowing .
Watch this short video ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/facialnerve ) to see an examination of the facial nerve using some simple tests .
The facial nerve controls the muscles of facial expression .
Severe deficits will be obvious in watching someone use those muscles for normal control .
One side of the face might not move like the other side .
But directed tests , especially for contraction against resistance , require a formal testing of the muscles .
The muscles of the upper and lower face need to be tested .
The strength test in this video involves the patient squeezing her eyes shut and the examiner trying to pry her eyes open .
Why does the examiner ask her to try a second time ?
The accessory nerve , also referred to as the spinal accessory nerve , innervates the sternocleidomastoid and trapezius muscles ( Figure 16.11 ) .
When both the sternocleidomastoids contract , the head flexes forward ; individually , they cause rotation to the opposite side .
The trapezius can act as an antagonist , causing extension and hyperextension of the neck .
These two superficial muscles are important for changing the position of the head .
Both muscles also receive input from cervical spinal nerves .
Along with the spinal accessory nerve , these nerves contribute to elevating the scapula and clavicle through the trapezius , which is tested by asking the patient to shrug both shoulders , and watching for asymmetry .
For the sternocleidomastoid , those spinal nerves are primarily sensory projections , whereas the trapezius also has lateral insertions to the clavicle and scapula , and receives motor input from the spinal cord .
Calling the nerve the spinal accessory nerve suggests that it is aiding the spinal nerves .
Though that is not precisely how the name originated , it does help make the association between the function of this nerve in controlling these muscles and the role these muscles play in movements of the trunk or shoulders .
To test these muscles , the patient is asked to flex and extend the neck or shrug the shoulders against resistance , testing the strength of the muscles .
Lateral flexion of the neck toward the shoulder tests both at the same time .
Any difference on one side versus the other would suggest damage on the weaker side .
These strength tests are common for the skeletal muscles controlled by spinal nerves and are a significant component of the motor exam .
Deficits associated with the accessory nerve may have an effect on orienting the head , as described with the VOR .
The autonomic control of pupillary size in response to a bright light involves the sensory input of the optic nerve and the parasympathetic motor output of the oculomotor nerve .
When light hits the retina , specialized photosensitive ganglion cells send a signal along the optic nerve to the pretectal nucleus in the superior midbrain .
A neuron from this nucleus projects to the Eddinger–Westphal nuclei in the oculomotor complex in both sides of the midbrain .
Neurons in this nucleus give rise to the preganglionic parasympathetic fibers that project through the oculomotor nerve to the ciliary ganglion in the posterior orbit .
The postganglionic parasympathetic fibers from the ganglion project to the iris , where they release acetylcholine onto circular fibers that constrict the pupil to reduce the amount of light hitting the retina .
The sympathetic nervous system is responsible for dilating the pupil when light levels are low .
Shining light in one eye will elicit constriction of both pupils .
The efferent limb of the pupillary light reflex is bilateral .
Light shined in one eye causes a constriction of that pupil , as well as constriction of the contralateral pupil .
Shining a penlight in the eye of a patient is a very artificial situation , as both eyes are normally exposed to the same light sources .
Testing this reflex can illustrate whether the optic nerve or the oculomotor nerve is damaged .
If shining the light in one eye results in no changes in pupillary size but shining light in the opposite eye elicits a normal , bilateral response , the damage is associated with the optic nerve on the nonresponsive side .
If light in either eye elicits a response in only one eye , the problem is with the oculomotor system .
If light in the right eye only causes the left pupil to constrict , the direct reflex is lost and the consensual reflex is intact , which means that the right oculomotor nerve ( or Eddinger–Westphal nucleus ) is damaged .
Damage to the right oculomotor connections will be evident when light is shined in the left eye .
In that case , the direct reflex is intact but the consensual reflex is lost , meaning that the left pupil will constrict while the right does not .
The cranial nerves can be separated into four major groups associated with the subtests of the cranial nerve exam .
First are the sensory nerves , then the nerves that control eye movement , the nerves of the oral cavity and superior pharynx , and the nerve that controls movements of the neck .
Special senses are tested by presenting the particular stimuli to each receptive organ .
General senses can be tested through sensory discrimination of touch versus painful stimuli .
The oculomotor , trochlear , and abducens nerves control the extraocular muscles and are connected by the medial longitudinal fasciculus to coordinate gaze .
Testing conjugate gaze is as simple as having the patient follow a visual target , like a pen tip , through the visual field ending with an approach toward the face to test convergence and accommodation .
Along with the vestibular functions of the eighth nerve , the vestibulo-ocular reflex stabilizes gaze during head movements by coordinating equilibrium sensations with the eye movement systems .
The trigeminal nerve controls the muscles of chewing , which are tested for stretch reflexes .
Motor functions of the facial nerve are usually obvious if facial expressions are compromised , but can be tested by having the patient raise their eyebrows , smile , and frown .
Movements of the tongue , soft palate , or superior pharynx can be observed directly while the patient swallows , while the gag reflex is elicited , or while the patient says repetitive consonant sounds .
The motor control of the gag reflex is largely controlled by fibers in the vagus nerve and constitutes a test of that nerve because the parasympathetic functions of that nerve are involved in visceral regulation , such as regulating the heartbeat and digestion .
Movement of the head and neck using the sternocleidomastoid and trapezius muscles is controlled by the accessory nerve .
Flexing of the neck and strength testing of those muscles reviews the function of that nerve .
The cranial nerves connect the head and neck directly to the brain , but the spinal cord receives sensory input and sends motor commands out to the body through the spinal nerves .
Whereas the brain develops into a complex series of nuclei and fiber tracts , the spinal cord remains relatively simple in its configuration ( Figure 16.12 ) .
From the initial neural tube early in embryonic development , the spinal cord retains a tube-like structure with gray matter surrounding the small central canal and white matter on the surface in three columns .
The dorsal , or posterior , horns of the gray matter are mainly devoted to sensory functions whereas the ventral , or anterior , and lateral horns are associated with motor functions .
In the white matter , the dorsal column relays sensory information to the brain , and the anterior column is almost exclusively relaying motor commands to the ventral horn motor neurons .
The lateral column , however , conveys both sensory and motor information between the spinal cord and brain .
The general senses are distributed throughout the body , relying on nervous tissue incorporated into various organs .
Somatic senses are incorporated mostly into the skin , muscles , or tendons , whereas the visceral senses come from nervous tissue incorporated into the majority of organs such as the heart or stomach .
The somatic senses are those that usually make up the conscious perception of the how the body interacts with the environment .
The visceral senses are most often below the limit of conscious perception because they are involved in homeostatic regulation through the autonomic nervous system .
The sensory exam tests the somatic senses , meaning those that are consciously perceived .
Testing of the senses begins with examining the regions known as dermatomes that connect to the cortical region where somatosensation is perceived in the postcentral gyrus .
To test the sensory fields , a simple stimulus of the light touch of the soft end of a cotton-tipped applicator is applied at various locations on the skin .
The spinal nerves , which contain sensory fibers with dendritic endings in the skin , connect with the skin in a topographically organized manner , illustrated as dermatomes ( Figure 16.13 ) .
For example , the fibers of eighth cervical nerve innervate the medial surface of the forearm and extend out to the fingers .
In addition to testing perception at different positions on the skin , it is necessary to test sensory perception within the dermatome from distal to proximal locations in the appendages , or lateral to medial locations in the trunk .
In testing the eighth cervical nerve , the patient would be asked if the touch of the cotton to the fingers or the medial forearm was perceptible , and whether there were any differences in the sensations .
Other modalities of somatosensation can be tested using a few simple tools .
The perception of pain can be tested using the broken end of the cotton-tipped applicator .
The perception of vibratory stimuli can be testing using an oscillating tuning fork placed against prominent bone features such as the distal head of the ulna on the medial aspect of the elbow .
When the tuning fork is still , the metal against the skin can be perceived as a cold stimulus .
Using the cotton tip of the applicator , or even just a fingertip , the perception of tactile movement can be assessed as the stimulus is drawn across the skin for approximately 2–3 cm .
The patient would be asked in what direction the stimulus is moving .
All of these tests are repeated in distal and proximal locations and for different dermatomes to assess the spatial specificity of perception .
The sense of position and motion , proprioception , is tested by moving the fingers or toes and asking the patient if they sense the movement .
If the distal locations are not perceived , the test is repeated at increasingly proximal joints .
The various stimuli used to test sensory input assess the function of the major ascending tracts of the spinal cord .
The dorsal column pathway conveys fine touch , vibration , and proprioceptive information , whereas the spinothalamic pathway primarily conveys pain and temperature .
Testing these stimuli provides information about whether these two major ascending pathways are functioning properly .
Within the spinal cord , the two systems are segregated .
The dorsal column information ascends ipsilateral to the source of the stimulus and decussates in the medulla , whereas the spinothalamic pathway decussates at the level of entry and ascends contralaterally .
The differing sensory stimuli are segregated in the spinal cord so that the various subtests for these stimuli can distinguish which ascending pathway may be damaged in certain situations .
Whereas the basic sensory stimuli are assessed in the subtests directed at each submodality of somatosensation , testing the ability to discriminate sensations is important .
Pairing the light touch and pain subtests together makes it possible to compare the two submodalities at the same time , and therefore the two major ascending tracts at the same time .
Mistaking painful stimuli for light touch , or vice versa , may point to errors in ascending projections , such as in a hemisection of the spinal cord that might come from a motor vehicle accident .
Another issue of sensory discrimination is not distinguishing between different submodalities , but rather location .
The two-point discrimination subtest highlights the density of sensory endings , and therefore receptive fields in the skin .
The sensitivity to fine touch , which can give indications of the texture and detailed shape of objects , is highest in the fingertips .
To assess the limit of this sensitivity , two-point discrimination is measured by simultaneously touching the skin in two locations , such as could be accomplished with a pair of forceps .
Specialized calipers for precisely measuring the distance between points are also available .
The patient is asked to indicate whether one or two stimuli are present while keeping their eyes closed .
The examiner will switch between using the two points and a single point as the stimulus .
Failure to recognize two points may be an indication of a dorsal column pathway deficit .
Similar to two-point discrimination , but assessing laterality of perception , is double simultaneous stimulation .
Two stimuli , such as the cotton tips of two applicators , are touched to the same position on both sides of the body .
If one side is not perceived , this may indicate damage to the contralateral posterior parietal lobe .
Because there is one of each pathway on either side of the spinal cord , they are not likely to interact .
If none of the other subtests suggest particular deficits with the pathways , the deficit is likely to be in the cortex where conscious perception is based .
The mental status exam contains subtests that assess other functions that are primarily localized to the parietal cortex , such as stereognosis and graphesthesia .
A final subtest of sensory perception that concentrates on the sense of proprioception is known as the Romberg test .
The patient is asked to stand straight with feet together .
Once the patient has achieved their balance in that position , they are asked to close their eyes .
Without visual feedback that the body is in a vertical orientation relative to the surrounding environment , the patient must rely on the proprioceptive stimuli of joint and muscle position , as well as information from the inner ear , to maintain balance .
This test can indicate deficits in dorsal column pathway proprioception , as well as problems with proprioceptive projections to the cerebellum through the spinocerebellar tract .
Watch this video ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/2point ) to see a quick demonstration of two-point discrimination .
Touching a specialized caliper to the surface of the skin will measure the distance between two points that are perceived as distinct stimuli versus a single stimulus .
The patient keeps their eyes closed while the examiner switches between using both points of the caliper or just one .
The patient then must indicate whether one or two stimuli are in contact with the skin .
Why is the distance between the caliper points closer on the fingertips as opposed to the palm of the hand ?
And what do you think the distance would be on the arm , or the shoulder ?
The skeletomotor system is largely based on the simple , two-cell projection from the precentral gyrus of the frontal lobe to the skeletal muscles .
The corticospinal tract represents the neurons that send output from the primary motor cortex .
These fibers synapse on motor neurons in the ventral horn .
The ventral horn motor neurons then project to skeletal muscle and cause contraction .
These two cells are termed the upper motor neuron ( UMN ) and the lower motor neuron ( LMN ) .
Voluntary movements require these two cells to be active .
The motor exam tests the function of these neurons and the muscles they control .
First , the muscles are inspected and palpated for signs of structural irregularities .
Movement disorders may be the result of changes to the muscle tissue , such as scarring , and these possibilities need to be ruled out before testing function .
Along with this inspection , muscle tone is assessed by moving the muscles through a passive range of motion .
The arm is moved at the elbow and wrist , and the leg is moved at the knee and ankle .
Skeletal muscle should have a resting tension representing a slight contraction of the fibers .
The lack of muscle tone , known as hypotonicity or flaccidity , may indicate that the LMN is not conducting action potentials that will keep a basal level of acetylcholine in the neuromuscular junction .
If muscle tone is present , muscle strength is tested by having the patient contract muscles against resistance .
The examiner will ask the patient to lift the arm , for example , while the examiner is pushing down on it .
This is done for both limbs , including shrugging the shoulders .
Lateral differences in strength—being able to push against resistance with the right arm but not the left—would indicate a deficit in one corticospinal tract versus the other .
An overall loss of strength , without laterality , could indicate a global problem with the motor system .
Diseases that result in UMN lesions include cerebral palsy or MS , or it may be the result of a stroke .
A sign of UMN lesion is a negative result in the subtest for pronator drift .
The patient is asked to extend both arms in front of the body with the palms facing up .
While keeping the eyes closed , if the patient unconsciously allows one or the other arm to slowly relax , toward the pronated position , this could indicate a failure of the motor system to maintain the supinated position .
Reflexes combine the spinal sensory and motor components with a sensory input that directly generates a motor response .
The reflexes that are tested in the neurological exam are classified into two groups .
A deep tendon reflex is commonly known as a stretch reflex , and is elicited by a strong tap to a tendon , such as in the knee-jerk reflex .
A superficial reflex is elicited through gentle stimulation of the skin and causes contraction of the associated muscles .
For the arm , the common reflexes to test are of the biceps , brachioradialis , triceps , and flexors for the digits .
For the leg , the knee-jerk reflex of the quadriceps is common , as is the ankle reflex for the gastrocnemius and soleus .
The tendon at the insertion for each of these muscles is struck with a rubber mallet .
The muscle is quickly stretched , resulting in activation of the muscle spindle that sends a signal into the spinal cord through the dorsal root .
The fiber synapses directly on the ventral horn motor neuron that activates the muscle , causing contraction .
The reflexes are physiologically useful for stability .
If a muscle is stretched , it reflexively contracts to return the muscle to compensate for the change in length .
In the context of the neurological exam , reflexes indicate that the LMN is functioning properly .
The most common superficial reflex in the neurological exam is the plantar reflex that tests for the Babinski sign on the basis of the extension or flexion of the toes at the plantar surface of the foot .
The plantar reflex is commonly tested in newborn infants to establish the presence of neuromuscular function .
To elicit this reflex , an examiner brushes a stimulus , usually the examiner ’ s fingertip , along the plantar surface of the infant ’ s foot .
An infant would present a positive Babinski sign , meaning the foot dorsiflexes and the toes extend and splay out .
As a person learns to walk , the plantar reflex changes to cause curling of the toes and a moderate plantar flexion .
If superficial stimulation of the sole of the foot caused extension of the foot , keeping one ’ s balance would be harder .
The descending input of the corticospinal tract modifies the response of the plantar reflex , meaning that a negative Babinski sign is the expected response in testing the reflex .
Other superficial reflexes are not commonly tested , though a series of abdominal reflexes can target function in the lower thoracic spinal segments .
Watch this video ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/reflextest ) to see how to test reflexes in the abdomen .
Testing reflexes of the trunk is not commonly performed in the neurological exam , but if findings suggest a problem with the thoracic segments of the spinal cord , a series of superficial reflexes of the abdomen can localize function to those segments .
If contraction is not observed when the skin lateral to the umbilicus ( belly button ) is stimulated , what level of the spinal cord may be damaged ?
Many of the tests of motor function can indicate differences that will address whether damage to the motor system is in the upper or lower motor neurons .
Signs that suggest a UMN lesion include muscle weakness , strong deep tendon reflexes , decreased control of movement or slowness , pronator drift , a positive Babinski sign , spasticity , and the claspknife response .
Spasticity is an excess contraction in resistance to stretch .
It can result in hyperflexia , which is when joints are overly flexed .
The clasp-knife response occurs when the patient initially resists movement , but then releases , and the joint will quickly flex like a pocket knife closing .
A lesion on the LMN would result in paralysis , or at least partial loss of voluntary muscle control , which is known as paresis .
The paralysis observed in LMN diseases is referred to as flaccid paralysis , referring to a complete or partial loss of muscle tone , in contrast to the loss of control in UMN lesions in which tone is retained and spasticity is exhibited .
Other signs of an LMN lesion are fibrillation , fasciculation , and compromised or lost reflexes resulting from the denervation of the muscle fibers .
In certain situations , such as a motorcycle accident , only half of the spinal cord may be damaged in what is known as a hemisection .
Forceful trauma to the trunk may cause ribs or vertebrae to fracture , and debris can crush or section through part of the spinal cord .
The full section of a spinal cord would result in paraplegia , or loss of voluntary motor control of the lower body , as well as loss of sensations from that point down .
A hemisection , however , will leave spinal cord tracts intact on one side .
The resulting condition would be hemiplegia on the side of the trauma—one leg would be paralyzed .
The sensory results are more complicated .
The ascending tracts in the spinal cord are segregated between the dorsal column and spinothalamic pathways .
This means that the sensory deficits will be based on the particular sensory information each pathway conveys .
Sensory discrimination between touch and painful stimuli will illustrate the difference in how these pathways divide these functions .
On the paralyzed leg , a patient will acknowledge painful stimuli , but not fine touch or proprioceptive sensations .
On the functional leg , the opposite is true .
The reason for this is that the dorsal column pathway ascends ipsilateral to the sensation , so it would be damaged the same way as the lateral corticospinal tract .
The spinothalamic pathway decussates immediately upon entering the spinal cord and ascends contralateral to the source ; it would therefore bypass the hemisection .
The motor system can indicate the loss of input to the ventral horn in the lumbar enlargement where motor neurons to the leg are found , but motor function in the trunk is less clear .
The left and right anterior corticospinal tracts are directly adjacent to each other .
The likelihood of trauma to the spinal cord resulting in a hemisection that affects one anterior column , but not the other , is very unlikely .
Either the axial musculature will not be affected at all , or there will be bilateral losses in the trunk .
Sensory discrimination can pinpoint the level of damage in the spinal cord .
Below the hemisection , pain stimuli will be perceived in the damaged side , but not fine touch .
The opposite is true on the other side .
The pain fibers on the side with motor function cross the midline in the spinal cord and ascend in the contralateral lateral column as far as the hemisection .
The dorsal column will be intact ipsilateral to the source on the intact side and reach the brain for conscious perception .
The trauma would be at the level just before sensory discrimination returns to normal , helping to pinpoint the trauma .
Whereas imaging technology , like magnetic resonance imaging ( MRI ) or computed tomography ( CT ) scanning , could localize the injury as well , nothing more complicated than a cotton-tipped applicator can localize the damage .
That may be all that is available on the scene when moving the victim requires crucial decisions be made .
There is an obvious connection to motor function based on the clinical implications of cerebellar damage .
There is also strong evidence of the cerebellar role in procedural memory .
The two are not incompatible ; in fact , procedural memory is motor memory , such as learning to ride a bicycle .
Significant work has been performed to describe the connections within the cerebellum that result in learning .
A model for this learning is classical conditioning , as shown by the famous dogs from the physiologist Ivan Pavlov ’ s work .
This classical conditioning , which can be related to motor learning , fits with the neural connections of the cerebellum .
The cerebellum is 10 percent of the mass of the brain and has varied functions that all point to a role in the motor system .
The cerebellum is located in apposition to the dorsal surface of the brain stem , centered on the pons .
The name of the pons is derived from its connection to the cerebellum .
The word means “ bridge ” and refers to the thick bundle of myelinated axons that form a bulge on its ventral surface .
Those fibers are axons that project from the gray matter of the pons into the contralateral cerebellar cortex .
These fibers make up the middle cerebellar peduncle ( MCP ) and are the major physical connection of the cerebellum to the brain stem ( Figure 16.14 ) .
Two other white matter bundles connect the cerebellum to the other regions of the brain stem .
The superior cerebellar peduncle ( SCP ) is the connection of the cerebellum to the midbrain and forebrain .
The inferior cerebellar peduncle ( ICP ) is the connection to the medulla .
These connections can also be broadly described by their functions .
The ICP conveys sensory input to the cerebellum , partially from the spinocerebellar tract , but also through fibers of the inferior olive .
The MCP is part of the cortico-pontocerebellar pathway that connects the cerebral cortex with the cerebellum and preferentially targets the lateral regions of the cerebellum .
It includes a copy of the motor commands sent from the precentral gyrus through the corticospinal tract , arising from collateral branches that synapse in the gray matter of the pons , along with input from other regions such as the visual cortex .
The SCP is the major output of the cerebellum , divided between the red nucleus in the midbrain and the thalamus , which will return cerebellar processing to the motor cortex .
These connections describe a circuit that compares motor commands and sensory feedback to generate a new output .
These comparisons make it possible to coordinate movements .
If the cerebral cortex sends a motor command to initiate walking , that command is copied by the pons and sent into the cerebellum through the MCP .
Sensory feedback in the form of proprioception from the spinal cord , as well as vestibular sensations from the inner ear , enters through the ICP .
If you take a step and begin to slip on the floor because it is wet , the output from the cerebellum—through the SCP—can correct for that and keep you balanced and moving .
The red nucleus sends new motor commands to the spinal cord through the rubrospinal tract .
The cerebellum is divided into regions that are based on the particular functions and connections involved .
The lateral hemispheres are primarily concerned with planning motor functions through frontal lobe inputs that are returned through the thalamic projections back to the premotor and motor cortices .
Processing in the midline regions targets movements of the axial musculature , whereas the lateral regions target movements of the appendicular musculature .
The vermis is referred to as the spinocerebellum because it primarily receives input from the dorsal columns and spinocerebellar pathways .
The flocculonodular lobe is referred to as the vestibulocerebellum because of the vestibular projection into that region .
Finally , the lateral cerebellum is referred to as the cerebrocerebellum , reflecting the significant input from the cerebral cortex through the cortico-ponto-cerebellar pathway .
Testing for cerebellar function is the basis of the coordination exam .
The subtests target appendicular musculature , controlling the limbs , and axial musculature for posture and gait .
The assessment of cerebellar function will depend on the normal functioning of other systems addressed in previous sections of the neurological exam .
Motor control from the cerebrum , as well as sensory input from somatic , visual , and vestibular senses , are important to cerebellar function .
The subtests that address appendicular musculature , and therefore the lateral regions of the cerebellum , begin with a check for tremor .
The patient extends their arms in front of them and holds the position .
The examiner watches for the presence of tremors that would not be present if the muscles are relaxed .
By pushing down on the arms in this position , the examiner can check for the rebound response , which is when the arms are automatically brought back to the extended position .
The extension of the arms is an ongoing motor process , and the tap or push on the arms presents a change in the proprioceptive feedback .
The cerebellum compares the cerebral motor command with the proprioceptive feedback and adjusts the descending input to correct .
The red nucleus would send an additional signal to the LMN for the arm to increase contraction momentarily to overcome the change and regain the original position .
The check reflex depends on cerebellar input to keep increased contraction from continuing after the removal of resistance .
The patient flexes the elbow against resistance from the examiner to extend the elbow .
When the examiner releases the arm , the patient should be able to stop the increased contraction and keep the arm from moving .
A similar response would be seen if you try to pick up a coffee mug that you believe to be full but turns out to be empty .
Without checking the contraction , the mug would be thrown from the overexertion of the muscles expecting to lift a heavier object .
Several subtests of the cerebellum assess the ability to alternate movements , or switch between muscle groups that may be antagonistic to each other .
In the finger-to-nose test , the patient touches their finger to the examiner ’ s finger and then to their nose , and then back to the examiner ’ s finger , and back to the nose .
The examiner moves the target finger to assess a range of movements .
A similar test for the lower extremities has the patient touch their toe to a moving target , such as the examiner ’ s finger .
Both of these tests involve flexion and extension around a joint—the elbow or the knee and the shoulder or hip—as well as movements of the wrist and ankle .
The patient must switch between the opposing muscles , like the biceps and triceps brachii , to move their finger from the target to their nose .
Coordinating these movements involves the motor cortex communicating with the cerebellum through the pons and feedback through the thalamus to plan the movements .
Visual cortex information is also part of the processing that occurs in the cerebrocerebellum while it is involved in guiding movements of the finger or toe .
Rapid , alternating movements are tested for the upper and lower extremities .
The patient is asked to touch each finger to their thumb , or to pat the palm of one hand on the back of the other , and then flip that hand over and alternate back-andforth .
To test similar function in the lower extremities , the patient touches their heel to their shin near the knee and slides it down toward the ankle , and then back again , repetitively .
Rapid , alternating movements are part of speech as well .
A patient is asked to repeat the nonsense consonants “ lah-kah-pah ” to alternate movements of the tongue , lips , and palate .
All of these rapid alternations require planning from the cerebrocerebellum to coordinate movement commands that control the coordination .
Gait can either be considered a separate part of the neurological exam or a subtest of the coordination exam that addresses walking and balance .
Testing posture and gait addresses functions of the spinocerebellum and the vestibulocerebellum because both are part of these activities .
A subtest called station begins with the patient standing in a normal position to check for the placement of the feet and balance .
The patient is asked to hop on one foot to assess the ability to maintain balance and posture during movement .
Though the station subtest appears to be similar to the Romberg test , the difference is that the patient ’ s eyes are open during station .
The Romberg test has the patient stand still with the eyes closed .
Any changes in posture would be the result of proprioceptive deficits , and the patient is able to recover when they open their eyes .
Subtests of walking begin with having the patient walk normally for a distance away from the examiner , and then turn and return to the starting position .
The examiner watches for abnormal placement of the feet and the movement of the arms relative to the movement .
The patient is then asked to walk with a few different variations .
Tandem gait is when the patient places the heel of one foot against the toe of the other foot and walks in a straight line in that manner .
Walking only on the heels or only on the toes will test additional aspects of balance .
A movement disorder of the cerebellum is referred to as ataxia .
It presents as a loss of coordination in voluntary movements .
Ataxia can also refer to sensory deficits that cause balance problems , primarily in proprioception and equilibrium .
When the problem is observed in movement , it is ascribed to cerebellar damage .
Sensory and vestibular ataxia would likely also present with problems in gait and station .
Ataxia is often the result of exposure to exogenous substances , focal lesions , or a genetic disorder .
Focal lesions include strokes affecting the cerebellar arteries , tumors that may impinge on the cerebellum , trauma to the back of the head and neck , or MS. Alcohol intoxication or drugs such as ketamine cause ataxia , but it is often reversible .
Mercury in fish can cause ataxia as well .
Hereditary conditions can lead to degeneration of the cerebellum or spinal cord , as well as malformation of the brain , or the abnormal accumulation of copper seen in Wilson ’ s disease .
Watch this short video ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/stationtest ) to see a test for station .
Station refers to the position a person adopts when they are standing still .
The examiner would look for issues with balance , which coordinates proprioceptive , vestibular , and visual information in the cerebellum .
To test the ability of a subject to maintain balance , asking them to stand or hop on one foot can be more demanding .
The examiner may also push the subject to see if they can maintain balance .
An abnormal finding in the test of station is if the feet are placed far apart .
Why would a wide stance suggest problems with cerebellar function ?
The neurological exam has been described as a clinical tool throughout this chapter .
It is also useful in other ways .
A variation of the coordination exam is the Field Sobriety Test ( FST ) used to assess whether drivers are under the influence of alcohol .
The cerebellum is crucial for coordinated movements such as keeping balance while walking , or moving appendicular musculature on the basis of proprioceptive feedback .
The cerebellum is also very sensitive to ethanol , the particular type of alcohol found in beer , wine , and liquor .
Walking in a straight line involves comparing the motor command from the primary motor cortex to the proprioceptive and vestibular sensory feedback , as well as following the visual guide of the white line on the side of the road .
When the cerebellum is compromised by alcohol , the cerebellum can not coordinate these movements effectively , and maintaining balance becomes difficult .
Another common aspect of the FST is to have the driver extend their arms out wide and touch their fingertip to their nose , usually with their eyes closed .
The point of this is to remove the visual feedback for the movement and force the driver to rely just on proprioceptive information about the movement and position of their fingertip relative to their nose .
Reciting the alphabet backwards is not always a component of the FST , but its relationship to neurological function is interesting .
There is a cognitive aspect to remembering how the alphabet goes and how to recite it backwards .
That is actually a variation of the mental status subtest of repeating the months backwards .
However , the cerebellum is important because speech production is a coordinated activity .
The speech rapid alternating movement subtest is specifically using the consonant changes of “ lah-kah-pah ” to assess coordinated movements of the lips , tongue , pharynx , and palate .
But the entire alphabet , especially in the nonrehearsed backwards order , pushes this type of coordinated movement quite far .
It is related to the reason that speech becomes slurred when a person is intoxicated .
Similarly , certain cells send chemical signals to other cells in the body that influence their behavior .
This long-distance intercellular communication , coordination , and control is critical for homeostasis , and it is the fundamental function of the endocrine system .
In the human body , two major organ systems participate in relatively “ long distance ” communication : the nervous system and the endocrine system .
Together , these two systems are primarily responsible for maintaining homeostasis in the body .
The nervous system uses two types of intercellular communication—electrical and chemical signaling—either by the direct action of an electrical potential , or in the latter case , through the action of chemical neurotransmitters such as serotonin or norepinephrine .
Neurotransmitters act locally and rapidly .
When an electrical signal in the form of an action potential arrives at the synaptic terminal , they diffuse across the synaptic cleft ( the gap between a sending neuron and a receiving neuron or muscle cell ) .
Once the neurotransmitters interact ( bind ) with receptors on the receiving ( post-synaptic ) cell , the receptor stimulation is transduced into a response such as continued electrical signaling or modification of cellular response .
The target cell responds within milliseconds of receiving the chemical “ message ” ; this response then ceases very quickly once the neural signaling ends .
In this way , neural communication enables body functions that involve quick , brief actions , such as movement , sensation , and cognition.In contrast , the endocrine system uses just one method of communication : chemical signaling .
These signals are sent by the endocrine organs , which secrete chemicals—the hormone —into the extracellular fluid .
Hormones are transported primarily via the bloodstream throughout the body , where they bind to receptors on target cells , inducing a characteristic response .
As a result , endocrine signaling requires more time than neural signaling to prompt a response in target cells , though the precise amount of time varies with different hormones .
For example , the hormones released when you are confronted with a dangerous or frightening situation , called the fight-or-flight response , occur by the release of adrenal hormones—epinephrine and norepinephrine—within seconds .
In contrast , it may take up to 48 hours for target cells to respond to certain reproductive hormones .
Visit this link ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/hormonebind ) to watch an animation of the events that occur when a hormone binds to a cell membrane receptor .
What is the secondary messenger made by adenylyl cyclase during the activation of liver cells by epinephrine ?
In addition , endocrine signaling is typically less specific than neural signaling .
The same hormone may play a role in a variety of different physiological processes depending on the target cells involved .
For example , the hormone oxytocin promotes uterine contractions in women in labor .
It is also important in breastfeeding , and may be involved in the sexual response and in feelings of emotional attachment in both males and females .
In general , the nervous system involves quick responses to rapid changes in the external environment , and the endocrine system is usually slower acting—taking care of the internal environment of the body , maintaining homeostasis , and controlling reproduction ( Table 17.1 ) .
So how does the fight-or-flight response that was mentioned earlier happen so quickly if hormones are usually slower acting ?
It is because the two systems are connected .
It is the fast action of the nervous system in response to the danger in the environment that stimulates the adrenal glands to secrete their hormones .
As a result , the nervous system can cause rapid endocrine responses to keep up with sudden changes in both the external and internal environments when necessary .
The endocrine system consists of cells , tissues , and organs that secrete hormones as a primary or secondary function .
The endocrine gland is the major player in this system .
The primary function of these ductless glands is to secrete their hormones directly into the surrounding fluid .
The interstitial fluid and the blood vessels then transport the hormones throughout the body .
The endocrine system includes the pituitary , thyroid , parathyroid , adrenal , and pineal glands ( Figure 17.2 ) .
Some of these glands have both endocrine and non-endocrine functions .
For example , the pancreas contains cells that function in digestion as well as cells that secrete the hormones insulin and glucagon , which regulate blood glucose levels .
The hypothalamus , thymus , heart , kidneys , stomach , small intestine , liver , skin , female ovaries , and male testes are other organs that contain cells with endocrine function .
Moreover , adipose tissue has long been known to produce hormones , and recent research has revealed that even bone tissue has endocrine functions .
The ductless endocrine glands are not to be confused with the body ’ s exocrine system , whose glands release their secretions through ducts .
Examples of exocrine glands include the sebaceous and sweat glands of the skin .
As just noted , the pancreas also has an exocrine function : most of its cells secrete pancreatic juice through the pancreatic and accessory ducts to the lumen of the small intestine .
In endocrine signaling , hormones secreted into the extracellular fluid diffuse into the blood or lymph , and can then travel great distances throughout the body .
In contrast , autocrine signaling takes place within the same cell .
An autocrine ( auto= “ self ” ) is a chemical that elicits a response in the same cell that secreted it .
Interleukin-1 , or IL-1 , is a signaling molecule that plays an important role in inflammatory response .
The cells that secrete IL-1 have receptors on their cell surface that bind these molecules , resulting in autocrine signaling .
Local intercellular communication is the province of the paracrine , also called a paracrine factor , which is a chemical that induces a response in neighboring cells .
Although paracrines may enter the bloodstream , their concentration is generally too low to elicit a response from distant tissues .
A familiar example to those with asthma is histamine , a paracrine that is released by immune cells in the bronchial tree .
Histamine causes the smooth muscle cells of the bronchi to constrict , narrowing the airways .
Another example is the neurotransmitters of the nervous system , which act only locally within the synaptic cleft .
Endocrinology is a specialty in the field of medicine that focuses on the treatment of endocrine system disorders .
Endocrinologists—medical doctors who specialize in this field—are experts in treating diseases associated with hormonal systems , ranging from thyroid disease to diabetes mellitus .
Endocrine surgeons treat endocrine disease through the removal , or resection , of the affected endocrine gland .
Patients who are referred to endocrinologists may have signs and symptoms or blood test results that suggest excessive or impaired functioning of an endocrine gland or endocrine cells .
The endocrinologist may order additional blood tests to determine whether the patient ’ s hormonal levels are abnormal , or they may stimulate or suppress the function of the suspect endocrine gland and then have blood taken for analysis .
Treatment varies according to the diagnosis .
Some endocrine disorders , such as type 2 diabetes , may respond to lifestyle changes such as modest weight loss , adoption of a healthy diet , and regular physical activity .
Other disorders may require medication , such as hormone replacement , and routine monitoring by the endocrinologist .
These include disorders of the pituitary gland that can affect growth and disorders of the thyroid gland that can result in a variety of metabolic problems .
Some patients experience health problems as a result of the normal decline in hormones that can accompany aging .
These patients can consult with an endocrinologist to weigh the risks and benefits of hormone replacement therapy intended to boost their natural levels of reproductive hormones .
In addition to treating patients , endocrinologists may be involved in research to improve the understanding of endocrine system disorders and develop new treatments for these diseases .
Once the hormone binds to the receptor , a chain of events is initiated that leads to the target cell ’ s response .
Hormones play a critical role in the regulation of physiological processes because of the target cell responses they regulate .
These responses contribute to human reproduction , growth and development of body tissues , metabolism , fluid , and electrolyte balance , sleep , and many other body functions .
The major hormones of the human body and their effects are identified in Table 17.2 .
The hormones of the human body can be divided into two major groups on the basis of their chemical structure .
Hormones derived from amino acids include amines , peptides , and proteins .
Those derived from lipids include steroids ( Figure 17.3 ) .
These chemical groups affect a hormone ’ s distribution , the type of receptors it binds to , and other aspects of its function .
Hormones derived from the modification of amino acids are referred to as amine hormones .
Typically , the original structure , or amine , group of the amino acid is modified such that a –COOH , or carboxyl , group is removed , whereas the remains .
Amine hormones are synthesized from the amino acids tryptophan or tyrosine .
An example of a hormone derived from tryptophan is melatonin , which is secreted by the pineal gland and helps regulate circadian rhythm .
Tyrosine derivatives include the metabolism-regulating thyroid hormones , as well as the catecholamines , such as epinephrine , norepinephrine , and dopamine .
Epinephrine and norepinephrine are secreted by the adrenal medulla and play a role in the fight-or-flight response , whereas dopamine is secreted by the hypothalamus and inhibits the release of certain anterior pituitary hormones .
Whereas the amine hormones are derived from a single amino acid , peptide and protein hormones consist of multiple amino acids that link to form an amino acid chain .
Peptide hormones consist of short chains of amino acids , whereas protein hormones are longer polypeptides .
Both types are synthesized like other body proteins : DNA is transcribed into mRNA , which is translated into an amino acid chain .
Examples of peptide hormones include antidiuretic hormone ( ADH ) , a pituitary hormone important in fluid balance , and atrial-natriuretic peptide , which is produced by the heart and helps to decrease blood pressure .
Some examples of protein hormones include growth hormone , which is produced by the pituitary gland , and follicle-stimulating hormone ( FSH ) , which has an attached carbohydrate group and is thus classified as a glycoprotein .
FSH helps stimulate the maturation of eggs in the ovaries and sperm in the testes .
The primary hormones derived from lipids are steroids .
Steroid hormones are derived from the lipid cholesterol .
For example , the reproductive hormones testosterone and the estrogens—which are produced by the gonads ( testes and ovaries ) —are steroid hormones .
The adrenal glands produce the steroid hormone aldosterone , which is involved in osmoregulation , and cortisol , which plays a role in metabolism .
Like cholesterol , steroid hormones are not soluble in water ( they are hydrophobic ) .
Because blood is water-based , lipidderived hormones must travel to their target cell bound to a transport protein .
This more complex structure extends the half-life of steroid hormones much longer than that of hormones derived from amino acids .
A hormone ’ s half-life is the time required for half the concentration of the hormone to be degraded .
For example , the lipid-derived hormone cortisol has a half-life of approximately 60 to 90 minutes .
In contrast , the amino acid–derived hormone epinephrine has a half-life of approximately one minute .
The message a hormone sends is received by a hormone receptor , a protein located either inside the cell or within the cell membrane .
The receptor will process the message by initiating other signaling events or cellular mechanisms that result in the target cell ’ s response .
Hormone receptors recognize molecules with specific shapes and side groups , and respond only to those hormones that are recognized .
The same type of receptor may be located on cells in different body tissues , and trigger somewhat different responses .
Thus , the response triggered by a hormone depends not only on the hormone , but also on the target cell .
Once the target cell receives the hormone signal , it can respond in a variety of ways .
The response may include the stimulation of protein synthesis , activation or deactivation of enzymes , alteration in the permeability of the cell membrane , altered rates of mitosis and cell growth , and stimulation of the secretion of products .
Moreover , a single hormone may be capable of inducing different responses in a given cell .
Intracellular hormone receptors are located inside the cell .
Hormones that bind to this type of receptor must be able to cross the cell membrane .
Steroid hormones are derived from cholesterol and therefore can readily diffuse through the lipid bilayer of the cell membrane to reach the intracellular receptor ( Figure 17.4 ) .
Thyroid hormones , which contain benzene rings studded with iodine , are also lipid-soluble and can enter the cell .
The location of steroid and thyroid hormone binding differs slightly : a steroid hormone may bind to its receptor within the cytosol or within the nucleus .
In either case , this binding generates a hormone-receptor complex that moves toward the chromatin in the cell nucleus and binds to a particular segment of the cell ’ s DNA .
In contrast , thyroid hormones bind to receptors already bound to DNA .
For both steroid and thyroid hormones , binding of the hormone-receptor complex with DNA triggers transcription of a target gene to mRNA , which moves to the cytosol and directs protein synthesis by ribosomes .
Hydrophilic , or water-soluble , hormones are unable to diffuse through the lipid bilayer of the cell membrane and must therefore pass on their message to a receptor located at the surface of the cell .
Except for thyroid hormones , which are lipid-soluble , all amino acid–derived hormones bind to cell membrane receptors that are located , at least in part , on the extracellular surface of the cell membrane .
Therefore , they do not directly affect the transcription of target genes , but instead initiate a signaling cascade that is carried out by a molecule called a second messenger .
In this case , the hormone is called a first messenger .
The second messenger used by most hormones is cyclic adenosine monophosphate ( cAMP ) .
In the cAMP second messenger system , a water-soluble hormone binds to its receptor in the cell membrane ( Step 1 in Figure 17.5 ) .
This receptor is associated with an intracellular component called a G protein , and binding of the hormone activates the Gprotein component ( Step 2 ) .
The activated G protein in turn activates an enzyme called adenylyl cyclase , also known as adenylate cyclase ( Step 3 ) , which converts adenosine triphosphate ( ATP ) to cAMP ( Step 4 ) .
As the second messenger , cAMP activates a type of enzyme called a protein kinase that is present in the cytosol ( Step 5 ) .
Activated protein kinases initiate a phosphorylation cascade , in which multiple protein kinases phosphorylate ( add a phosphate group to ) numerous and various cellular proteins , including other enzymes ( Step 6 ) .
The phosphorylation of cellular proteins can trigger a wide variety of effects , from nutrient metabolism to the synthesis of different hormones and other products .
The effects vary according to the type of target cell , the G proteins and kinases involved , and the phosphorylation of proteins .
Overall , the phosphorylation cascade significantly increases the efficiency , speed , and specificity of the hormonal response , as thousands of signaling events can be initiated simultaneously in response to a very low concentration of hormone in the bloodstream .
However , the duration of the hormone signal is short , as cAMP is quickly deactivated by the enzyme phosphodiesterase ( PDE ) , which is located in the cytosol .
The action of PDE helps to ensure that a target cell ’ s response ceases quickly unless new hormones arrive at the cell membrane .
Importantly , there are also G proteins that decrease the levels of cAMP in the cell in response to hormone binding .
For example , when growth hormone–inhibiting hormone ( GHIH ) , also known as somatostatin , binds to its receptors in the pituitary gland , the level of cAMP decreases , thereby inhibiting the secretion of human growth hormone .
Not all water-soluble hormones initiate the cAMP second messenger system .
One common alternative system uses calcium ions as a second messenger .
In this system , G proteins activate the enzyme phospholipase C ( PLC ) , which functions similarly to adenylyl cyclase .
Once activated , PLC cleaves a membrane-bound phospholipid into two molecules : diacylglycerol ( DAG ) and inositol triphosphate ( IP ) .
Like cAMP , DAG activates protein kinases that initiate a phosphorylation cascade .
At the same time , IP causes calcium ions to be released from storage sites within the cytosol , such as from within the smooth endoplasmic reticulum .
The calcium ions then act as second messengers in two ways : they can influence enzymatic and other cellular activities directly , or they can bind to calcium-binding proteins , the most common of which is calmodulin .
Upon binding calcium , calmodulin is able to modulate protein kinase within the cell .
Examples of hormones that use calcium ions as a second messenger system include angiotensin II , which helps regulate blood pressure through vasoconstriction , and growth hormone–releasing hormone ( GHRH ) , which causes the pituitary gland to release growth hormones .
You will recall that target cells must have receptors specific to a given hormone if that hormone is to trigger a response .
But several other factors influence the target cell response .
For example , the presence of a significant level of a hormone circulating in the bloodstream can cause its target cells to decrease their number of receptors for that hormone .
This process is called downregulation , and it allows cells to become less reactive to the excessive hormone levels .
When the level of a hormone is chronically reduced , target cells engage in upregulation to increase their number of receptors .
This process allows cells to be more sensitive to the hormone that is present .
Cells can also alter the sensitivity of the receptors themselves to various hormones .
Two or more hormones can interact to affect the response of cells in a variety of ways .
The three most common types of interaction are as follows : The permissive effect , in which the presence of one hormone enables another hormone to act .
For example , thyroid hormones have complex permissive relationships with certain reproductive hormones .
A dietary deficiency of iodine , a component of thyroid hormones , can therefore affect reproductive system development and functioning .
The synergistic effect , in which two hormones with similar effects produce an amplified response .
In some cases , two hormones are required for an adequate response .
For example , two different reproductive hormones—FSH from the pituitary gland and estrogens from the ovaries—are required for the maturation of female ova ( egg cells ) .
The antagonistic effect , in which two hormones have opposing effects .
A familiar example is the effect of two pancreatic hormones , insulin and glucagon .
Insulin increases the liver ’ s storage of glucose as glycogen , decreasing blood glucose , whereas glucagon stimulates the breakdown of glycogen stores , increasing blood glucose .
To prevent abnormal hormone levels and a potential disease state , hormone levels must be tightly controlled .
The body maintains this control by balancing hormone production and degradation .
Feedback loops govern the initiation and maintenance of most hormone secretion in response to various stimuli .
The contribution of feedback loops to homeostasis will only be briefly reviewed here .
Positive feedback loops are characterized by the release of additional hormone in response to an original hormone release .
The release of oxytocin during childbirth is a positive feedback loop .
The initial release of oxytocin begins to signal the uterine muscles to contract , which pushes the fetus toward the cervix , causing it to stretch .
This , in turn , signals the pituitary gland to release more oxytocin , causing labor contractions to intensify .
The release of oxytocin decreases after the birth of the child .
The more common method of hormone regulation is the negative feedback loop .
Negative feedback is characterized by the inhibition of further secretion of a hormone in response to adequate levels of that hormone .
This allows blood levels of the hormone to be regulated within a narrow range .
An example of a negative feedback loop is the release of glucocorticoid hormones from the adrenal glands , as directed by the hypothalamus and pituitary gland .
As glucocorticoid concentrations in the blood rise , the hypothalamus and pituitary gland reduce their signaling to the adrenal glands to prevent additional glucocorticoid secretion ( Figure 17.6 ) .
Reflexes triggered by both chemical and neural stimuli control endocrine activity .
These reflexes may be simple , involving only one hormone response , or they may be more complex and involve many hormones , as is the case with the hypothalamic control of various anterior pituitary–controlled hormones .
Humoral stimuli are changes in blood levels of non-hormone chemicals , such as nutrients or ions , which cause the release or inhibition of a hormone to , in turn , maintain homeostasis .
For example , osmoreceptors in the hypothalamus detect changes in blood osmolarity ( the concentration of solutes in the blood plasma ) .
If blood osmolarity is too high , meaning that the blood is not dilute enough , osmoreceptors signal the hypothalamus to release ADH .
The hormone causes the kidneys to reabsorb more water and reduce the volume of urine produced .
This reabsorption causes a reduction of the osmolarity of the blood , diluting the blood to the appropriate level .
The regulation of blood glucose is another example .
High blood glucose levels cause the release of insulin from the pancreas , which increases glucose uptake by cells and liver storage of glucose as glycogen .
An endocrine gland may also secrete a hormone in response to the presence of another hormone produced by a different endocrine gland .
Such hormonal stimuli often involve the hypothalamus , which produces releasing and inhibiting hormones that control the secretion of a variety of pituitary hormones .
In addition to these chemical signals , hormones can also be released in response to neural stimuli .
A common example of neural stimuli is the activation of the fight-or-flight response by the sympathetic nervous system .
When an individual perceives danger , sympathetic neurons signal the adrenal glands to secrete norepinephrine and epinephrine .
The two hormones dilate blood vessels , increase the heart and respiratory rate , and suppress the digestive and immune systems .
These responses boost the body ’ s transport of oxygen to the brain and muscles , thereby improving the body ’ s ability to fight or flee .
You may have heard news reports about the effects of a chemical called bisphenol A ( BPA ) in various types of food packaging .
BPA is used in the manufacturing of hard plastics and epoxy resins .
Common food-related items that may contain BPA include the lining of aluminum cans , plastic food-storage containers , drinking cups , as well as baby bottles and “ sippy ” cups .
Other uses of BPA include medical equipment , dental fillings , and the lining of water pipes .
Research suggests that BPA is an endocrine disruptor , meaning that it negatively interferes with the endocrine system , particularly during the prenatal and postnatal development period .
In particular , BPA mimics the hormonal effects of estrogens and has the opposite effect—that of androgens .
The FDA is currently facilitating decreased use of BPA in food-related materials .
The potential harmful effects of BPA have been studied in both animal models and humans and include a large variety of health effects , such as developmental delay and disease .
For example , prenatal exposure to BPA during the first trimester of human pregnancy may be associated with wheezing and aggressive behavior during childhood .
Adults exposed to high levels of BPA may experience altered thyroid signaling and male sexual dysfunction .
BPA exposure during the prenatal or postnatal period of development in animal models has been observed to cause neurological delays , changes in brain structure and function , sexual dysfunction , asthma , and increased risk for multiple cancers .
In vitro studies have also shown that BPA exposure causes molecular changes that initiate the development of cancers of the breast , prostate , and brain .
Although these studies have implicated BPA in numerous ill health effects , some experts caution that some of these studies may be flawed and that more research needs to be done .
In the meantime , the FDA recommends that consumers take precautions to limit their exposure to BPA .
In addition to purchasing foods in packaging free of BPA , consumers should avoid carrying or storing foods or liquids in bottles with the recycling code 3 or 7 .
Foods and liquids should not be microwave-heated in any form of plastic : use paper , glass , or ceramics instead .
This complex secretes several hormones that directly produce responses in target tissues , as well as hormones that regulate the synthesis and secretion of hormones of other glands .
In addition , the hypothalamus–pituitary complex coordinates the messages of the endocrine and nervous systems .
In many cases , a stimulus received by the nervous system must pass through the hypothalamus–pituitary complex to be translated into hormones that can initiate a response .
The hypothalamus is a structure of the diencephalon of the brain located anterior and inferior to the thalamus ( Figure 17.7 ) .
It has both neural and endocrine functions , producing and secreting many hormones .
In addition , the hypothalamus is anatomically and functionally related to the pituitary gland ( or hypophysis ) , a bean-sized organ suspended from it by a stem called the infundibulum ( or pituitary stalk ) .
The pituitary gland is cradled within the sellaturcica of the sphenoid bone of the skull .
It consists of two lobes that arise from distinct parts of embryonic tissue : the posterior pituitary ( neurohypophysis ) is neural tissue , whereas the anterior pituitary ( also known as the adenohypophysis ) is glandular tissue that develops from the primitive digestive tract .
The hormones secreted by the posterior and anterior pituitary , and the intermediate zone between the lobes are summarized in Table 17.3 .
The posterior pituitary is actually an extension of the neurons of the paraventricular and supraoptic nuclei of the hypothalamus .
The cell bodies of their axons descend as the hypothalamic–hypophyseal tract within the infundibulum , and end in axon terminals that comprise the posterior pituitary ( Figure 17.8 ) .
in the hypothalamus , but these regions rest The posterior pituitary gland does not produce hormones , but rather stores and secretes hormones produced by the hypothalamus .
The paraventricular nuclei produce the hormone oxytocin , whereas the supraoptic nuclei produce ADH .
These hormones travel along the axons into storage sites in the axon terminals of the posterior pituitary .
In response to signals from the same hypothalamic neurons , the hormones are released from the axon terminals into the bloodstream .
When fetal development is complete , the peptide-derived hormone oxytocin ( tocia= “ childbirth ” ) stimulates uterine contractions and dilation of the cervix .
Throughout most of pregnancy , oxytocin hormone receptors are not expressed at high levels in the uterus .
Toward the end of pregnancy , the synthesis of oxytocin receptors in the uterus increases , and the smooth muscle cells of the uterus become more sensitive to its effects .
Oxytocin is continually released throughout childbirth through a positive feedback mechanism .
As noted earlier , oxytocin prompts uterine contractions that push the fetal head toward the cervix .
In response , cervical stretching stimulates additional oxytocin to be synthesized by the hypothalamus and released from the pituitary .
This increases the intensity and effectiveness of uterine contractions and prompts additional dilation of the cervix .
The feedback loop continues until birth .
Although the mother ’ s high blood levels of oxytocin begin to decrease immediately following birth , oxytocin continues to play a role in maternal and newborn health .
First , oxytocin is necessary for the milk ejection reflex ( commonly referred to as “ let-down ” ) in breastfeeding women .
As the newborn begins suckling , sensory receptors in the nipples transmit signals to the hypothalamus .
In response , oxytocin is secreted and released into the bloodstream .
Within seconds , cells in the mother ’ s milk ducts contract , ejecting milk into the infant ’ s mouth .
Secondly , in both males and females , oxytocin is thought to contribute to parent–newborn bonding , known as attachment .
Oxytocin is also thought to be involved in feelings of love and closeness , as well as in the sexual response .
The solute concentration of the blood , or blood osmolarity , may change in response to the consumption of certain foods and fluids , as well as in response to disease , injury , medications , or other factors .
Blood osmolarity is constantly monitored by osmoreceptors —specialized cells within the hypothalamus that are particularly sensitive to the concentration of sodium ions and other solutes .
In response to high blood osmolarity , which can occur during dehydration or following a very salty meal , the osmoreceptors signal the posterior pituitary to release antidiuretic hormone ( ADH ) .
The target cells of ADH are located in the tubular cells of the kidneys .
Its effect is to increase epithelial permeability to water , allowing increased water reabsorption .
The more water reabsorbed from the filtrate , the greater the amount of water that is returned to the blood and the less that is excreted in the urine .
A greater concentration of water results in a reduced concentration of solutes .
ADH is also known as vasopressin because , in very high concentrations , it causes constriction of blood vessels , which increases blood pressure by increasing peripheral resistance .
The release of ADH is controlled by a negative feedback loop .
As blood osmolarity decreases , the hypothalamic osmoreceptors sense the change and prompt a corresponding decrease in the secretion of ADH .
As a result , less water is reabsorbed from the urine filtrate .
Interestingly , drugs can affect the secretion of ADH .
For example , alcohol consumption inhibits the release of ADH , resulting in increased urine production that can eventually lead to dehydration and a hangover .
A disease called diabetes insipidus is characterized by chronic underproduction of ADH that causes chronic dehydration .
Because little ADH is produced and secreted , not enough water is reabsorbed by the kidneys .
Although patients feel thirsty , and increase their fluid consumption , this doesn ’ t effectively decrease the solute concentration in their blood because ADH levels are not high enough to trigger water reabsorption in the kidneys .
Electrolyte imbalances can occur in severe cases of diabetes insipidus .
The anterior pituitary originates from the digestive tract in the embryo and migrates toward the brain during fetal development .
There are three regions : the pars distalis is the most anterior , the pars intermedia is adjacent to the posterior pituitary , and the pars tuberalis is a slender “ tube ” that wraps the infundibulum .
Recall that the posterior pituitary does not synthesize hormones , but merely stores them .
In contrast , the anterior pituitary does manufacture hormones .
However , the secretion of hormones from the anterior pituitary is regulated by two classes of hormones .
These hormones—secreted by the hypothalamus—are the releasing hormones that stimulate the secretion of hormones from the anterior pituitary and the inhibiting hormones that inhibit secretion .
Hypothalamic hormones are secreted by neurons , but enter the anterior pituitary through blood vessels ( Figure 17.9 ) .
Within the infundibulum is a bridge of capillaries that connects the hypothalamus to the anterior pituitary .
This network , called the hypophyseal portal system , allows hypothalamic hormones to be transported to the anterior pituitary without first entering the systemic circulation .
The system originates from the superior hypophyseal artery , which branches off the carotid arteries and transports blood to the hypothalamus .
The branches of the superior hypophyseal artery form the hypophyseal portal system ( see Figure 17.9 ) .
Hypothalamic releasing and inhibiting hormones travel through a primary capillary plexus to the portal veins , which carry them into the anterior pituitary .
Hormones produced by the anterior pituitary ( in response to releasing hormones ) enter a secondary capillary plexus , and from there drain into the circulation .
The anterior pituitary produces seven hormones .
These are the growth hormone ( GH ) , thyroid-stimulating hormone ( TSH ) , adrenocorticotropic hormone ( ACTH ) , follicle-stimulating hormone ( FSH ) , luteinizing hormone ( LH ) , beta endorphin , and prolactin .
Of the hormones of the anterior pituitary , TSH , ACTH , FSH , and LH are collectively referred to as tropic hormones ( trope= “ turning ” ) because they turn on or off the function of other endocrine glands .
The endocrine system regulates the growth of the human body , protein synthesis , and cellular replication .
A major hormone involved in this process is growth hormone ( GH ) , also called somatotropin—a protein hormone produced and secreted by the anterior pituitary gland .
Its primary function is anabolic ; it promotes protein synthesis and tissue building through direct and indirect mechanisms ( Figure 17.10 ) .
GH levels are controlled by the release of GHRH and GHIH ( also known as somatostatin ) from the hypothalamus .
A glucose-sparing effect occurs when GH stimulates lipolysis , or the breakdown of adipose tissue , releasing fatty acids into the blood .
As a result , many tissues switch from glucose to fatty acids as their main energy source , which means that less glucose is taken up from the bloodstream .
GH also initiates the diabetogenic effect in which GH stimulates the liver to break down glycogen to glucose , which is then deposited into the blood .
The name “ diabetogenic ” is derived from the similarity in elevated blood glucose levels observed between individuals with untreated diabetes mellitus and individuals experiencing GH excess .
Blood glucose levels rise as the result of a combination of glucose-sparing and diabetogenic effects .
GH indirectly mediates growth and protein synthesis by triggering the liver and other tissues to produce a group of proteins called insulin-like growth factors ( IGFs ) .
These proteins enhance cellular proliferation and inhibit apoptosis , or programmed cell death .
IGFs stimulate cells to increase their uptake of amino acids from the blood for protein synthesis .
Skeletal muscle and cartilage cells are particularly sensitive to stimulation from IGFs .
Dysfunction of the endocrine system ’ s control of growth can result in several disorders .
For example , gigantism is a disorder in children that is caused by the secretion of abnormally large amounts of GH , resulting in excessive growth .
A similar condition in adults is acromegaly , a disorder that results in the growth of bones in the face , hands , and feet in response to excessive levels of GH in individuals who have stopped growing .
Abnormally low levels of GH in children can cause growth impairment—a disorder called pituitary dwarfism ( also known as growth hormone deficiency ) .
The activity of the thyroid gland is regulated by thyroid-stimulating hormone ( TSH ) , also called thyrotropin .
TSH is released from the anterior pituitary in response to thyrotropin-releasing hormone ( TRH ) from the hypothalamus .
As discussed shortly , it triggers the secretion of thyroid hormones by the thyroid gland .
In a classic negative feedback loop , elevated levels of thyroid hormones in the bloodstream then trigger a drop in production of TRH and subsequently TSH .
The adrenocorticotropic hormone ( ACTH ) , also called corticotropin , stimulates the adrenal cortex ( the more superficial “ bark ” of the adrenal glands ) to secrete corticosteroid hormones such as cortisol .
ACTH come from a precursor molecule known as pro-opiomelanotropin ( POMC ) which produces several biologically active molecules when cleaved , including ACTH , melanocyte-stimulating hormone , and the brain opioid peptides known as endorphins .
The release of ACTH is regulated by the corticotropin-releasing hormone ( CRH ) from the hypothalamus in response to normal physiologic rhythms .
A variety of stressors can also influence its release , and the role of ACTH in the stress response is discussed later in this chapter .
The endocrine glands secrete a variety of hormones that control the development and regulation of the reproductive system ( these glands include the anterior pituitary , the adrenal cortex , and the gonads—the testes in males and the ovaries in females ) .
Much of the development of the reproductive system occurs during puberty and is marked by the development of sex-specific characteristics in both male and female adolescents .
Puberty is initiated by gonadotropin-releasing hormone ( GnRH ) , a hormone produced and secreted by the hypothalamus .
GnRH stimulates the anterior pituitary to secrete gonadotropins —hormones that regulate the function of the gonads .
The levels of GnRH are regulated through a negative feedback loop ; high levels of reproductive hormones inhibit the release of GnRH .
Throughout life , gonadotropins regulate reproductive function and , in the case of women , the onset and cessation of reproductive capacity .
The gonadotropins include two glycoprotein hormones : follicle-stimulating hormone ( FSH ) stimulates the production and maturation of sex cells , or gametes , including ova in women and sperm in men .
FSH also promotes follicular growth ; these follicles then release estrogens in the female ovaries .
Luteinizing hormone ( LH ) triggers ovulation in women , as well as the production of estrogens and progesterone by the ovaries .
LH stimulates production of testosterone by the male testes .
As its name implies , prolactin ( PRL ) promotes lactation ( milk production ) in women .
During pregnancy , it contributes to development of the mammary glands , and after birth , it stimulates the mammary glands to produce breast milk .
However , the effects of prolactin depend heavily upon the permissive effects of estrogens , progesterone , and other hormones .
And as noted earlier , the let-down of milk occurs in response to stimulation from oxytocin .
In a non-pregnant woman , prolactin secretion is inhibited by prolactin-inhibiting hormone ( PIH ) , which is actually the neurotransmitter dopamine , and is released from neurons in the hypothalamus .
Only during pregnancy do prolactin levels rise in response to prolactin-releasing hormone ( PRH ) from the hypothalamus .
The cells in the zone between the pituitary lobes secrete a hormone known as melanocyte-stimulating hormone ( MSH ) that is formed by cleavage of the pro-opiomelanocortin ( POMC ) precursor protein .
Local production of MSH in the skin is responsible for melanin production in response to UV light exposure .
The role of MSH made by the pituitary is more complicated .
For instance , people with lighter skin generally have the same amount of MSH as people with darker skin .
Nevertheless , this hormone is capable of darkening of the skin by inducing melanin production in the skin ’ s melanocytes .
Women also show increased MSH production during pregnancy ; in combination with estrogens , it can lead to darker skin pigmentation , especially the skin of the areolas and labia minora .
Figure 17.11 is a summary of the pituitary hormones and their principal effects .
Visit this link ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/roleofhypo ) to watch an animation showing the role of the hypothalamus and the pituitary gland .
Which hormone is released by the pituitary to stimulate the thyroid gland ?
The medial region , called the isthmus , is flanked by wing-shaped left and right lobes .
Each of the thyroid lobes are embedded with parathyroid glands , primarily on their posterior surfaces .
The tissue of the thyroid gland is composed mostly of thyroid follicles .
The follicles are made up of a central cavity filled with a sticky fluid called colloid .
Surrounded by a wall of epithelial follicle cells , the colloid is the center of thyroid hormone production , and that production is dependent on the hormones ’ essential and unique component : iodine .
Hormones are produced in the colloid when atoms of the mineral iodine attach to a glycoprotein , called thyroglobulin , that is secreted into the colloid by the follicle cells .
The following steps outline the hormones ’ assembly : Binding of TSH to its receptors in the follicle cells of the thyroid gland causes the cells to actively transport iodide ions ( I ) across their cell membrane , from the bloodstream into the cytosol .
As a result , the concentration of iodide ions “ trapped ” in the follicular cells is many times higher than the concentration in the bloodstream .
Iodide ions then move to the lumen of the follicle cells that border the colloid .
There , the ions undergo oxidation ( their negatively charged electrons are removed ) .
The oxidation of two iodide ions ( 2 I ) results in iodine ( I ) , which passes through the follicle cell membrane into the colloid .
In the colloid , peroxidase enzymes link the iodine to the tyrosine amino acids in thyroglobulin to produce two intermediaries : a tyrosine attached to one iodine and a tyrosine attached to two iodines .
When one of each of these intermediaries is linked by covalent bonds , the resulting compound is triiodothyronine ( T ) , a thyroid hormone with three iodines .
Much more commonly , two copies of the second intermediary bond , forming tetraiodothyronine , also known as thyroxine ( T ) , a thyroid hormone with four iodines .
These hormones remain in the colloid center of the thyroid follicles until TSH stimulates endocytosis of colloid back into the follicle cells .
There , lysosomal enzymes break apart the thyroglobulin colloid , releasing free T and T , which diffuse across the follicle cell membrane and enter the bloodstream .
In the bloodstream , less than one percent of the circulating T and T remains unbound .
This free T and T can cross the lipid bilayer of cell membranes and be taken up by cells .
The remaining 99 percent of circulating T and T is bound to specialized transport proteins called thyroxine-binding globulins ( TBGs ) , to albumin , or to other plasma proteins .
This “ packaging ” prevents their free diffusion into body cells .
When blood levels of T and T begin to decline , bound T and T are released from these plasma proteins and readily cross the membrane of target cells .
T is more potent than T , and many cells convert T to T through the removal of an iodine atom .
The release of T and T from the thyroid gland is regulated by thyroid-stimulating hormone ( TSH ) .
As shown in Figure 17.13 , low blood levels of T and T stimulate the release of thyrotropin-releasing hormone ( TRH ) from the hypothalamus , which triggers secretion of TSH from the anterior pituitary .
In turn , TSH stimulates the thyroid gland to secrete T and T .
The levels of TRH , TSH , T , and T are regulated by a negative feedback system in which increasing levels of T and T decrease the production and secretion of TSH .
The thyroid hormones , T and T , are often referred to as metabolic hormones because their levels influence the body ’ s basal metabolic rate , the amount of energy used by the body at rest .
When T and T bind to intracellular receptors located on the mitochondria , they cause an increase in nutrient breakdown and the use of oxygen to produce ATP .
In addition , T and T initiate the transcription of genes involved in glucose oxidation .
Although these mechanisms prompt cells to produce more ATP , the process is inefficient , and an abnormally increased level of heat is released as a byproduct of these reactions .
This so-called calorigenic effect ( calor= “ heat ” ) raises body temperature .
Adequate levels of thyroid hormones are also required for protein synthesis and for fetal and childhood tissue development and growth .
They are especially critical for normal development of the nervous system both in utero and in early childhood , and they continue to support neurological function in adults .
As noted earlier , these thyroid hormones have a complex interrelationship with reproductive hormones , and deficiencies can influence libido , fertility , and other aspects of reproductive function .
Finally , thyroid hormones increase the body ’ s sensitivity to catecholamines ( epinephrine and norepinephrine ) from the adrenal medulla by upregulation of receptors in the blood vessels .
When levels of T and T hormones are excessive , this effect accelerates the heart rate , strengthens the heartbeat , and increases blood pressure .
Because thyroid hormones regulate metabolism , heat production , protein synthesis , and many other body functions , thyroid disorders can have severe and widespread consequences .
As discussed above , dietary iodine is required for the synthesis of T and T .
But for much of the world ’ s population , foods do not provide adequate levels of this mineral , because the amount varies according to the level in the soil in which the food was grown , as well as the irrigation and fertilizers used .
Marine fish and shrimp tend to have high levels because they concentrate iodine from seawater , but many people in landlocked regions lack access to seafood .
Thus , the primary source of dietary iodine in many countries is iodized salt .
Fortification of salt with iodine began in the United States in 1924 , and international efforts to iodize salt in the world ’ s poorest nations continue today .
Dietary iodine deficiency can result in the impaired ability to synthesize T and T , leading to a variety of severe disorders .
When T and T can not be produced , TSH is secreted in increasing amounts .
As a result of this hyperstimulation , thyroglobulin accumulates in the thyroid gland follicles , increasing their deposits of colloid .
The accumulation of colloid increases the overall size of the thyroid gland , a condition called a goiter ( Figure 17.14 ) .
A goiter is only a visible indication of the deficiency .
Other iodine deficiency disorders include impaired growth and development , decreased fertility , and prenatal and infant death .
Moreover , iodine deficiency is the primary cause of preventable mental retardation worldwide .
Neonatal hypothyroidism ( cretinism ) is characterized by cognitive deficits , short stature , and sometimes deafness and muteness in children and adults born to mothers who were iodinedeficient during pregnancy .
In areas of the world with access to iodized salt , dietary deficiency is rare .
Instead , inflammation of the thyroid gland is the more common cause of low blood levels of thyroid hormones .
Called hypothyroidism , the condition is characterized by a low metabolic rate , weight gain , cold extremities , constipation , reduced libido , menstrual irregularities , and reduced mental activity .
In contrast , hyperthyroidism —an abnormally elevated blood level of thyroid hormones—is often caused by a pituitary or thyroid tumor .
In Graves ’ disease , the hyperthyroid state results from an autoimmune reaction in which antibodies overstimulate the follicle cells of the thyroid gland .
Hyperthyroidism can lead to an increased metabolic rate , excessive body heat and sweating , diarrhea , weight loss , tremors , and increased heart rate .
The person ’ s eyes may bulge ( called exophthalmos ) as antibodies produce inflammation in the soft tissues of the orbits .
The person may also develop a goiter .
The thyroid gland also secretes a hormone called calcitonin that is produced by the parafollicular cells ( also called C cells ) that stud the tissue between distinct follicles .
Calcitonin is released in response to a rise in blood calcium levels .
Pharmaceutical preparations of calcitonin are sometimes prescribed to reduce osteoclast activity in people with osteoporosis and to reduce the degradation of cartilage in people with osteoarthritis .
The hormones secreted by thyroid are summarized in Table 17.4 .
Of course , calcium is critical for many other biological processes .
It is a second messenger in many signaling pathways , and is essential for muscle contraction , nerve impulse transmission , and blood clotting .
Given these roles , it is not surprising that blood calcium levels are tightly regulated by the endocrine system .
The organs involved in the regulation are the parathyroid glands .
A thick connective tissue capsule separates the glands from the thyroid tissue .
Most people have four parathyroid glands , but occasionally there are more in tissues of the neck or chest .
The function of one type of parathyroid cells , the oxyphil cells , is not clear .
The primary functional cells of the parathyroid glands are the chief cells .
These epithelial cells produce and secrete the parathyroid hormone ( PTH ) , the major hormone involved in the regulation of blood calcium levels .
at http : //141.214.65.171/Histology/Endocrine % 20System/ View the University of Michigan WebScope 217_HISTO_40X.svs/view.apml ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/parathyroid ) to explore the tissue sample in greater detail .
The parathyroid glands produce and secrete PTH , a peptide hormone , in response to low blood calcium levels ( Figure 17.16 ) .
PTH secretion causes the release of calcium from the bones by stimulating osteoclasts , which secrete enzymes that degrade bone and release calcium into the interstitial fluid .
PTH also inhibits osteoblasts , the cells involved in bone deposition , thereby sparing blood calcium .
PTH causes increased reabsorption of calcium ( and magnesium ) in the kidney tubules from the urine filtrate .
In addition , PTH initiates the production of the steroid hormone calcitriol ( also known as 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D ) , which is the active form of vitamin D , in the kidneys .
Calcitriol then stimulates increased absorption of dietary calcium by the intestines .
A negative feedback loop regulates the levels of PTH , with rising blood calcium levels inhibiting further release of PTH .
Abnormally high activity of the parathyroid gland can cause hyperparathyroidism , a disorder caused by an overproduction of PTH that results in excessive calcium reabsorption from bone .
Hyperparathyroidism can significantly decrease bone density , leading to spontaneous fractures or deformities .
As blood calcium levels rise , cell membrane permeability to sodium is decreased , and the responsiveness of the nervous system is reduced .
At the same time , calcium deposits may collect in the body ’ s tissues and organs , impairing their functioning .
In contrast , abnormally low blood calcium levels may be caused by parathyroid hormone deficiency , called hypoparathyroidism , which may develop following injury or surgery involving the thyroid gland .
Low blood calcium increases membrane permeability to sodium , resulting in muscle twitching , cramping , spasms , or convulsions .
Severe deficits can paralyze muscles , including those involved in breathing , and can be fatal .
When blood calcium levels are high , calcitonin is produced and secreted by the parafollicular cells of the thyroid gland .
As discussed earlier , calcitonin inhibits the activity of osteoclasts , reduces the absorption of dietary calcium in the intestine , and signals the kidneys to reabsorb less calcium , resulting in larger amounts of calcium excreted in the urine .
The adrenal glands have a rich blood supply and experience one of the highest rates of blood flow in the body .
They are served by several arteries branching off the aorta , including the suprarenal and renal arteries .
Blood flows to each adrenal gland at the adrenal cortex and then drains into the adrenal medulla .
Adrenal hormones are released into the circulation via the left and right suprarenal veins .
at http : //141.214.65.171/Histology/Endocrine % 20System/ View the University of Michigan WebScope New % 20Scans/230_HISTO_40x.svs/view.apml ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/adrenal ) to explore the tissue sample in greater detail .
The adrenal gland consists of an outer cortex of glandular tissue and an inner medulla of nervous tissue .
The cortex itself is divided into three zones : the zona glomerulosa , the zona fasciculata , and the zona reticularis .
Each region secretes its own set of hormones .
The adrenal cortex , as a component of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal ( HPA ) axis , secretes steroid hormones important for the regulation of the long-term stress response , blood pressure and blood volume , nutrient uptake and storage , fluid and electrolyte balance , and inflammation .
The HPA axis involves the stimulation of hormone release of adrenocorticotropic hormone ( ACTH ) from the pituitary by the hypothalamus .
ACTH then stimulates the adrenal cortex to produce the hormone cortisol .
This pathway will be discussed in more detail below .
The adrenal medulla is neuroendocrine tissue composed of postganglionic sympathetic nervous system ( SNS ) neurons .
It is really an extension of the autonomic nervous system , which regulates homeostasis in the body .
The sympathomedullary ( SAM ) pathway involves the stimulation of the medulla by impulses from the hypothalamus via neurons from the thoracic spinal cord .
The medulla is stimulated to secrete the amine hormones epinephrine and norepinephrine .
One of the major functions of the adrenal gland is to respond to stress .
Stress can be either physical or psychological or both .
Physical stresses include exposing the body to injury , walking outside in cold and wet conditions without a coat on , or malnutrition .
Psychological stresses include the perception of a physical threat , a fight with a loved one , or just a bad day at school .
The body responds in different ways to short-term stress and long-term stress following a pattern known as the general adaptation syndrome ( GAS ) .
Stage one of GAS is called the alarm reaction .
This is short-term stress , the fight-or-flight response , mediated by the hormones epinephrine and norepinephrine from the adrenal medulla via the SAM pathway .
Their function is to prepare the body for extreme physical exertion .
Once this stress is relieved , the body quickly returns to normal .
The section on the adrenal medulla covers this response in more detail .
If the stress is not soon relieved , the body adapts to the stress in the second stage called the stage of resistance .
If a person is starving for example , the body may send signals to the gastrointestinal tract to maximize the absorption of nutrients from food .
If the stress continues for a longer term however , the body responds with symptoms quite different than the fight-or-flight response .
During the stage of exhaustion , individuals may begin to suffer depression , the suppression of their immune response , severe fatigue , or even a fatal heart attack .
These symptoms are mediated by the hormones of the adrenal cortex , especially cortisol , released as a result of signals from the HPA axis .
Adrenal hormones also have several non–stress-related functions , including the increase of blood sodium and glucose levels , which will be described in detail below .
The adrenal cortex consists of multiple layers of lipid-storing cells that occur in three structurally distinct regions .
Each of these regions produces different hormones .
Visit this link ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/adrenalglands ) to view an animation describing the location and function of the adrenal glands .
Which hormone produced by the adrenal glands is responsible for the mobilization of energy stores ?
The most superficial region of the adrenal cortex is the zona glomerulosa , which produces a group of hormones collectively referred to as mineralocorticoids because of their effect on body minerals , especially sodium and potassium .
These hormones are essential for fluid and electrolyte balance .
Aldosterone is the major mineralocorticoid .
It is important in the regulation of the concentration of sodium and potassium ions in urine , sweat , and saliva .
For example , it is released in response to elevated blood K , low blood Na , low blood pressure , or low blood volume .
In response , aldosterone increases the excretion of K and the retention of Na , which in turn increases blood volume and blood pressure .
Its secretion is prompted when CRH from the hypothalamus triggers ACTH release from the anterior pituitary .
Aldosterone is also a key component of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system ( RAAS ) in which specialized cells of the kidneys secrete the enzyme renin in response to low blood volume or low blood pressure .
Renin then catalyzes the conversion of the blood protein angiotensinogen , produced by the liver , to the hormone angiotensin I. Angiotensin I is converted in the lungs to angiotensin II by angiotensin-converting enzyme ( ACE ) .
These drugs , known as ACE inhibitors , block the ACE enzyme from converting angiotensin I to angiotensin II , thus mitigating the latter ’ s ability to increase blood pressure .
The intermediate region of the adrenal cortex is the zona fasciculata , named as such because the cells form small fascicles ( bundles ) separated by tiny blood vessels .
The cells of the zona fasciculata produce hormones called glucocorticoids because of their role in glucose metabolism .
The most important of these is cortisol , some of which the liver converts to cortisone .
A glucocorticoid produced in much smaller amounts is corticosterone .
In response to long-term stressors , the hypothalamus secretes CRH , which in turn triggers the release of ACTH by the anterior pituitary .
ACTH triggers the release of the glucocorticoids .
Their overall effect is to inhibit tissue building while stimulating the breakdown of stored nutrients to maintain adequate fuel supplies .
In conditions of long-term stress , for example , cortisol promotes the catabolism of glycogen to glucose , the catabolism of stored triglycerides into fatty acids and glycerol , and the catabolism of muscle proteins into amino acids .
These raw materials can then be used to synthesize additional glucose and ketones for use as body fuels .
The hippocampus , which is part of the temporal lobe of the cerebral cortices and important in memory formation , is highly sensitive to stress levels because of its many glucocorticoid receptors .
You are probably familiar with prescription and over-the-counter medications containing glucocorticoids , such as cortisone injections into inflamed joints , prednisone tablets and steroid-based inhalers used to manage severe asthma , and hydrocortisone creams applied to relieve itchy skin rashes .
These drugs reflect another role of cortisol—the downregulation of the immune system , which inhibits the inflammatory response .
The deepest region of the adrenal cortex is the zona reticularis , which produces small amounts of a class of steroid sex hormones called androgens .
During puberty and most of adulthood , androgens are produced in the gonads .
The androgens produced in the zona reticularis supplement the gonadal androgens .
They are produced in response to ACTH from the anterior pituitary and are converted in the tissues to testosterone or estrogens .
In adult women , they may contribute to the sex drive , but their function in adult men is not well understood .
In post-menopausal women , as the functions of the ovaries decline , the main source of estrogens becomes the androgens produced by the zona reticularis .
As noted earlier , the adrenal cortex releases glucocorticoids in response to long-term stress such as severe illness .
In contrast , the adrenal medulla releases its hormones in response to acute , short-term stress mediated by the sympathetic nervous system ( SNS ) .
The medullary tissue is composed of unique postganglionic SNS neurons called chromaffin cells , which are large and irregularly shaped , and produce the neurotransmitters epinephrine ( also called adrenaline ) and norepinephrine ( or noradrenaline ) .
Epinephrine is produced in greater quantities—approximately a 4 to 1 ratio with norepinephrine—and is the more powerful hormone .
Because the chromaffin cells release epinephrine and norepinephrine into the systemic circulation , where they travel widely and exert effects on distant cells , they are considered hormones .
Derived from the amino acid tyrosine , they are chemically classified as catecholamines .
The secretion of medullary epinephrine and norepinephrine is controlled by a neural pathway that originates from the hypothalamus in response to danger or stress ( the SAM pathway ) .
Both epinephrine and norepinephrine signal the liver and skeletal muscle cells to convert glycogen into glucose , resulting in increased blood glucose levels .
These hormones increase the heart rate , pulse , and blood pressure to prepare the body to fight the perceived threat or flee from it .
In addition , the pathway dilates the airways , raising blood oxygen levels .
It also prompts vasodilation , further increasing the oxygenation of important organs such as the lungs , brain , heart , and skeletal muscle .
At the same time , it triggers vasoconstriction to blood vessels serving less essential organs such as the gastrointestinal tract , kidneys , and skin , and downregulates some components of the immune system .
Other effects include a dry mouth , loss of appetite , pupil dilation , and a loss of peripheral vision .
The major hormones of the adrenal glands are summarized in Table 17.5 .
Several disorders are caused by the dysregulation of the hormones produced by the adrenal glands .
For example , Cushing ’ s disease is a disorder characterized by high blood glucose levels and the accumulation of lipid deposits on the face and neck .
It is caused by hypersecretion of cortisol .
The most common source of Cushing ’ s disease is a pituitary tumor that secretes cortisol or ACTH in abnormally high amounts .
Other common signs of Cushing ’ s disease include the development of a moon-shaped face , a buffalo hump on the back of the neck , rapid weight gain , and hair loss .
Chronically elevated glucose levels are also associated with an elevated risk of developing type 2 diabetes .
In addition to hyperglycemia , chronically elevated glucocorticoids compromise immunity , resistance to infection , and memory , and can result in rapid weight gain and hair loss .
In contrast , the hyposecretion of corticosteroids can result in Addison ’ s disease , a rare disorder that causes low blood glucose levels and low blood sodium levels .
The signs and symptoms of Addison ’ s disease are vague and are typical of other disorders as well , making diagnosis difficult .
They may include general weakness , abdominal pain , weight loss , nausea , vomiting , sweating , and cravings for salty food .
By the end of this section , you will be able to : Describe the location and structure of the pineal gland Discuss the function of melatonin Recall that the hypothalamus , part of the diencephalon of the brain , sits inferior and somewhat anterior to the thalamus .
Inferior but somewhat posterior to the thalamus is the pineal gland , a tiny endocrine gland whose functions are not entirely clear .
The pinealocyte cells that make up the pineal gland are known to produce and secrete the amine hormone melatonin , which is derived from serotonin .
The secretion of melatonin varies according to the level of light received from the environment .
When photons of light stimulate the retinas of the eyes , a nerve impulse is sent to a region of the hypothalamus called the suprachiasmatic nucleus ( SCN ) , which is important in regulating biological rhythms .
From the SCN , the nerve signal is carried to the spinal cord and eventually to the pineal gland , where the production of melatonin is inhibited .
As a result , blood levels of melatonin fall , promoting wakefulness .
In contrast , as light levels decline—such as during the evening—melatonin production increases , boosting blood levels and causing drowsiness .
Visit this link ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/melatonin ) to view an animation describing the function of the hormone melatonin .
What should you avoid doing in the middle of your sleep cycle that would lower melatonin ?
The secretion of melatonin may influence the body ’ s circadian rhythms , the dark-light fluctuations that affect not only sleepiness and wakefulness , but also appetite and body temperature .
Interestingly , children have higher melatonin levels than adults , which may prevent the release of gonadotropins from the anterior pituitary , thereby inhibiting the onset of puberty .
Finally , an antioxidant role of melatonin is the subject of current research .
Jet lag occurs when a person travels across several time zones and feels sleepy during the day or wakeful at night .
Traveling across multiple time zones significantly disturbs the light-dark cycle regulated by melatonin .
It can take up to several days for melatonin synthesis to adjust to the light-dark patterns in the new environment , resulting in jet lag .
Some air travelers take melatonin supplements to induce sleep .
The roles of the gonadotropins released from the anterior pituitary ( FSH and LH ) were discussed earlier .
Interestingly , testosterone is also produced in the female ovaries , but at a much reduced level .
In addition , the testes produce the peptide hormone inhibin , which inhibits the secretion of FSH from the anterior pituitary gland .
FSH stimulates spermatogenesis .
The primary hormones produced by the ovaries are estrogens , which include estradiol , estriol , and estrone .
Another significant ovarian hormone is progesterone , which contributes to regulation of the menstrual cycle and is important in preparing the body for pregnancy as well as maintaining pregnancy .
In addition , the granulosa cells of the ovarian follicles produce inhibin , which—as in males—inhibits the secretion of FSH.During the initial stages of pregnancy , an organ called the placenta develops within the uterus .
The placenta supplies oxygen and nutrients to the fetus , excretes waste products , and produces and secretes estrogens and progesterone .
The placenta produces human chorionic gonadotropin ( hCG ) as well .
The hCG hormone promotes progesterone synthesis and reduces the mother ’ s immune function to protect the fetus from immune rejection .
It also secretes human placental lactogen ( hPL ) , which plays a role in preparing the breasts for lactation , and relaxin , which is thought to help soften and widen the pubic symphysis in preparation for childbirth .
The hormones controlling reproduction are summarized in Table 17.6 .
The endocrine system can be exploited for illegal or unethical purposes .
A prominent example of this is the use of steroid drugs by professional athletes .
Commonly used for performance enhancement , anabolic steroids are synthetic versions of the male sex hormone , testosterone .
By boosting natural levels of this hormone , athletes experience increased muscle mass .
Synthetic versions of human growth hormone are also used to build muscle mass .
The use of performance-enhancing drugs is banned by all major collegiate and professional sports organizations in the United States because they impart an unfair advantage to athletes who take them .
In addition , the drugs can cause significant and dangerous side effects .
For example , anabolic steroid use can increase cholesterol levels , raise blood pressure , and damage the liver .
Altered testosterone levels ( both too low or too high ) have been implicated in causing structural damage to the heart , and increasing the risk for cardiac arrhythmias , heart attacks , congestive heart failure , and sudden death .
Paradoxically , steroids can have a feminizing effect in males , including shriveled testicles and enlarged breast tissue .
In females , their use can cause masculinizing effects such as an enlarged clitoris and growth of facial hair .
In both sexes , their use can promote increased aggression ( commonly known as “ roid-rage ” ) , depression , sleep disturbances , severe acne , and infertility .
Although it is primarily an exocrine gland , secreting a variety of digestive enzymes , the pancreas has an endocrine function .
Its pancreatic islets —clusters of cells formerly known as the islets of Langerhans—secrete the hormones glucagon , insulin , somatostatin , and pancreatic polypeptide ( PP ) .
View the University Liver % 20and % 20Pancreas/188B_HISTO_40X.svs/view.apml ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/pancreaticislet ) explore the tissue sample in greater detail .
at http : //141.214.65.171/Histology/Digestive % 20System/ to of Michigan WebScope The pancreatic islets each contain four varieties of cells : The alpha cell produces the hormone glucagon and makes up approximately 20 percent of each islet .
Glucagon plays an important role in blood glucose regulation ; low blood glucose levels stimulate its release .
The beta cell produces the hormone insulin and makes up approximately 75 percent of each islet .
Elevated blood glucose levels stimulate the release of insulin .
The delta cell accounts for four percent of the islet cells and secretes the peptide hormone somatostatin .
Recall that somatostatin is also released by the hypothalamus ( as GHIH ) , and the stomach and intestines also secrete it .
An inhibiting hormone , pancreatic somatostatin inhibits the release of both glucagon and insulin .
The PP cell accounts for about one percent of islet cells and secretes the pancreatic polypeptide hormone .
It is thought to play a role in appetite , as well as in the regulation of pancreatic exocrine and endocrine secretions .
Pancreatic polypeptide released following a meal may reduce further food consumption ; however , it is also released in response to fasting .
Glucose is required for cellular respiration and is the preferred fuel for all body cells .
The body derives glucose from the breakdown of the carbohydrate-containing foods and drinks we consume .
Glucose not immediately taken up by cells for fuel can be stored by the liver and muscles as glycogen , or converted to triglycerides and stored in the adipose tissue .
Hormones regulate both the storage and the utilization of glucose as required .
Receptors located in the pancreas sense blood glucose levels , and subsequently the pancreatic cells secrete glucagon or insulin to maintain normal levels .
Receptors in the pancreas can sense the decline in blood glucose levels , such as during periods of fasting or during prolonged labor or exercise ( Figure 17.19 ) .
In response , the alpha cells of the pancreas secrete the hormone glucagon , which has several effects : It stimulates the liver to convert its stores of glycogen back into glucose .
This response is known as glycogenolysis .
The glucose is then released into the circulation for use by body cells .
It stimulates the liver to take up amino acids from the blood and convert them into glucose .
This response is known as gluconeogenesis .
It stimulates lipolysis , the breakdown of stored triglycerides into free fatty acids and glycerol .
Some of the free glycerol released into the bloodstream travels to the liver , which converts it into glucose .
This is also a form of gluconeogenesis .
Taken together , these actions increase blood glucose levels .
The activity of glucagon is regulated through a negative feedback mechanism ; rising blood glucose levels inhibit further glucagon production and secretion .
The primary function of insulin is to facilitate the uptake of glucose into body cells .
Red blood cells , as well as cells of the brain , liver , kidneys , and the lining of the small intestine , do not have insulin receptors on their cell membranes and do not require insulin for glucose uptake .
Although all other body cells do require insulin if they are to take glucose from the bloodstream , skeletal muscle cells and adipose cells are the primary targets of insulin .
The presence of food in the intestine triggers the release of gastrointestinal tract hormones such as glucose-dependent insulinotropic peptide ( previously known as gastric inhibitory peptide ) .
This is in turn the initial trigger for insulin production and secretion by the beta cells of the pancreas .
Once nutrient absorption occurs , the resulting surge in blood glucose levels further stimulates insulin secretion .
Precisely how insulin facilitates glucose uptake is not entirely clear .
However , insulin appears to activate a tyrosine kinase receptor , triggering the phosphorylation of many substrates within the cell .
These multiple biochemical reactions converge to support the movement of intracellular vesicles containing facilitative glucose transporters to the cell membrane .
In the absence of insulin , these transport proteins are normally recycled slowly between the cell membrane and cell interior .
Insulin triggers the rapid movement of a pool of glucose transporter vesicles to the cell membrane , where they fuse and expose the glucose transporters to the extracellular fluid .
The transporters then move glucose by facilitated diffusion into the cell interior .
Visit this link ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/pancreas1 ) to view an animation describing the location and function of the pancreas .
What goes wrong in the function of insulin in type 2 diabetes ?
Insulin also reduces blood glucose levels by stimulating glycolysis , the metabolism of glucose for generation of ATP .
Moreover , it stimulates the liver to convert excess glucose into glycogen for storage , and it inhibits enzymes involved in glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis .
Finally , insulin promotes triglyceride and protein synthesis .
The secretion of insulin is regulated through a negative feedback mechanism .
As blood glucose levels decrease , further insulin release is inhibited .
The pancreatic hormones are summarized in Table 17.7 .
Dysfunction of insulin production and secretion , as well as the target cells ’ responsiveness to insulin , can lead to a condition called diabetes mellitus .
An increasingly common disease , diabetes mellitus has been diagnosed in more than 18 million adults in the United States , and more than 200,000 children .
It is estimated that up to 7 million more adults have the condition but have not been diagnosed .
In addition , approximately 79 million people in the US are estimated to have pre-diabetes , a condition in which blood glucose levels are abnormally high , but not yet high enough to be classified as diabetes .
There are two main forms of diabetes mellitus .
Type 1 diabetes is an autoimmune disease affecting the beta cells of the pancreas .
Certain genes are recognized to increase susceptibility .
The beta cells of people with type 1 diabetes do not produce insulin ; thus , synthetic insulin must be administered by injection or infusion .
This form of diabetes accounts for less than five percent of all diabetes cases .
Type 2 diabetes accounts for approximately 95 percent of all cases .
It is acquired , and lifestyle factors such as poor diet , inactivity , and the presence of pre-diabetes greatly increase a person ’ s risk .
About 80 to 90 percent of people with type 2 diabetes are overweight or obese .
In type 2 diabetes , cells become resistant to the effects of insulin .
In response , the pancreas increases its insulin secretion , but over time , the beta cells become exhausted .
In many cases , type 2 diabetes can be reversed by moderate weight loss , regular physical activity , and consumption of a healthy diet ; however , if blood glucose levels can not be controlled , the diabetic will eventually require insulin .
Two of the early manifestations of diabetes are excessive urination and excessive thirst .
They demonstrate how the out-of-control levels of glucose in the blood affect kidney function .
The kidneys are responsible for filtering glucose from the blood .
Excessive blood glucose draws water into the urine , and as a result the person eliminates an abnormally large quantity of sweet urine .
The use of body water to dilute the urine leaves the body dehydrated , and so the person is unusually and continually thirsty .
The person may also experience persistent hunger because the body cells are unable to access the glucose in the bloodstream .
Over time , persistently high levels of glucose in the blood injure tissues throughout the body , especially those of the blood vessels and nerves .
Inflammation and injury of the lining of arteries lead to atherosclerosis and an increased risk of heart attack and stroke .
Damage to the microscopic blood vessels of the kidney impairs kidney function and can lead to kidney failure .
Damage to blood vessels that serve the eyes can lead to blindness .
Blood vessel damage also reduces circulation to the limbs , whereas nerve damage leads to a loss of sensation , called neuropathy , particularly in the hands and feet .
Together , these changes increase the risk of injury , infection , and tissue death ( necrosis ) , contributing to a high rate of toe , foot , and lower leg amputations in people with diabetes .
Uncontrolled diabetes can also lead to a dangerous form of metabolic acidosis called ketoacidosis .
Deprived of glucose , cells increasingly rely on fat stores for fuel .
However , in a glucose-deficient state , the liver is forced to use an alternative lipid metabolism pathway that results in the increased production of ketone bodies ( or ketones ) , which are acidic .
The build-up of ketones in the blood causes ketoacidosis , which—if left untreated—may lead to a life-threatening “ diabetic coma. ” Together , these complications make diabetes the seventh leading cause of death in the United States .
Diabetes is diagnosed when lab tests reveal that blood glucose levels are higher than normal , a condition called hyperglycemia .
The treatment of diabetes depends on the type , the severity of the condition , and the ability of the patient to make lifestyle changes .
As noted earlier , moderate weight loss , regular physical activity , and consumption of a healthful diet can reduce blood glucose levels .
Some patients with type 2 diabetes may be unable to control their disease with these lifestyle changes , and will require medication .
Historically , the first-line treatment of type 2 diabetes was insulin .
Research advances have resulted in alternative options , including medications that enhance pancreatic function .
Visit this link ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/insulin ) to view an animation describing the role of insulin and the pancreas in diabetes .
Here , you will learn about the hormone-producing activities of the heart , gastrointestinal tract , kidneys , skeleton , adipose tissue , skin , and thymus .
When the body experiences an increase in blood volume or pressure , the cells of the heart ’ s atrial wall stretch .
In response , specialized cells in the wall of the atria produce and secrete the peptide hormone atrial natriuretic peptide ( ANP ) .
ANP signals the kidneys to reduce sodium reabsorption , thereby decreasing the amount of water reabsorbed from the urine filtrate and reducing blood volume .
Other actions of ANP include the inhibition of renin secretion and the initiation of the reninangiotensin-aldosterone system ( RAAS ) and vasodilation .
Therefore , ANP aids in decreasing blood pressure , blood volume , and blood sodium levels .
The endocrine cells of the GI tract are located in the mucosa of the stomach and small intestine .
Some of these hormones are secreted in response to eating a meal and aid in digestion .
An example of a hormone secreted by the stomach cells is gastrin , a peptide hormone secreted in response to stomach distention that stimulates the release of hydrochloric acid .
Secretin is a peptide hormone secreted by the small intestine as acidic chyme ( partially digested food and fluid ) moves from the stomach .
It stimulates the release of bicarbonate from the pancreas , which buffers the acidic chyme , and inhibits the further secretion of hydrochloric acid by the stomach .
Cholecystokinin ( CCK ) is another peptide hormone released from the small intestine .
It promotes the secretion of pancreatic enzymes and the release of bile from the gallbladder , both of which facilitate digestion .
Other hormones produced by the intestinal cells aid in glucose metabolism , such as by stimulating the pancreatic beta cells to secrete insulin , reducing glucagon secretion from the alpha cells , or enhancing cellular sensitivity to insulin .
The kidneys participate in several complex endocrine pathways and produce certain hormones .
A decline in blood flow to the kidneys stimulates them to release the enzyme renin , triggering the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone ( RAAS ) system , and stimulating the reabsorption of sodium and water .
The reabsorption increases blood flow and blood pressure .
The kidneys also play a role in regulating blood calcium levels through the production of calcitriol from vitamin D , which is released in response to the secretion of parathyroid hormone ( PTH ) .
In addition , the kidneys produce the hormone erythropoietin ( EPO ) in response to low oxygen levels .
EPO stimulates the production of red blood cells ( erythrocytes ) in the bone marrow , thereby increasing oxygen delivery to tissues .
You may have heard of EPO as a performance-enhancing drug ( in a synthetic form ) .
Although bone has long been recognized as a target for hormones , only recently have researchers recognized that the skeleton itself produces at least two hormones .
Fibroblast growth factor 23 ( FGF23 ) is produced by bone cells in response to increased blood levels of vitamin D or phosphate .
It triggers the kidneys to inhibit the formation of calcitriol from vitamin D and to increase phosphorus excretion .
Osteocalcin , produced by osteoblasts , stimulates the pancreatic beta cells to increase insulin production .
It also acts on peripheral tissues to increase their sensitivity to insulin and their utilization of glucose .
Adipose tissue produces and secretes several hormones involved in lipid metabolism and storage .
One important example is leptin , a protein manufactured by adipose cells that circulates in amounts directly proportional to levels of body fat .
Leptin is released in response to food consumption and acts by binding to brain neurons involved in energy intake and expenditure .
Binding of leptin produces a feeling of satiety after a meal , thereby reducing appetite .
It also appears that the binding of leptin to brain receptors triggers the sympathetic nervous system to regulate bone metabolism , increasing deposition of cortical bone .
Adiponectin—another hormone synthesized by adipose cells—appears to reduce cellular insulin resistance and to protect blood vessels from inflammation and atherosclerosis .
Its levels are lower in people who are obese , and rise following weight loss .
The skin functions as an endocrine organ in the production of the inactive form of vitamin D , cholecalciferol .
When cholesterol present in the epidermis is exposed to ultraviolet radiation , it is converted to cholecalciferol , which then enters the blood .
In the liver , cholecalciferol is converted to an intermediate that travels to the kidneys and is further converted to calcitriol , the active form of vitamin D .
Vitamin D is important in a variety of physiological processes , including intestinal calcium absorption and immune system function .
In some studies , low levels of vitamin D have been associated with increased risks of cancer , severe asthma , and multiple sclerosis .
Vitamin D deficiency in children causes rickets , and in adults , osteomalacia—both of which are characterized by bone deterioration .
The thymus is an organ of the immune system that is larger and more active during infancy and early childhood , and begins to atrophy as we age .
Its endocrine function is the production of a group of hormones called thymosins that contribute to the development and differentiation of T lymphocytes , which are immune cells .
Although the role of thymosins is not yet well understood , it is clear that they contribute to the immune response .
Thymosins have been found in tissues other than the thymus and have a wide variety of functions , so the thymosins can not be strictly categorized as thymic hormones .
The liver is responsible for secreting at least four important hormones or hormone precursors : insulin-like growth factor ( somatomedin ) , angiotensinogen , thrombopoetin , and hepcidin .
Insulin-like growth factor-1 is the immediate stimulus for growth in the body , especially of the bones .
Angiotensinogen is the precursor to angiotensin , mentioned earlier , which increases blood pressure .
Thrombopoetin stimulates the production of the blood ’ s platelets .
Hepcidins block the release of iron from cells in the body , helping to regulate iron homeostasis in our body fluids .
The major hormones of these other organs are summarized in Table 17.8 .
By the end of this section , you will be able to : Describe the embryonic origins of the endocrine system Discuss the effects of aging on the endocrine system The endocrine system arises from all three embryonic germ layers .
The endocrine glands that produce the steroid hormones , such as the gonads and adrenal cortex , arise from the mesoderm .
In contrast , endocrine glands that arise from the endoderm and ectoderm produce the amine , peptide , and protein hormones .
The pituitary gland arises from two distinct areas of the ectoderm : the anterior pituitary gland arises from the oral ectoderm , whereas the posterior pituitary gland arises from the neural ectoderm at the base of the hypothalamus .
The pineal gland also arises from the ectoderm .
The two structures of the adrenal glands arise from two different germ layers : the adrenal cortex from the mesoderm and the adrenal medulla from ectoderm neural cells .
The endoderm gives rise to the thyroid and parathyroid glands , as well as the pancreas and the thymus .
As the body ages , changes occur that affect the endocrine system , sometimes altering the production , secretion , and catabolism of hormones .
For example , the structure of the anterior pituitary gland changes as vascularization decreases and the connective tissue content increases with increasing age .
This restructuring affects the gland ’ s hormone production .
For example , the amount of human growth hormone that is produced declines with age , resulting in the reduced muscle mass commonly observed in the elderly .
The adrenal glands also undergo changes as the body ages ; as fibrous tissue increases , the production of cortisol and aldosterone decreases .
Interestingly , the production and secretion of epinephrine and norepinephrine remain normal throughout the aging process .
A well-known example of the aging process affecting an endocrine gland is menopause and the decline of ovarian function .
With increasing age , the ovaries decrease in both size and weight and become progressively less sensitive to gonadotropins .
This gradually causes a decrease in estrogen and progesterone levels , leading to menopause and the inability to reproduce .
Low levels of estrogens and progesterone are also associated with some disease states , such as osteoporosis , atherosclerosis , and hyperlipidemia , or abnormal blood lipid levels .
Testosterone levels also decline with age , a condition called andropause ( or viropause ) ; however , this decline is much less dramatic than the decline of estrogens in women , and much more gradual , rarely affecting sperm production until very old age .
Although this means that males maintain their ability to father children for decades longer than females , the quantity , quality , and motility of their sperm is often reduced .
As the body ages , the thyroid gland produces less of the thyroid hormones , causing a gradual decrease in the basal metabolic rate .
The lower metabolic rate reduces the production of body heat and increases levels of body fat .
Parathyroid hormones , on the other hand , increase with age .
This may be because of reduced dietary calcium levels , causing a compensatory increase in parathyroid hormone .
However , increased parathyroid hormone levels combined with decreased levels of calcitonin ( and estrogens in women ) can lead to osteoporosis as PTH stimulates demineralization of bones to increase blood calcium levels .
Notice that osteoporosis is common in both elderly males and females .
Increasing age also affects glucose metabolism , as blood glucose levels spike more rapidly and take longer to return to normal in the elderly .
In addition , increasing glucose intolerance may occur because of a gradual decline in cellular insulin sensitivity .
Almost 27 percent of Americans aged 65 and older have diabetes .
They obtain nutrients directly from and excrete wastes directly into their environment .
The human organism can not do that .
Our large , complex bodies need blood to deliver nutrients to and remove wastes from our trillions of cells .
The heart pumps blood throughout the body in a network of blood vessels .
Together , these three components—blood , heart , and vessels—makes up the cardiovascular system .
This chapter focuses on the medium of transport : blood .
Like all connective tissues , it is made up of cellular elements and an extracellular matrix .
The cellular elements—referred to as the formed elements —include red blood cells ( RBCs ) , white blood cells ( WBCs ) , and cell fragments called platelets .
The extracellular matrix , called plasma , makes blood unique among connective tissues because it is fluid .
This fluid , which is mostly water , perpetually suspends the formed elements and enables them to circulate throughout the body within the cardiovascular system .
The primary function of blood is to deliver oxygen and nutrients to and remove wastes from body cells , but that is only the beginning of the story .
The specific functions of blood also include defense , distribution of heat , and maintenance of homeostasis .
Nutrients from the foods you eat are absorbed in the digestive tract .
Most of these travel in the bloodstream directly to the liver , where they are processed and released back into the bloodstream for delivery to body cells .
Oxygen from the air you breathe diffuses into the blood , which moves from the lungs to the heart , which then pumps it out to the rest of the body .
Moreover , endocrine glands scattered throughout the body release their products , called hormones , into the bloodstream , which carries them to distant target cells .
Blood also picks up cellular wastes and byproducts , and transports them to various organs for removal .
For instance , blood moves carbon dioxide to the lungs for exhalation from the body , and various waste products are transported to the kidneys and liver for excretion from the body in the form of urine or bile .
Many types of WBCs protect the body from external threats , such as disease-causing bacteria that have entered the bloodstream in a wound .
Other WBCs seek out and destroy internal threats , such as cells with mutated DNA that could multiply to become cancerous , or body cells infected with viruses .
When damage to the vessels results in bleeding , blood platelets and certain proteins dissolved in the plasma , the fluid portion of the blood , interact to block the ruptured areas of the blood vessels involved .
This protects the body from further blood loss .
Recall that body temperature is regulated via a classic negative-feedback loop .
If you were exercising on a warm day , your rising core body temperature would trigger several homeostatic mechanisms , including increased transport of blood from your core to your body periphery , which is typically cooler .
As blood passes through the vessels of the skin , heat would be dissipated to the environment , and the blood returning to your body core would be cooler .
In contrast , on a cold day , blood is diverted away from the skin to maintain a warmer body core .
In extreme cases , this may result in frostbite .
Blood also helps to maintain the chemical balance of the body .
Proteins and other compounds in blood act as buffers , which thereby help to regulate the pH of body tissues .
Blood also helps to regulate the water content of body cells .
You have probably had blood drawn from a superficial vein in your arm , which was then sent to a lab for analysis .
Some of the most common blood tests—for instance , those measuring lipid or glucose levels in plasma—determine which substances are present within blood and in what quantities .
Other blood tests check for the composition of the blood itself , including the quantities and types of formed elements .
One such test , called a hematocrit , measures the percentage of RBCs , clinically known as erythrocytes , in a blood sample .
It is performed by spinning the blood sample in a specialized centrifuge , a process that causes the heavier elements suspended within the blood sample to separate from the lightweight , liquid plasma ( Figure 18.2 ) .
Because the heaviest elements in blood are the erythrocytes , these settle at the very bottom of the hematocrit tube .
Located above the erythrocytes is a pale , thin layer composed of the remaining formed elements of blood .
These are the WBCs , clinically known as leukocytes , and the platelets , cell fragments also called thrombocytes .
This layer is referred to as the buffy coat because of its color ; it normally constitutes less than 1 percent of a blood sample .
Above the buffy coat is the blood plasma , normally a pale , strawcolored fluid , which constitutes the remainder of the sample .
The volume of erythrocytes after centrifugation is also commonly referred to as packed cell volume ( PCV ) .
In normal blood , about 45 percent of a sample is erythrocytes .
The hematocrit of any one sample can vary significantly , however , about 36–50 percent , according to gender and other factors .
Normal hematocrit values for females range from 37 to 47 , with a mean value of 41 ; for males , hematocrit ranges from 42 to 52 , with a mean of 47 .
The percentage of other formed elements , the WBCs and platelets , is extremely small so it is not normally considered with the hematocrit .
So the mean plasma percentage is the percent of blood that is not erythrocytes : for females , it is approximately 59 ( or 100 minus 41 ) , and for males , it is approximately 53 ( or 100 minus 47 ) .
When you think about blood , the first characteristic that probably comes to mind is its color .
Blood that has just taken up oxygen in the lungs is bright red , and blood that has released oxygen in the tissues is a more dusky red .
This is because hemoglobin is a pigment that changes color , depending upon the degree of oxygen saturation .
Blood is viscous and somewhat sticky to the touch .
It has a viscosity approximately five times greater than water .
Viscosity is a measure of a fluid ’ s thickness or resistance to flow , and is influenced by the presence of the plasma proteins and formed elements within the blood .
The viscosity of blood has a dramatic impact on blood pressure and flow .
Consider the difference in flow between water and honey .
The more viscous honey would demonstrate a greater resistance to flow than the less viscous water .
The same principle applies to blood .
The normal temperature of blood is slightly higher than normal body temperature—about 38 °C ( or 100.4 °F ) , compared to 37 °C ( or 98.6 °F ) for an internal body temperature reading , although daily variations of 0.5 °C are normal .
Although the surface of blood vessels is relatively smooth , as blood flows through them , it experiences some friction and resistance , especially as vessels age and lose their elasticity , thereby producing heat .
This accounts for its slightly higher temperature .
The pH of blood averages about 7.4 ; however , it can range from 7.35 to 7.45 in a healthy person .
Blood is therefore somewhat more basic ( alkaline ) on a chemical scale than pure water , which has a pH of 7.0 .
Blood contains numerous buffers that actually help to regulate pH .
Blood constitutes approximately 8 percent of adult body weight .
Adult males typically average about 5 to 6 liters of blood .
Females average 4–5 liters .
Like other fluids in the body , plasma is composed primarily of water : In fact , it is about 92 percent water .
Dissolved or suspended within this water is a mixture of substances , most of which are proteins .
There are literally hundreds of substances dissolved or suspended in the plasma , although many of them are found only in very small quantities .
Visit this site ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/normallevels ) for a list of normal levels established for many of the substances found in a sample of blood .
Serum , one of the specimen types included , refers to a sample of plasma after clotting factors have been removed .
What types of measurements are given for levels of glucose in the blood ?
About 7 percent of the volume of plasma—nearly all that is not water—is made of proteins .
These include several plasma proteins ( proteins that are unique to the plasma ) , plus a much smaller number of regulatory proteins , including enzymes and some hormones .
The major components of plasma are summarized in Figure 18.3 .
The three major groups of plasma proteins are as follows : Albumin is the most abundant of the plasma proteins .
Manufactured by the liver , albumin molecules serve as binding proteins—transport vehicles for fatty acids and steroid hormones .
Recall that lipids are hydrophobic ; however , their binding to albumin enables their transport in the watery plasma .
Albumin is also the most significant contributor to the osmotic pressure of blood ; that is , its presence holds water inside the blood vessels and draws water from the tissues , across blood vessel walls , and into the bloodstream .
This in turn helps to maintain both blood volume and blood pressure .
Albumin normally accounts for approximately 54 percent of the total plasma protein content , in clinical levels of 3.5–5.0 g/dL blood .
The second most common plasma proteins are the globulins .
A heterogeneous group , there are three main subgroups known as alpha , beta , and gamma globulins .
The alpha and beta globulins transport iron , lipids , and the fat-soluble vitamins A , D , E , and K to the cells ; like albumin , they also contribute to osmotic pressure .
The gamma globulins are proteins involved in immunity and are better known as an antibodies or immunoglobulins .
Although other plasma proteins are produced by the liver , immunoglobulins are produced by specialized leukocytes known as plasma cells .
( Seek additional content for more information about immunoglobulins . )
Globulins make up approximately 38 percent of the total plasma protein volume , in clinical levels of 1.0–1.5 g/dL blood .
The least abundant plasma protein is fibrinogen .
Like albumin and the alpha and beta globulins , fibrinogen is produced by the liver .
It is essential for blood clotting , a process described later in this chapter .
Fibrinogen accounts for about 7 percent of the total plasma protein volume , in clinical levels of 0.2–0.45 g/dL blood .
In addition to proteins , plasma contains a wide variety of other substances .
These include various electrolytes , such as sodium , potassium , and calcium ions ; dissolved gases , such as oxygen , carbon dioxide , and nitrogen ; various organic nutrients , such as vitamins , lipids , glucose , and amino acids ; and metabolic wastes .
All of these nonprotein solutes combined contribute approximately 1 percent to the total volume of plasma .
Phlebotomists are professionals trained to draw blood ( phleb= “ a blood vessel ” ; -tomy = “ to cut ” ) .
When more than a few drops of blood are required , phlebotomists perform a venipuncture , typically of a surface vein in the arm .
They perform a capillary stick on a finger , an earlobe , or the heel of an infant when only a small quantity of blood is required .
An arterial stick is collected from an artery and used to analyze blood gases .
After collection , the blood may be analyzed by medical laboratories or perhaps used for transfusions , donations , or research .
While many allied health professionals practice phlebotomy , the American Society of Phlebotomy Technicians issues certificates to individuals passing a national examination , and some large labs and hospitals hire individuals expressly for their skill in phlebotomy .
Medical or clinical laboratories employ a variety of individuals in technical positions : Medical technologists ( MT ) , also known as clinical laboratory technologists ( CLT ) , typically hold a bachelor ’ s degree and certification from an accredited training program .
They perform a wide variety of tests on various body fluids , including blood .
The information they provide is essential to the primary care providers in determining a diagnosis and in monitoring the course of a disease and response to treatment .
Medical laboratory technicians ( MLT ) typically have an associate ’ s degree but may perform duties similar to those of an MT .
Medical laboratory assistants ( MLA ) spend the majority of their time processing samples and carrying out routine assignments within the lab .
Clinical training is required , but a degree may not be essential to obtaining a position .
Although one type of leukocyte called memory cells can survive for years , most erythrocytes , leukocytes , and platelets normally live only a few hours to a few weeks .
Thus , the body must form new blood cells and platelets quickly and continuously .
When you donate a unit of blood during a blood drive ( approximately 475 mL , or about 1 pint ) , your body typically replaces the donated plasma within 24 hours , but it takes about 4 to 6 weeks to replace the blood cells .
This restricts the frequency with which donors can contribute their blood .
The process by which this replacement occurs is called hemopoiesis , or hematopoiesis ( from the Greek root haima= “ blood ” ; -poiesis = “ production ” ) .
Prior to birth , hemopoiesis occurs in a number of tissues , beginning with the yolk sac of the developing embryo , and continuing in the fetal liver , spleen , lymphatic tissue , and eventually the red bone marrow .
Following birth , most hemopoiesis occurs in the red marrow , a connective tissue within the spaces of spongy ( cancellous ) bone tissue .
In children , hemopoiesis can occur in the medullary cavity of long bones ; in adults , the process is largely restricted to the cranial and pelvic bones , the vertebrae , the sternum , and the proximal epiphyses of the femur and humerus .
Throughout adulthood , the liver and spleen maintain their ability to generate the formed elements .
This process is referred to as extramedullary hemopoiesis ( meaning hemopoiesis outside the medullary cavity of adult bones ) .
When a disease such as bone cancer destroys the bone marrow , causing hemopoiesis to fail , extramedullary hemopoiesis may be initiated .
All formed elements arise from stem cells of the red bone marrow .
Recall that stem cells undergo mitosis plus cytokinesis ( cellular division ) to give rise to new daughter cells : One of these remains a stem cell and the other differentiates into one of any number of diverse cell types .
Stem cells may be viewed as occupying a hierarchal system , with some loss of the ability to diversify at each step .
The totipotent stem cell is the zygote , or fertilized egg .
The totipotent ( toti= “ all ” ) stem cell gives rise to all cells of the human body .
The next level is the pluripotent stem cell , which gives rise to multiple types of cells of the body and some of the supporting fetal membranes .
Beneath this level , the mesenchymal cell is a stem cell that develops only into types of connective tissue , including fibrous connective tissue , bone , cartilage , and blood , but not epithelium , muscle , and nervous tissue .
One step lower on the hierarchy of stem cells is the hemopoietic stem cell , or hemocytoblast .
All of the formed elements of blood originate from this specific type of cell .
Hemopoiesis begins when the hemopoietic stem cell is exposed to appropriate chemical stimuli collectively called hemopoietic growth factors , which prompt it to divide and differentiate .
One daughter cell remains a hemopoietic stem cell , allowing hemopoiesis to continue .
However , hemopoiesis of lymphocytes progresses somewhat differently from the process for the other formed elements .
In brief , lymphoid stem cells quickly migrate from the bone marrow to lymphatic tissues , including the lymph nodes , spleen , and thymus , where their production and differentiation continues .
B cells are so named since they mature in the bone marrow , while T cells mature in the thymus .
Myeloid stem cells give rise to all the other formed elements , including the erythrocytes ; megakaryocytes that produce platelets ; and a myeloblast lineage that gives rise to monocytes and three forms of granular leukocytes : neutrophils , eosinophils , and basophils .
Lymphoid and myeloid stem cells do not immediately divide and differentiate into mature formed elements .
As you can see in Figure 18.4 , there are several intermediate stages of precursor cells ( literally , forerunner cells ) , many of which can be recognized by their names , which have the suffix -blast .
For instance , megakaryoblasts are the precursors of megakaryocytes , and proerythroblasts become reticulocytes , which eject their nucleus and most other organelles before maturing into erythrocytes .
Development from stem cells to precursor cells to mature cells is again initiated by hemopoietic growth factors .
These include the following : Erythropoietin ( EPO ) is a glycoprotein hormone secreted by the interstitial fibroblast cells of the kidneys in response to low oxygen levels .
It prompts the production of erythrocytes .
Some athletes use synthetic EPO as a performanceenhancing drug ( called blood doping ) to increase RBC counts and subsequently increase oxygen delivery to tissues throughout the body .
EPO is a banned substance in most organized sports , but it is also used medically in the treatment of certain anemia , specifically those triggered by certain types of cancer , and other disorders in which increased erythrocyte counts and oxygen levels are desirable .
Thrombopoietin , another glycoprotein hormone , is produced by the liver and kidneys .
It triggers the development of megakaryocytes into platelets .
Cytokines are glycoproteins secreted by a wide variety of cells , including red bone marrow , leukocytes , macrophages , fibroblasts , and endothelial cells .
They act locally as autocrine or paracrine factors , stimulating the proliferation of progenitor cells and helping to stimulate both nonspecific and specific resistance to disease .
There are two major subtypes of cytokines known as colony-stimulating factors and interleukins .
Colony-stimulating factors ( CSFs ) are glycoproteins that act locally , as autocrine or paracrine factors .
Some trigger the differentiation of myeloblasts into granular leukocytes , namely , neutrophils , eosinophils , and basophils .
These are referred to as granulocyte CSFs .
A different CSF induces the production of monocytes , called monocyte CSFs .
Both granulocytes and monocytes are stimulated by GM-CSF ; granulocytes , monocytes , platelets , and erythrocytes are stimulated by multi-CSF .
Synthetic forms of these hormones are often administered to patients with various forms of cancer who are receiving chemotherapy to revive their WBC counts .
Interleukins are another class of cytokine signaling molecules important in hemopoiesis .
They were initially thought to be secreted uniquely by leukocytes and to communicate only with other leukocytes , and were named accordingly , but are now known to be produced by a variety of cells including bone marrow and endothelium .
Researchers now suspect that interleukins may play other roles in body functioning , including differentiation and maturation of cells , producing immunity and inflammation .
To date , more than a dozen interleukins have been identified , with others likely to follow .
They are generally numbered IL-1 , IL-2 , IL-3 , etc .
In its original intent , the term blood doping was used to describe the practice of injecting by transfusion supplemental RBCs into an individual , typically to enhance performance in a sport .
Additional RBCs would deliver more oxygen to the tissues , providing extra aerobic capacity , clinically referred to as VO max .
The source of the cells was either from the recipient ( autologous ) or from a donor with compatible blood ( homologous ) .
This practice was aided by the well-developed techniques of harvesting , concentrating , and freezing of the RBCs that could be later thawed and injected , yet still retain their functionality .
These practices are considered illegal in virtually all sports and run the risk of infection , significantly increasing the viscosity of the blood and the potential for transmission of blood-borne pathogens if the blood was collected from another individual .
With the development of synthetic EPO in the 1980s , it became possible to provide additional RBCs by artificially stimulating RBC production in the bone marrow .
Originally developed to treat patients suffering from anemia , renal failure , or cancer treatment , large quantities of EPO can be generated by recombinant DNA technology .
Synthetic EPO is injected under the skin and can increase hematocrit for many weeks .
It may also induce polycythemia and raise hematocrit to 70 or greater .
This increased viscosity raises the resistance of the blood and forces the heart to pump more powerfully ; in extreme cases , it has resulted in death .
Other drugs such as cobalt II chloride have been shown to increase natural EPO gene expression .
Blood doping has become problematic in many sports , especially cycling .
Lance Armstrong , winner of seven Tour de France and many other cycling titles , was stripped of his victories and admitted to blood doping in 2013 .
Watch this video ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/doping ) to see doctors discuss the dangers of blood doping in sports .
What are the some potential side effects of blood doping ?
These tests and procedures are often used to assist in the diagnosis and treatment of various severe forms of anemia , such as thalassemia major and sickle cell anemia , as well as some types of cancer , specifically leukemia .
In the past , when a bone marrow sample or transplant was necessary , the procedure would have required inserting a largebore needle into the region near the iliac crest of the pelvic bones ( os coxae ) .
This location was preferred , since its location close to the body surface makes it more accessible , and it is relatively isolated from most vital organs .
Unfortunately , the procedure is quite painful .
Now , direct sampling of bone marrow can often be avoided .
In many cases , stem cells can be isolated in just a few hours from a sample of a patient ’ s blood .
The isolated stem cells are then grown in culture using the appropriate hemopoietic growth factors , and analyzed or sometimes frozen for later use .
For an individual requiring a transplant , a matching donor is essential to prevent the immune system from destroying the donor cells—a phenomenon known as tissue rejection .
To treat patients with bone marrow transplants , it is first necessary to destroy the patient ’ s own diseased marrow through radiation and/or chemotherapy .
Donor bone marrow stem cells are then intravenously infused .
From the bloodstream , they establish themselves in the recipient ’ s bone marrow .
Specifically , males have about 5.4 million erythrocytes per microliter ( µ L ) of blood , and females have approximately 4.8 million per µ L. In fact , erythrocytes are estimated to make up about 25 percent of the total cells in the body .
As you can imagine , they are quite small cells , with a mean diameter of only about 7–8 micrometers ( µ m ) ( Figure 18.5 ) .
The primary functions of erythrocytes are to pick up inhaled oxygen from the lungs and transport it to the body ’ s tissues , and to pick up some ( about 24 percent ) carbon dioxide waste at the tissues and transport it to the lungs for exhalation .
Erythrocytes remain within the vascular network .
Although leukocytes typically leave the blood vessels to perform their defensive functions , movement of erythrocytes from the blood vessels is abnormal .
As an erythrocyte matures in the red bone marrow , it extrudes its nucleus and most of its other organelles .
During the first day or two that it is in the circulation , an immature erythrocyte , known as a reticulocyte , will still typically contain remnants of organelles .
Reticulocytes should comprise approximately 1–2 percent of the erythrocyte count and provide a rough estimate of the rate of RBC production , with abnormally low or high rates indicating deviations in the production of these cells .
These remnants , primarily of networks ( reticulum ) of ribosomes , are quickly shed , however , and mature , circulating erythrocytes have few internal cellular structural components .
Lacking mitochondria , for example , they rely on anaerobic respiration .
This means that they do not utilize any of the oxygen they are transporting , so they can deliver it all to the tissues .
They also lack endoplasmic reticula and do not synthesize proteins .
Erythrocytes do , however , contain some structural proteins that help the blood cells maintain their unique structure and enable them to change their shape to squeeze through capillaries .
This includes the protein spectrin , a cytoskeletal protein element .
Erythrocytes are biconcave disks ; that is , they are plump at their periphery and very thin in the center ( Figure 18.6 ) .
Since they lack most organelles , there is more interior space for the presence of the hemoglobin molecules that , as you will see shortly , transport gases .
The biconcave shape also provides a greater surface area across which gas exchange can occur , relative to its volume ; a sphere of a similar diameter would have a lower surface area-to-volume ratio .
Capillary beds are extremely narrow , slowing the passage of the erythrocytes and providing an extended opportunity for gas exchange to occur .
However , the space within capillaries can be so minute that , despite their own small size , erythrocytes may have to fold in on themselves if they are to make their way through .
Fortunately , their structural proteins like spectrin are flexible , allowing them to bend over themselves to a surprising degree , then spring back again when they enter a wider vessel .
In wider vessels , erythrocytes may stack up much like a roll of coins , forming a rouleaux , from the French word for “ roll. ” Hemoglobin is a large molecule made up of proteins and iron .
It consists of four folded chains of a protein called globin , designated alpha 1 and 2 , and beta 1 and 2 ( Figure 18.7a ) .
Each of these globin molecules is bound to a red pigment molecule called heme , which contains an ion of iron ( Fe ) ( Figure 18.7b ) .
Each iron ion in the heme can bind to one oxygen molecule ; therefore , each hemoglobin molecule can transport four oxygen molecules .
An individual erythrocyte may contain about 300 million hemoglobin molecules , and therefore can bind to and transport up to 1.2 billion oxygen molecules ( see Figure 18.7b ) .
In the lungs , hemoglobin picks up oxygen , which binds to the iron ions , forming oxyhemoglobin .
The bright red , oxygenated hemoglobin travels to the body tissues , where it releases some of the oxygen molecules , becoming darker red deoxyhemoglobin , sometimes referred to as reduced hemoglobin .
Oxygen release depends on the need for oxygen in the surrounding tissues , so hemoglobin rarely if ever leaves all of its oxygen behind .
In the capillaries , carbon dioxide enters the bloodstream .
About 76 percent dissolves in the plasma , some of it remaining as dissolved CO , and the remainder forming bicarbonate ion .
About 23–24 percent of it binds to the amino acids in hemoglobin , forming a molecule known as carbaminohemoglobin .
From the capillaries , the hemoglobin carries carbon dioxide back to the lungs , where it releases it for exchange of oxygen .
Changes in the levels of RBCs can have significant effects on the body ’ s ability to effectively deliver oxygen to the tissues .
Ineffective hematopoiesis results in insufficient numbers of RBCs and results in one of several forms of anemia .
An overproduction of RBCs produces a condition called polycythemia .
The primary drawback with polycythemia is not a failure to directly deliver enough oxygen to the tissues , but rather the increased viscosity of the blood , which makes it more difficult for the heart to circulate the blood .
In patients with insufficient hemoglobin , the tissues may not receive sufficient oxygen , resulting in another form of anemia .
In determining oxygenation of tissues , the value of greatest interest in healthcare is the percent saturation ; that is , the percentage of hemoglobin sites occupied by oxygen in a patient ’ s blood .
Clinically this value is commonly referred to simply as “ percent sat. ” Percent saturation is normally monitored using a device known as a pulse oximeter , which is applied to a thin part of the body , typically the tip of the patient ’ s finger .
The device works by sending two different wavelengths of light ( one red , the other infrared ) through the finger and measuring the light with a photodetector as it exits .
Hemoglobin absorbs light differentially depending upon its saturation with oxygen .
The machine calibrates the amount of light received by the photodetector against the amount absorbed by the partially oxygenated hemoglobin and presents the data as percent saturation .
Normal pulse oximeter readings range from 95–100 percent .
Lower percentages reflect hypoxemia , or low blood oxygen .
The term hypoxia is more generic and simply refers to low oxygen levels .
Oxygen levels are also directly monitored from free oxygen in the plasma typically following an arterial stick .
When this method is applied , the amount of oxygen present is expressed in terms of partial pressure of oxygen or simply pO and is typically recorded in units of millimeters of mercury , mm Hg .
The kidneys filter about 180 liters ( ~380 pints ) of blood in an average adult each day , or about 20 percent of the total resting volume , and thus serve as ideal sites for receptors that determine oxygen saturation .
In response to hypoxemia , less oxygen will exit the vessels supplying the kidney , resulting in hypoxia ( low oxygen concentration ) in the tissue fluid of the kidney where oxygen concentration is actually monitored .
Interstitial fibroblasts within the kidney secrete EPO , thereby increasing erythrocyte production and restoring oxygen levels .
In a classic negative-feedback loop , as oxygen saturation rises , EPO secretion falls , and vice versa , thereby maintaining homeostasis .
Populations dwelling at high elevations , with inherently lower levels of oxygen in the atmosphere , naturally maintain a hematocrit higher than people living at sea level .
Consequently , people traveling to high elevations may experience symptoms of hypoxemia , such as fatigue , headache , and shortness of breath , for a few days after their arrival .
In response to the hypoxemia , the kidneys secrete EPO to step up the production of erythrocytes until homeostasis is achieved once again .
To avoid the symptoms of hypoxemia , or altitude sickness , mountain climbers typically rest for several days to a week or more at a series of camps situated at increasing elevations to allow EPO levels and , consequently , erythrocyte counts to rise .
When climbing the tallest peaks , such as Mt .
Everest and K2 in the Himalayas , many mountain climbers rely upon bottled oxygen as they near the summit .
Production of erythrocytes in the marrow occurs at the staggering rate of more than 2 million cells per second .
For this production to occur , a number of raw materials must be present in adequate amounts .
These include the same nutrients that are essential to the production and maintenance of any cell , such as glucose , lipids , and amino acids .
However , erythrocyte production also requires several trace elements : Iron .
We have said that each heme group in a hemoglobin molecule contains an ion of the trace mineral iron .
On average , less than 20 percent of the iron we consume is absorbed .
Heme iron , from animal foods such as meat , poultry , and fish , is absorbed more efficiently than non-heme iron from plant foods .
Upon absorption , iron becomes part of the body ’ s total iron pool .
The bone marrow , liver , and spleen can store iron in the protein compounds ferritin and hemosiderin .
Ferroportin transports the iron across the intestinal cell plasma membranes and from its storage sites into tissue fluid where it enters the blood .
When EPO stimulates the production of erythrocytes , iron is released from storage , bound to transferrin , and carried to the red marrow where it attaches to erythrocyte precursors .
A trace mineral , copper is a component of two plasma proteins , hephaestin and ceruloplasmin .
Without these , hemoglobin could not be adequately produced .
Located in intestinal villi , hephaestin enables iron to be absorbed by intestinal cells .
Ceruloplasmin transports copper .
Both enable the oxidation of iron from Fe to Fe , a form in which it can be bound to its transport protein , transferrin , for transport to body cells .
In a state of copper deficiency , the transport of iron for heme synthesis decreases , and iron can accumulate in tissues , where it can eventually lead to organ damage .
The trace mineral zinc functions as a co-enzyme that facilitates the synthesis of the heme portion of hemoglobin .
The B vitamins folate and vitamin B function as co-enzymes that facilitate DNA synthesis .
Thus , both are critical for the synthesis of new cells , including erythrocytes .
Erythrocytes live up to 120 days in the circulation , after which the worn-out cells are removed by a type of myeloid phagocytic cell called a macrophage , located primarily within the bone marrow , liver , and spleen .
The components of the degraded erythrocytes ’ hemoglobin are further processed as follows : Globin , the protein portion of hemoglobin , is broken down into amino acids , which can be sent back to the bone marrow to be used in the production of new erythrocytes .
Hemoglobin that is not phagocytized is broken down in the circulation , releasing alpha and beta chains that are removed from circulation by the kidneys .
The iron contained in the heme portion of hemoglobin may be stored in the liver or spleen , primarily in the form of ferritin or hemosiderin , or carried through the bloodstream by transferrin to the red bone marrow for recycling into new erythrocytes .
The non-iron portion of heme is degraded into the waste product biliverdin , a green pigment , and then into another waste product , bilirubin , a yellow pigment .
Bilirubin binds to albumin and travels in the blood to the liver , which uses it in the manufacture of bile , a compound released into the intestines to help emulsify dietary fats .
In the large intestine , bacteria breaks the bilirubin apart from the bile and converts it to urobilinogen and then into stercobilin .
It is then eliminated from the body in the feces .
Broad-spectrum antibiotics typically eliminate these bacteria as well and may alter the color of feces .
The kidneys also remove any circulating bilirubin and other related metabolic byproducts such as urobilins and secrete them into the urine .
The breakdown pigments formed from the destruction of hemoglobin can be seen in a variety of situations .
At the site of an injury , biliverdin from damaged RBCs produces some of the dramatic colors associated with bruising .
With a failing liver , bilirubin can not be removed effectively from circulation and causes the body to assume a yellowish tinge associated with jaundice .
Stercobilins within the feces produce the typical brown color associated with this waste .
And the yellow of urine is associated with the urobilins .
The erythrocyte lifecycle is summarized in Figure 18.8 .
The size , shape , and number of erythrocytes , and the number of hemoglobin molecules can have a major impact on a person ’ s health .
When the number of RBCs or hemoglobin is deficient , the general condition is called anemia .
There are more than 400 types of anemia and more than 3.5 million Americans suffer from this condition .
Anemia can be broken down into three major groups : those caused by blood loss , those caused by faulty or decreased RBC production , and those caused by excessive destruction of RBCs .
Clinicians often use two groupings in diagnosis : The kinetic approach focuses on evaluating the production , destruction , and removal of RBCs , whereas the morphological approach examines the RBCs themselves , paying particular emphasis to their size .
A common test is the mean corpuscle volume ( MCV ) , which measures size .
Normal-sized cells are referred to as normocytic , smaller-than-normal cells are referred to as microcytic , and larger-than-normal cells are referred to as macrocytic .
Reticulocyte counts are also important and may reveal inadequate production of RBCs .
The effects of the various anemias are widespread , because reduced numbers of RBCs or hemoglobin will result in lower levels of oxygen being delivered to body tissues .
Since oxygen is required for tissue functioning , anemia produces fatigue , lethargy , and an increased risk for infection .
An oxygen deficit in the brain impairs the ability to think clearly , and may prompt headaches and irritability .
Lack of oxygen leaves the patient short of breath , even as the heart and lungs work harder in response to the deficit .
Blood loss anemias are fairly straightforward .
In addition to bleeding from wounds or other lesions , these forms of anemia may be due to ulcers , hemorrhoids , inflammation of the stomach ( gastritis ) , and some cancers of the gastrointestinal tract .
The excessive use of aspirin or other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs such as ibuprofen can trigger ulceration and gastritis .
Excessive menstruation and loss of blood during childbirth are also potential causes .
Anemias caused by faulty or decreased RBC production include sickle cell anemia , iron deficiency anemia , vitamin deficiency anemia , and diseases of the bone marrow and stem cells .
A characteristic change in the shape of erythrocytes is seen in sickle cell disease ( also referred to as sickle cell anemia ) .
A genetic disorder , it is caused by production of an abnormal type of hemoglobin , called hemoglobin S , which delivers less oxygen to tissues and causes erythrocytes to assume a sickle ( or crescent ) shape , especially at low oxygen concentrations ( Figure 18.9 ) .
Sickle cell anemia is a genetic condition particularly found in individuals of African descent .
Iron deficiency anemia is the most common type and results when the amount of available iron is insufficient to allow production of sufficient heme .
This condition can occur in individuals with a deficiency of iron in the diet and is especially common in teens and children as well as in vegans and vegetarians .
Additionally , iron deficiency anemia may be caused by either an inability to absorb and transport iron or slow , chronic bleeding .
Vitamin-deficient anemias generally involve insufficient vitamin B12 and folate .
Megaloblastic anemia involves a deficiency of vitamin B12 and/or folate , and often involves diets deficient in these essential nutrients .
Lack of meat or a viable alternate source , and overcooking or eating insufficient amounts of vegetables may lead to a lack of folate .
Pregnancies , some medications , excessive alcohol consumption , and some diseases such as celiac disease are also associated with vitamin deficiencies .
It is essential to provide sufficient folic acid during the early stages of pregnancy to reduce the risk of neurological defects , including spina bifida , a failure of the neural tube to close .
Assorted disease processes can also interfere with the production and formation of RBCs and hemoglobin .
If myeloid stem cells are defective or replaced by cancer cells , there will be insufficient quantities of RBCs produced .
Aplastic anemia is the condition in which there are deficient numbers of RBC stem cells .
Aplastic anemia is often inherited , or it may be triggered by radiation , medication , chemotherapy , or infection .
Thalassemia is an inherited condition typically occurring in individuals from the Middle East , the Mediterranean , African , and Southeast Asia , in which maturation of the RBCs does not proceed normally .
The most severe form is called Cooley ’ s anemia .
Lead exposure from industrial sources or even dust from paint chips of iron-containing paints or pottery that has not been properly glazed may also lead to destruction of the red marrow .
Various disease processes also can lead to anemias .
These include chronic kidney diseases often associated with a decreased production of EPO , hypothyroidism , some forms of cancer , lupus , and rheumatoid arthritis .
In contrast to anemia , an elevated RBC count is called polycythemia and is detected in a patient ’ s elevated hematocrit .
It can occur transiently in a person who is dehydrated ; when water intake is inadequate or water losses are excessive , the plasma volume falls .
As a result , the hematocrit rises .
For reasons mentioned earlier , a mild form of polycythemia is chronic but normal in people living at high altitudes .
Some elite athletes train at high elevations specifically to induce this phenomenon .
Finally , a type of bone marrow disease called polycythemia vera ( from the Greek vera = “ true ” ) causes an excessive production of immature erythrocytes .
Polycythemia vera can dangerously elevate the viscosity of blood , raising blood pressure and making it more difficult for the heart to pump blood throughout the body .
It is a relatively rare disease that occurs more often in men than women , and is more likely to be present in elderly patients those over 60 years of age .
Leukocytes protect the body against invading microorganisms and body cells with mutated DNA , and they clean up debris .
Platelets are essential for the repair of blood vessels when damage to them has occurred ; they also provide growth factors for healing and repair .
See Figure 18.5 for a summary of leukocytes and platelets .
Although leukocytes and erythrocytes both originate from hematopoietic stem cells in the bone marrow , they are very different from each other in many significant ways .
For instance , leukocytes are far less numerous than erythrocytes : Typically there are only 5000 to 10,000 per µ L. They are also larger than erythrocytes and are the only formed elements that are complete cells , possessing a nucleus and organelles .
And although there is just one type of erythrocyte , there are many types of leukocytes .
Most of these types have a much shorter lifespan than that of erythrocytes , some as short as a few hours or even a few minutes in the case of acute infection .
One of the most distinctive characteristics of leukocytes is their movement .
Whereas erythrocytes spend their days circulating within the blood vessels , leukocytes routinely leave the bloodstream to perform their defensive functions in the body ’ s tissues .
For leukocytes , the vascular network is simply a highway they travel and soon exit to reach their true destination .
When they arrive , they are often given distinct names , such as macrophage or microglia , depending on their function .
Once they have exited the capillaries , some leukocytes will take up fixed positions in lymphatic tissue , bone marrow , the spleen , the thymus , or other organs .
Others will move about through the tissue spaces very much like amoebas , continuously extending their plasma membranes , sometimes wandering freely , and sometimes moving toward the direction in which they are drawn by chemical signals .
This attracting of leukocytes occurs because of positive chemotaxis ( literally “ movement in response to chemicals ” ) , a phenomenon in which injured or infected cells and nearby leukocytes emit the equivalent of a chemical “ 911 ” call , attracting more leukocytes to the site .
In clinical medicine , the differential counts of the types and percentages of leukocytes present are often key indicators in making a diagnosis and selecting a treatment .
When scientists first began to observe stained blood slides , it quickly became evident that leukocytes could be divided into two groups , according to whether their cytoplasm contained highly visible granules : Granular leukocytes contain abundant granules within the cytoplasm .
They include neutrophils , eosinophils , and basophils ( you can view their lineage from myeloid stem cells in Figure 18.4 ) .
While granules are not totally lacking in agranular leukocytes , they are far fewer and less obvious .
Agranular leukocytes include monocytes , which mature into macrophages that are phagocytic , and lymphocytes , which arise from the lymphoid stem cell line .
We will consider the granular leukocytes in order from most common to least common .
All of these are produced in the red bone marrow and have a short lifespan of hours to days .
They typically have a lobed nucleus and are classified according to which type of stain best highlights their granules ( Figure 18.11 ) .
The most common of all the leukocytes , neutrophils will normally comprise 50–70 percent of total leukocyte count .
They are 10–12 µ m in diameter , significantly larger than erythrocytes .
They are called neutrophils because their granules show up most clearly with stains that are chemically neutral ( neither acidic nor basic ) .
The granules are numerous but quite fine and normally appear light lilac .
The nucleus has a distinct lobed appearance and may have two to five lobes , the number increasing with the age of the cell .
Their granules include lysozyme , an enzyme capable of lysing , or breaking down , bacterial cell walls ; oxidants such as hydrogen peroxide ; and defensins , proteins that bind to and puncture bacterial and fungal plasma membranes , so that the cell contents leak out .
Abnormally high counts of neutrophils indicate infection and/or inflammation , particularly triggered by bacteria , but are also found in burn patients and others experiencing unusual stress .
A burn injury increases the proliferation of neutrophils in order to fight off infection that can result from the destruction of the barrier of the skin .
Low counts may be caused by drug toxicity and other disorders , and may increase an individual ’ s susceptibility to infection .
Eosinophils typically represent 2–4 percent of total leukocyte count .
They are also 10–12 µ m in diameter .
The granules of eosinophils stain best with an acidic stain known as eosin .
The nucleus of the eosinophil will typically have two to three lobes and , if stained properly , the granules will have a distinct red to orange color .
The granules of eosinophils include antihistamine molecules , which counteract the activities of histamines , inflammatory chemicals produced by basophils and mast cells .
Some eosinophil granules contain molecules toxic to parasitic worms , which can enter the body through the integument , or when an individual consumes raw or undercooked fish or meat .
Eosinophils are also capable of phagocytosis and are particularly effective when antibodies bind to the target and form an antigen-antibody complex .
High counts of eosinophils are typical of patients experiencing allergies , parasitic worm infestations , and some autoimmune diseases .
Low counts may be due to drug toxicity and stress .
Basophils are the least common leukocytes , typically comprising less than one percent of the total leukocyte count .
They are slightly smaller than neutrophils and eosinophils at 8–10 µ m in diameter .
The granules of basophils stain best with basic ( alkaline ) stains .
Basophils contain large granules that pick up a dark blue stain and are so common they may make it difficult to see the two-lobed nucleus .
In general , basophils intensify the inflammatory response .
They share this trait with mast cells .
In the past , mast cells were considered to be basophils that left the circulation .
However , this appears not to be the case , as the two cell types develop from different lineages .
The granules of basophils release histamines , which contribute to inflammation , and heparin , which opposes blood clotting .
High counts of basophils are associated with allergies , parasitic infections , and hypothyroidism .
Low counts are associated with pregnancy , stress , and hyperthyroidism .
Agranular leukocytes contain smaller , less-visible granules in their cytoplasm than do granular leukocytes .
The nucleus is simple in shape , sometimes with an indentation but without distinct lobes .
There are two major types of agranulocytes : lymphocytes and monocytes ( see Figure 18.4 ) .
Lymphocytes are the only formed element of blood that arises from lymphoid stem cells .
Although they form initially in the bone marrow , much of their subsequent development and reproduction occurs in the lymphatic tissues .
Lymphocytes are the second most common type of leukocyte , accounting for about 20–30 percent of all leukocytes , and are essential for the immune response .
The size range of lymphocytes is quite extensive , with some authorities recognizing two size classes and others three .
Typically , the large cells are 10–14 µ m and have a smaller nucleus-to-cytoplasm ratio and more granules .
The smaller cells are typically 6–9 µ m with a larger volume of nucleus to cytoplasm , creating a “ halo ” effect .
A few cells may fall outside these ranges , at 14–17 µ m. This finding has led to the three size range classification .
The three major groups of lymphocytes include natural killer cells , B cells , and T cells .
Natural killer ( NK ) cells are capable of recognizing cells that do not express “ self ” proteins on their plasma membrane or that contain foreign or abnormal markers .
These “ nonself ” cells include cancer cells , cells infected with a virus , and other cells with atypical surface proteins .
Thus , they provide generalized , nonspecific immunity .
The larger lymphocytes are typically NK cells .
B cells and T cells , also called B lymphocytes and T lymphocytes , play prominent roles in defending the body against specific pathogens ( disease-causing microorganisms ) and are involved in specific immunity .
One form of B cells ( plasma cells ) produces the antibodies or immunoglobulins that bind to specific foreign or abnormal components of plasma membranes .
This is also referred to as humoral ( body fluid ) immunity .
T cells provide cellular-level immunity by physically attacking foreign or diseased cells .
A memory cell is a variety of both B and T cells that forms after exposure to a pathogen and mounts rapid responses upon subsequent exposures .
Unlike other leukocytes , memory cells live for many years .
B cells undergo a maturation process in the bone marrow , whereas T cells undergo maturation in the thymus .
This site of the maturation process gives rise to the name B and T cells .
The functions of lymphocytes are complex and will be covered in detail in the chapter covering the lymphatic system and immunity .
Smaller lymphocytes are either B or T cells , although they can not be differentiated in a normal blood smear .
Abnormally high lymphocyte counts are characteristic of viral infections as well as some types of cancer .
Abnormally low lymphocyte counts are characteristic of prolonged ( chronic ) illness or immunosuppression , including that caused by HIV infection and drug therapies that often involve steroids .
Monocytes originate from myeloid stem cells .
They normally represent 2–8 percent of the total leukocyte count .
They are typically easily recognized by their large size of 12–20 µ m and indented or horseshoe-shaped nuclei .
Macrophages are monocytes that have left the circulation and phagocytize debris , foreign pathogens , worn-out erythrocytes , and many other dead , worn out , or damaged cells .
Macrophages also release antimicrobial defensins and chemotactic chemicals that attract other leukocytes to the site of an infection .
Some macrophages occupy fixed locations , whereas others wander through the tissue fluid .
Abnormally high counts of monocytes are associated with viral or fungal infections , tuberculosis , and some forms of leukemia and other chronic diseases .
Abnormally low counts are typically caused by suppression of the bone marrow .
Most leukocytes have a relatively short lifespan , typically measured in hours or days .
Production of all leukocytes begins in the bone marrow under the influence of CSFs and interleukins .
Secondary production and maturation of lymphocytes occurs in specific regions of lymphatic tissue known as germinal centers .
Lymphocytes are fully capable of mitosis and may produce clones of cells with identical properties .
This capacity enables an individual to maintain immunity throughout life to many threats that have been encountered in the past .
Leukopenia is a condition in which too few leukocytes are produced .
If this condition is pronounced , the individual may be unable to ward off disease .
Excessive leukocyte proliferation is known as leukocytosis .
Although leukocyte counts are high , the cells themselves are often nonfunctional , leaving the individual at increased risk for disease .
Leukemia is a cancer involving an abundance of leukocytes .
It may involve only one specific type of leukocyte from either the myeloid line ( myelocytic leukemia ) or the lymphoid line ( lymphocytic leukemia ) .
In chronic leukemia , mature leukocytes accumulate and fail to die .
In acute leukemia , there is an overproduction of young , immature leukocytes .
In both conditions the cells do not function properly .
Lymphoma is a form of cancer in which masses of malignant T and/or B lymphocytes collect in lymph nodes , the spleen , the liver , and other tissues .
As in leukemia , the malignant leukocytes do not function properly , and the patient is vulnerable to infection .
Some forms of lymphoma tend to progress slowly and respond well to treatment .
Others tend to progress quickly and require aggressive treatment , without which they are rapidly fatal .
You may occasionally see platelets referred to as thrombocytes , but because this name suggests they are a type of cell , it is not accurate .
A platelet is not a cell but rather a fragment of the cytoplasm of a cell called a megakaryocyte that is surrounded by a plasma membrane .
Megakaryocytes are descended from myeloid stem cells ( see Figure 18.4 ) and are large , typically 50–100 µ m in diameter , and contain an enlarged , lobed nucleus .
As noted earlier , thrombopoietin , a glycoprotein secreted by the kidneys and liver , stimulates the proliferation of megakaryoblasts , which mature into megakaryocytes .
These remain within bone marrow tissue ( Figure 18.12 ) and ultimately form platelet-precursor extensions that extend through the walls of bone marrow capillaries to release into the circulation thousands of cytoplasmic fragments , each enclosed by a bit of plasma membrane .
These enclosed fragments are platelets .
Each megakarocyte releases 2000–3000 platelets during its lifespan .
Following platelet release , megakaryocyte remnants , which are little more than a cell nucleus , are consumed by macrophages .
Platelets are relatively small , 2–4 µ m in diameter , but numerous , with typically 150,000–160,000 per µ L of blood .
After entering the circulation , approximately one-third migrate to the spleen for storage for later release in response to any rupture in a blood vessel .
They then become activated to perform their primary function , which is to limit blood loss .
Platelets remain only about 10 days , then are phagocytized by macrophages .
Platelets are critical to hemostasis , the stoppage of blood flow following damage to a vessel .
They also secrete a variety of growth factors essential for growth and repair of tissue , particularly connective tissue .
Infusions of concentrated platelets are now being used in some therapies to stimulate healing .
Thrombocytosis is a condition in which there are too many platelets .
This may trigger formation of unwanted blood clots ( thrombosis ) , a potentially fatal disorder .
If there is an insufficient number of platelets , called thrombocytopenia , blood may not clot properly , and excessive bleeding may result .
at of Michigan University Webscopes http : //virtualslides.med.umich.edu/Histology/ View Cardiovascular % 20System/081-2_HISTO_40X.svs/ view.apml ? cwidth=860 & cheight=733 & chost=virtualslides.med.umich.edu & listview=1 & title= & csis=1 and explore the blood slides in greater detail .
The Webscope feature allows you to move the slides as you would with a mechanical stage .
You can increase and decrease the magnification .
There is a chance to review each of the leukocytes individually after you have attempted to identify them from the first two blood smears .
In addition , there are a few multiple choice questions .
Are you able to recognize and identify the various formed elements ?
You will need to do this is a systematic manner , scanning along the image .
The standard method is to use a grid , but this is not possible with this resource .
Try constructing a simple table with each leukocyte type and then making a mark for each cell type you identify .
Attempt to classify at least 50 and perhaps as many as 100 different cells .
Based on the percentage of cells that you count , do the numbers represent a normal blood smear or does something appear to be abnormal ?
Although rupture of larger vessels usually requires medical intervention , hemostasis is quite effective in dealing with small , simple wounds .
There are three steps to the process : vascular spasm , the formation of a platelet plug , and coagulation ( blood clotting ) .
Failure of any of these steps will result in hemorrhage —excessive bleeding .
When a vessel is severed or punctured , or when the wall of a vessel is damaged , vascular spasm occurs .
In vascular spasm , the smooth muscle in the walls of the vessel contracts dramatically .
This smooth muscle has both circular layers ; larger vessels also have longitudinal layers .
The circular layers tend to constrict the flow of blood , whereas the longitudinal layers , when present , draw the vessel back into the surrounding tissue , often making it more difficult for a surgeon to locate , clamp , and tie off a severed vessel .
The vascular spasm response is believed to be triggered by several chemicals called endothelins that are released by vessel-lining cells and by pain receptors in response to vessel injury .
This phenomenon typically lasts for up to 30 minutes , although it can last for hours .
In the second step , platelets , which normally float free in the plasma , encounter the area of vessel rupture with the exposed underlying connective tissue and collagenous fibers .
The platelets begin to clump together , become spiked and sticky , and bind to the exposed collagen and endothelial lining .
This process is assisted by a glycoprotein in the blood plasma called von Willebrand factor , which helps stabilize the growing platelet plug .
As platelets collect , they simultaneously release chemicals from their granules into the plasma that further contribute to hemostasis .
Plug formation , in essence , buys the body time while more sophisticated and durable repairs are being made .
In a similar manner , even modern naval warships still carry an assortment of wooden plugs to temporarily repair small breaches in their hulls until permanent repairs can be made .
Those more sophisticated and more durable repairs are collectively called coagulation , the formation of a blood clot .
The process is sometimes characterized as a cascade , because one event prompts the next as in a multi-level waterfall .
The result is the production of a gelatinous but robust clot made up of a mesh of fibrin —an insoluble filamentous protein derived from fibrinogen , the plasma protein introduced earlier—in which platelets and blood cells are trapped .
Figure 18.14 summarizes the three steps of hemostasis .
In the coagulation cascade , chemicals called clotting factors ( or coagulation factors ) prompt reactions that activate still more coagulation factors .
The process is complex , but is initiated along two basic pathways : The extrinsic pathway , which normally is triggered by trauma .
The intrinsic pathway , which begins in the bloodstream and is triggered by internal damage to the wall of the vessel .
Both of these merge into a third pathway , referred to as the common pathway ( see Figure 18.14b ) .
All three pathways are dependent upon the 12 known clotting factors , including Ca and vitamin K ( Table 18.1 ) .
Clotting factors are secreted primarily by the liver and the platelets .
The liver requires the fat-soluble vitamin K to produce many of them .
Vitamin K ( along with biotin and folate ) is somewhat unusual among vitamins in that it is not only consumed in the diet but is also synthesized by bacteria residing in the large intestine .
The calcium ion , considered factor IV , is derived from the diet and from the breakdown of bone .
Some recent evidence indicates that activation of various clotting factors occurs on specific receptor sites on the surfaces of platelets .
The 12 clotting factors are numbered I through XIII according to the order of their discovery .
Factor VI was once believed to be a distinct clotting factor , but is now thought to be identical to factor V. Rather than renumber the other factors , factor VI was allowed to remain as a placeholder and also a reminder that knowledge changes over time .
The quicker responding and more direct extrinsic pathway ( also known as the tissue factor pathway ) begins when damage occurs to the surrounding tissues , such as in a traumatic injury .
Upon contact with blood plasma , the damaged extravascular cells , which are extrinsic to the bloodstream , release factor III ( thromboplastin ) .
Sequentially , Ca then factor VII ( proconvertin ) , which is activated by factor III , are added , forming an enzyme complex .
This enzyme complex leads to activation of factor X ( Stuart–Prower factor ) , which activates the common pathway discussed below .
The events in the extrinsic pathway are completed in a matter of seconds .
The intrinsic pathway ( also known as the contact activation pathway ) is longer and more complex .
In this case , the factors involved are intrinsic to ( present within ) the bloodstream .
Within the body , factor XII is typically activated when it encounters negatively charged molecules , such as inorganic polymers and phosphate produced earlier in the series of intrinsic pathway reactions .
Factor XII sets off a series of reactions that in turn activates factor XI ( antihemolytic factor C or plasma thromboplastin antecedent ) then factor IX ( antihemolytic factor B or plasma thromboplasmin ) .
In the meantime , chemicals released by the platelets increase the rate of these activation reactions .
Finally , factor VIII ( antihemolytic factor A ) from the platelets and endothelial cells combines with factor IX ( antihemolytic factor B or plasma thromboplasmin ) to form an enzyme complex that activates factor X ( Stuart–Prower factor or thrombokinase ) , leading to the common pathway .
The events in the intrinsic pathway are completed in a few minutes .
Both the intrinsic and extrinsic pathways lead to the common pathway , in which fibrin is produced to seal off the vessel .
Once factor X has been activated by either the intrinsic or extrinsic pathway , the enzyme prothrombinase converts factor II , the inactive enzyme prothrombin , into the active enzyme thrombin .
( Note that if the enzyme thrombin were not normally in an inactive form , clots would form spontaneously , a condition not consistent with life . )
Then , thrombin converts factor I , the soluble fibrinogen , into the insoluble fibrin protein strands .
Factor XIII then stabilizes the fibrin clot .
The stabilized clot is acted upon by contractile proteins within the platelets .
As these proteins contract , they pull on the fibrin threads , bringing the edges of the clot more tightly together , somewhat as we do when tightening loose shoelaces ( see Figure 18.14a ) .
This process also wrings out of the clot a small amount of fluid called serum , which is blood plasma without its clotting factors .
To restore normal blood flow as the vessel heals , the clot must eventually be removed .
Fibrinolysis is the gradual degradation of the clot .
Again , there is a fairly complicated series of reactions that involves factor XII and proteincatabolizing enzymes .
During this process , the inactive protein plasminogen is converted into the active plasmin , which gradually breaks down the fibrin of the clot .
Additionally , bradykinin , a vasodilator , is released , reversing the effects of the serotonin and prostaglandins from the platelets .
This allows the smooth muscle in the walls of the vessels to relax and helps to restore the circulation .
An anticoagulant is any substance that opposes coagulation .
Several circulating plasma anticoagulants play a role in limiting the coagulation process to the region of injury and restoring a normal , clot-free condition of blood .
For instance , a cluster of proteins collectively referred to as the protein C system inactivates clotting factors involved in the intrinsic pathway .
TFPI ( tissue factor pathway inhibitor ) inhibits the conversion of the inactive factor VII to the active form in the extrinsic pathway .
Antithrombin inactivates factor X and opposes the conversion of prothrombin ( factor II ) to thrombin in the common pathway .
And as noted earlier , basophils release heparin , a short-acting anticoagulant that also opposes prothrombin .
Heparin is also found on the surfaces of cells lining the blood vessels .
A pharmaceutical form of heparin is often administered therapeutically , for example , in surgical patients at risk for blood clots .
View these animations ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/coagulation ) to explore the intrinsic , extrinsic , and common pathways that are involved the process of coagulation .
The coagulation cascade restores hemostasis by activating coagulation factors in the presence of an injury .
How does the endothelium of the blood vessel walls prevent the blood from coagulating as it flows through the blood vessels ?
Either an insufficient or an excessive production of platelets can lead to severe disease or death .
As discussed earlier , an insufficient number of platelets , called thrombocytopenia , typically results in the inability of blood to form clots .
This can lead to excessive bleeding , even from minor wounds .
Another reason for failure of the blood to clot is the inadequate production of functional amounts of one or more clotting factors .
This is the case in the genetic disorder hemophilia , which is actually a group of related disorders , the most common of which is hemophilia A , accounting for approximately 80 percent of cases .
This disorder results in the inability to synthesize sufficient quantities of factor VIII .
Hemophilia B is the second most common form , accounting for approximately 20 percent of cases .
In this case , there is a deficiency of factor IX .
Both of these defects are linked to the X chromosome and are typically passed from a healthy ( carrier ) mother to her male offspring , since males are XY .
Females would need to inherit a defective gene from each parent to manifest the disease , since they are XX .
Patients with hemophilia bleed from even minor internal and external wounds , and leak blood into joint spaces after exercise and into urine and stool .
Hemophilia C is a rare condition that is triggered by an autosomal ( not sex ) chromosome that renders factor XI nonfunctional .
It is not a true recessive condition , since even individuals with a single copy of the mutant gene show a tendency to bleed .
Regular infusions of clotting factors isolated from healthy donors can help prevent bleeding in hemophiliac patients .
At some point , genetic therapy will become a viable option .
In contrast to the disorders characterized by coagulation failure is thrombocytosis , also mentioned earlier , a condition characterized by excessive numbers of platelets that increases the risk for excessive clot formation , a condition known as thrombosis .
A thrombus ( plural = thrombi ) is an aggregation of platelets , erythrocytes , and even WBCs typically trapped within a mass of fibrin strands .
While the formation of a clot is normal following the hemostatic mechanism just described , thrombi can form within an intact or only slightly damaged blood vessel .
In a large vessel , a thrombus will adhere to the vessel wall and decrease the flow of blood , and is referred to as a mural thrombus .
In a small vessel , it may actually totally block the flow of blood and is termed an occlusive thrombus .
Thrombi are most commonly caused by vessel damage to the endothelial lining , which activates the clotting mechanism .
These may include venous stasis , when blood in the veins , particularly in the legs , remains stationary for long periods .
This is one of the dangers of long airplane flights in crowded conditions and may lead to deep vein thrombosis or atherosclerosis , an accumulation of debris in arteries .
Thrombophilia , also called hypercoagulation , is a condition in which there is a tendency to form thrombosis .
This may be familial ( genetic ) or acquired .
Acquired forms include the autoimmune disease lupus , immune reactions to heparin , polycythemia vera , thrombocytosis , sickle cell disease , pregnancy , and even obesity .
A thrombus can seriously impede blood flow to or from a region and will cause a local increase in blood pressure .
If flow is to be maintained , the heart will need to generate a greater pressure to overcome the resistance .
When a portion of a thrombus breaks free from the vessel wall and enters the circulation , it is referred to as an embolus .
An embolus that is carried through the bloodstream can be large enough to block a vessel critical to a major organ .
When it becomes trapped , an embolus is called an embolism .
In the heart , brain , or lungs , an embolism may accordingly cause a heart attack , a stroke , or a pulmonary embolism .
These are medical emergencies .
Among the many known biochemical activities of aspirin is its role as an anticoagulant .
Aspirin ( acetylsalicylic acid ) is very effective at inhibiting the aggregation of platelets .
It is routinely administered during a heart attack or stroke to reduce the adverse effects .
Physicians sometimes recommend that patients at risk for cardiovascular disease take a low dose of aspirin on a daily basis as a preventive measure .
However , aspirin can also lead to serious side effects , including increasing the risk of ulcers .
A patient is well advised to consult a physician before beginning any aspirin regimen .
A class of drugs collectively known as thrombolytic agents can help speed up the degradation of an abnormal clot .
If a thrombolytic agent is administered to a patient within 3 hours following a thrombotic stroke , the patient ’ s prognosis improves significantly .
However , some strokes are not caused by thrombi , but by hemorrhage .
Thus , the cause must be determined before treatment begins .
Tissue plasminogen activator is an enzyme that catalyzes the conversion of plasminogen to plasmin , the primary enzyme that breaks down clots .
It is released naturally by endothelial cells but is also used in clinical medicine .
New research is progressing using compounds isolated from the venom of some species of snakes , particularly vipers and cobras , which may eventually have therapeutic value as thrombolytic agents .
Until that point , physicians did not understand that death sometimes followed blood transfusions , when the type of donor blood infused into the patient was incompatible with the patient ’ s own blood .
Blood groups are determined by the presence or absence of specific marker molecules on the plasma membranes of erythrocytes .
With their discovery , it became possible for the first time to match patient-donor blood types and prevent transfusion reactions and deaths .
Antigens are substances that the body does not recognize as belonging to the “ self ” and that therefore trigger a defensive response from the leukocytes of the immune system .
( Seek more content for additional information on immunity . )
Here , we will focus on the role of immunity in blood transfusion reactions .
With RBCs in particular , you may see the antigens referred to as isoantigens or agglutinogens ( surface antigens ) and the antibodies referred to as isoantibodies or agglutinins .
In this chapter , we will use the more common terms antigens and antibodies .
Antigens are generally large proteins , but may include other classes of organic molecules , including carbohydrates , lipids , and nucleic acids .
Following an infusion of incompatible blood , erythrocytes with foreign antigens appear in the bloodstream and trigger an immune response .
Proteins called antibodies ( immunoglobulins ) , which are produced by certain B lymphocytes called plasma cells , attach to the antigens on the plasma membranes of the infused erythrocytes and cause them to adhere to one another .
Because the arms of the Y-shaped antibodies attach randomly to more than one nonself erythrocyte surface , they form clumps of erythrocytes .
This process is called agglutination .
The clumps of erythrocytes block small blood vessels throughout the body , depriving tissues of oxygen and nutrients .
As the erythrocyte clumps are degraded , in a process called hemolysis , their hemoglobin is released into the bloodstream .
This hemoglobin travels to the kidneys , which are responsible for filtration of the blood .
However , the load of hemoglobin released can easily overwhelm the kidney ’ s capacity to clear it , and the patient can quickly develop kidney failure .
More than 50 antigens have been identified on erythrocyte membranes , but the most significant in terms of their potential harm to patients are classified in two groups : the ABO blood group and the Rh blood group .
Although the ABO blood group name consists of three letters , ABO blood typing designates the presence or absence of just two antigens , A and B .
Both are glycoproteins .
People whose erythrocytes have A antigens on their erythrocyte membrane surfaces are designated blood type A , and those whose erythrocytes have B antigens are blood type B .
People can also have both A and B antigens on their erythrocytes , in which case they are blood type AB .
People with neither A nor B antigens are designated blood type O. ABO blood types are genetically determined .
Normally the body must be exposed to a foreign antigen before an antibody can be produced .
This is not the case for the ABO blood group .
Individuals with type A blood—without any prior exposure to incompatible blood—have preformed antibodies to the B antigen circulating in their blood plasma .
These antibodies , referred to as anti-B antibodies , will cause agglutination and hemolysis if they ever encounter erythrocytes with B antigens .
Similarly , an individual with type B blood has pre-formed anti-A antibodies .
Individuals with type AB blood , which has both antigens , do not have preformed antibodies to either of these .
People with type O blood lack antigens A and B on their erythrocytes , but both anti-A and anti-B antibodies circulate in their blood plasma .
The Rh blood group is classified according to the presence or absence of a second erythrocyte antigen identified as Rh .
( It was first discovered in a type of primate known as a rhesus macaque , which is often used in research , because its blood is similar to that of humans . )
Although dozens of Rh antigens have been identified , only one , designated D , is clinically important .
Those who have the Rh D antigen present on their erythrocytes—about 85 percent of Americans—are described as Rh positive ( Rh ) and those who lack it are Rh negative ( Rh ) .
Note that the Rh group is distinct from the ABO group , so any individual , no matter their ABO blood type , may have or lack this Rh antigen .
When identifying a patient ’ s blood type , the Rh group is designated by adding the word positive or negative to the ABO type .
For example , A positive ( A ) means ABO group A blood with the Rh antigen present , and AB negative ( AB ) means ABO group AB blood without the Rh antigen .
Table 18.2 summarizes the distribution of the ABO and Rh blood types within the United States .
In contrast to the ABO group antibodies , which are preformed , antibodies to the Rh antigen are produced only in Rh individuals after exposure to the antigen .
This process , called sensitization , occurs following a transfusion with Rhincompatible blood or , more commonly , with the birth of an Rh baby to an Rh mother .
Problems are rare in a first pregnancy , since the baby ’ s Rh cells rarely cross the placenta ( the organ of gas and nutrient exchange between the baby and the mother ) .
However , during or immediately after birth , the Rh mother can be exposed to the baby ’ s Rh cells ( Figure 18.15 ) .
Research has shown that this occurs in about 13−14 percent of such pregnancies .
After exposure , the mother ’ s immune system begins to generate anti-Rh antibodies .
If the mother should then conceive another Rh baby , the Rh antibodies she has produced can cross the placenta into the fetal bloodstream and destroy the fetal RBCs .
This condition , known as hemolytic disease of the newborn ( HDN ) or erythroblastosis fetalis , may cause anemia in mild cases , but the agglutination and hemolysis can be so severe that without treatment the fetus may die in the womb or shortly after birth .
A drug known as RhoGAM , short for Rh immune globulin , can temporarily prevent the development of Rh antibodies in the Rh mother , thereby averting this potentially serious disease for the fetus .
RhoGAM antibodies destroy any fetal Rh erythrocytes that may cross the placental barrier .
RhoGAM is normally administered to Rh mothers during weeks 26−28 of pregnancy and within 72 hours following birth .
It has proven remarkably effective in decreasing the incidence of HDN .
Earlier we noted that the incidence of HDN in an Rh subsequent pregnancy to an Rh mother is about 13–14 percent without preventive treatment .
Since the introduction of RhoGAM in 1968 , the incidence has dropped to about 0.1 percent in the United States .
Clinicians are able to determine a patient ’ s blood type quickly and easily using commercially prepared antibodies .
An unknown blood sample is allocated into separate wells .
Into one well a small amount of anti-A antibody is added , and to another a small amount of anti-B antibody .
If the antigen is present , the antibodies will cause visible agglutination of the cells ( Figure 18.16 ) .
The blood should also be tested for Rh antibodies .
To avoid transfusion reactions , it is best to transfuse only matching blood types ; that is , a type B recipient should ideally receive blood only from a type B donor and so on .
That said , in emergency situations , when acute hemorrhage threatens the patient ’ s life , there may not be time for cross matching to identify blood type .
In these cases , blood from a universal donor —an individual with type O blood—may be transfused .
Recall that type O erythrocytes do not display A or B antigens .
Thus , anti-A or anti-B antibodies that might be circulating in the patient ’ s blood plasma will not encounter any erythrocyte surface antigens on the donated blood and therefore will not be provoked into a response .
One problem with this designation of universal donor is if the O individual had prior exposure to Rh antigen , Rh antibodies may be present in the donated blood .
Also , introducing type O blood into an individual with type A , B , or AB blood will nevertheless introduce antibodies against both A and B antigens , as these are always circulating in the type O blood plasma .
This may cause problems for the recipient , but because the volume of blood transfused is much lower than the volume of the patient ’ s own blood , the adverse effects of the relatively few infused plasma antibodies are typically limited .
Rh factor also plays a role .
If Rh individuals receiving blood have had prior exposure to Rh antigen , antibodies for this antigen may be present in the blood and trigger agglutination to some degree .
Although it is always preferable to cross match a patient ’ s blood before transfusing , in a true life-threatening emergency situation , this is not always possible , and these procedures may be implemented .
A patient with blood type AB is known as the universal recipient .
This patient can theoretically receive any type of blood , because the patient ’ s own blood—having both A and B antigens on the erythrocyte surface—does not produce anti-A or anti-B antibodies .
In addition , an Rh patient can receive both Rh and Rh blood .
However , keep in mind that the donor ’ s blood will contain circulating antibodies , again with possible negative implications .
Figure 18.17 summarizes the blood types and compatibilities .
At the scene of multiple-vehicle accidents , military engagements , and natural or human-caused disasters , many victims may suffer simultaneously from acute hemorrhage , yet type O blood may not be immediately available .
In these circumstances , medics may at least try to replace some of the volume of blood that has been lost .
This is done by intravenous administration of a saline solution that provides fluids and electrolytes in proportions equivalent to those of normal blood plasma .
Research is ongoing to develop a safe and effective artificial blood that would carry out the oxygen-carrying function of blood without the RBCs , enabling transfusions in the field without concern for incompatibility .
These blood substitutes normally contain hemoglobinas well as perfluorocarbon-based oxygen carriers .
There is no single better word to describe the function of the heart other than “ pump , ” since its contraction develops the pressure that ejects blood into the major vessels : the aorta and pulmonary trunk .
From these vessels , the blood is distributed to the remainder of the body .
Although the connotation of the term “ pump ” suggests a mechanical device made of steel and plastic , the anatomical structure is a living , sophisticated muscle .
As you read this chapter , try to keep these twin concepts in mind : pump and muscle .
Although the term “ heart ” is an English word , cardiac ( heart-related ) terminology can be traced back to the Latin term , “ kardia. ” Cardiology is the study of the heart , and cardiologists are the physicians who deal primarily with the heart .
If one assumes an average rate of contraction of 75 contractions per minute , a human heart would contract approximately 108,000 times in one day , more than 39 million times in one year , and nearly 3 billion times during a 75-year lifespan .
Each of the major pumping chambers of the heart ejects approximately 70 mL blood per contraction in a resting adult .
This would be equal to 5.25 liters of fluid per minute and approximately 14,000 liters per day .
Over one year , that would equal 10,000,000 liters or 2.6 million gallons of blood sent through roughly 60,000 miles of vessels .
In order to understand how that happens , it is necessary to understand the anatomy and physiology of the heart .
The human heart is located within the thoracic cavity , medially between the lungs in the space known as the mediastinum .
Figure 19.2 shows the position of the heart within the thoracic cavity .
Within the mediastinum , the heart is separated from the other mediastinal structures by a tough membrane known as the pericardium , or pericardial sac , and sits in its own space called the pericardial cavity .
The dorsal surface of the heart lies near the bodies of the vertebrae , and its anterior surface sits deep to the sternum and costal cartilages .
The great veins , the superior and inferior venae cavae , and the great arteries , the aorta and pulmonary trunk , are attached to the superior surface of the heart , called the base .
The base of the heart is located at the level of the third costal cartilage , as seen in Figure 19.2 .
The inferior tip of the heart , the apex , lies just to the left of the sternum between the junction of the fourth and fifth ribs near their articulation with the costal cartilages .
The right side of the heart is deflected anteriorly , and the left side is deflected posteriorly .
It is important to remember the position and orientation of the heart when placing a stethoscope on the chest of a patient and listening for heart sounds , and also when looking at images taken from a midsagittal perspective .
The slight deviation of the apex to the left is reflected in a depression in the medial surface of the inferior lobe of the left lung , called the cardiac notch .
This is particularly critical for the brain , as irreversible damage and death of neurons occur within minutes of loss of blood flow .
Current standards call for compression of the chest at least 5 cm deep and at a rate of 100 compressions per minute , a rate equal to the beat in “ Staying Alive , ” recorded in 1977 by the Bee Gees .
If you are unfamiliar with this song , a version is available on www.youtube.com .
At this stage , the emphasis is on performing high-quality chest compressions , rather than providing artificial respiration .
CPR is generally performed until the patient regains spontaneous contraction or is declared dead by an experienced healthcare professional .
When performed by untrained or overzealous individuals , CPR can result in broken ribs or a broken sternum , and can inflict additional severe damage on the patient .
It is also possible , if the hands are placed too low on the sternum , to manually drive the xiphoid process into the liver , a consequence that may prove fatal for the patient .
Proper training is essential .
This proven life-sustaining technique is so valuable that virtually all medical personnel as well as concerned members of the public should be certified and routinely recertified in its application .
CPR courses are offered at a variety of locations , including colleges , hospitals , the American Red Cross , and some commercial companies .
They normally include practice of the compression technique on a mannequin .
Visit the American Heart Association website ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/AHA ) to help locate a course near your home in the United States .
There are also many other national and regional heart associations that offer the same service , depending upon the location .
The shape of the heart is similar to a pinecone , rather broad at the superior surface and tapering to the apex ( see Figure 19.2 ) .
A typical heart is approximately the size of your fist : 12 cm ( 5 in ) in length , 8 cm ( 3.5 in ) wide , and 6 cm ( 2.5 in ) in thickness .
Given the size difference between most members of the sexes , the weight of a female heart is approximately 250–300 grams ( 9 to 11 ounces ) , and the weight of a male heart is approximately 300–350 grams ( 11 to 12 ounces ) .
The heart of a well-trained athlete , especially one specializing in aerobic sports , can be considerably larger than this .
Cardiac muscle responds to exercise in a manner similar to that of skeletal muscle .
That is , exercise results in the addition of protein myofilaments that increase the size of the individual cells without increasing their numbers , a concept called hypertrophy .
Hearts of athletes can pump blood more effectively at lower rates than those of nonathletes .
Enlarged hearts are not always a result of exercise ; they can result from pathologies , such as hypertrophic cardiomyopathy .
The cause of an abnormally enlarged heart muscle is unknown , but the condition is often undiagnosed and can cause sudden death in apparently otherwise healthy young people .
The human heart consists of four chambers : The left side and the right side each have one atrium and one ventricle .
Each of the upper chambers , the right atrium ( plural = atria ) and the left atrium , acts as a receiving chamber and contracts to push blood into the lower chambers , the right ventricle and the left ventricle .
The ventricles serve as the primary pumping chambers of the heart , propelling blood to the lungs or to the rest of the body .
There are two distinct but linked circuits in the human circulation called the pulmonary and systemic circuits .
Although both circuits transport blood and everything it carries , we can initially view the circuits from the point of view of gases .
The pulmonary circuit transports blood to and from the lungs , where it picks up oxygen and delivers carbon dioxide for exhalation .
The systemic circuit transports oxygenated blood to virtually all of the tissues of the body and returns relatively deoxygenated blood and carbon dioxide to the heart to be sent back to the pulmonary circulation .
The right ventricle pumps deoxygenated blood into the pulmonary trunk , which leads toward the lungs and bifurcates into the left and right pulmonary arteries .
These vessels in turn branch many times before reaching the pulmonary capillaries , where gas exchange occurs : Carbon dioxide exits the blood and oxygen enters .
The pulmonary trunk arteries and their branches are the only arteries in the post-natal body that carry relatively deoxygenated blood .
Highly oxygenated blood returning from the pulmonary capillaries in the lungs passes through a series of vessels that join together to form the pulmonary veins —the only post-natal veins in the body that carry highly oxygenated blood .
The pulmonary veins conduct blood into the left atrium , which pumps the blood into the left ventricle , which in turn pumps oxygenated blood into the aorta and on to the many branches of the systemic circuit .
Eventually , these vessels will lead to the systemic capillaries , where exchange with the tissue fluid and cells of the body occurs .
In this case , oxygen and nutrients exit the systemic capillaries to be used by the cells in their metabolic processes , and carbon dioxide and waste products will enter the blood .
The blood exiting the systemic capillaries is lower in oxygen concentration than when it entered .
The capillaries will ultimately unite to form venules , joining to form ever-larger veins , eventually flowing into the two major systemic veins , the superior vena cava and the inferior vena cava , which return blood to the right atrium .
The blood in the superior and inferior venae cavae flows into the right atrium , which pumps blood into the right ventricle .
This process of blood circulation continues as long as the individual remains alive .
Understanding the flow of blood through the pulmonary and systemic circuits is critical to all health professions ( Figure 19.4 ) .
Our exploration of more in-depth heart structures begins by examining the membrane that surrounds the heart , the prominent surface features of the heart , and the layers that form the wall of the heart .
Each of these components plays its own unique role in terms of function .
The membrane that directly surrounds the heart and defines the pericardial cavity is called the pericardium or pericardial sac .
It also surrounds the “ roots ” of the major vessels , or the areas of closest proximity to the heart .
The pericardium , which literally translates as “ around the heart , ” consists of two distinct sublayers : the sturdy outer fibrous pericardium and the inner serous pericardium .
The fibrous pericardium is made of tough , dense connective tissue that protects the heart and maintains its position in the thorax .
The more delicate serous pericardium consists of two layers : the parietal pericardium , which is fused to the fibrous pericardium , and an inner visceral pericardium , or epicardium , which is fused to the heart and is part of the heart wall .
The pericardial cavity , filled with lubricating serous fluid , lies between the epicardium and the pericardium .
In most organs within the body , visceral serous membranes such as the epicardium are microscopic .
However , in the case of the heart , it is not a microscopic layer but rather a macroscopic layer , consisting of a simple squamous epithelium called a mesothelium , reinforced with loose , irregular , or areolar connective tissue that attaches to the pericardium .
This mesothelium secretes the lubricating serous fluid that fills the pericardial cavity and reduces friction as the heart contracts .
Figure 19.5 illustrates the pericardial membrane and the layers of the heart .
If excess fluid builds within the pericardial space , it can lead to a condition called cardiac tamponade , or pericardial tamponade .
With each contraction of the heart , more fluid—in most instances , blood—accumulates within the pericardial cavity .
In order to fill with blood for the next contraction , the heart must relax .
However , the excess fluid in the pericardial cavity puts pressure on the heart and prevents full relaxation , so the chambers within the heart contain slightly less blood as they begin each heart cycle .
Over time , less and less blood is ejected from the heart .
If the fluid builds up slowly , as in hypothyroidism , the pericardial cavity may be able to expand gradually to accommodate this extra volume .
Some cases of fluid in excess of one liter within the pericardial cavity have been reported .
Rapid accumulation of as little as 100 mL of fluid following trauma may trigger cardiac tamponade .
Other common causes include myocardial rupture , pericarditis , cancer , or even cardiac surgery .
Removal of this excess fluid requires insertion of drainage tubes into the pericardial cavity .
Premature removal of these drainage tubes , for example , following cardiac surgery , or clot formation within these tubes are causes of this condition .
Untreated , cardiac tamponade can lead to death .
Inside the pericardium , the surface features of the heart are visible , including the four chambers .
There is a superficial leaflike extension of the atria near the superior surface of the heart , one on each side , called an auricle —a name that means “ ear like ” —because its shape resembles the external ear of a human ( Figure 19.6 ) .
Auricles are relatively thin-walled structures that can fill with blood and empty into the atria or upper chambers of the heart .
You may also hear them referred to as atrial appendages .
Also prominent is a series of fat-filled grooves , each of which is known as a sulcus ( plural = sulci ) , along the superior surfaces of the heart .
Major coronary blood vessels are located in these sulci .
The deep coronary sulcus is located between the atria and ventricles .
Located between the left and right ventricles are two additional sulci that are not as deep as the coronary sulcus .
The anterior interventricular sulcus is visible on the anterior surface of the heart , whereas the posterior interventricular sulcus is visible on the posterior surface of the heart .
Figure 19.6 illustrates anterior and posterior views of the surface of the heart .
The wall of the heart is composed of three layers of unequal thickness .
From superficial to deep , these are the epicardium , the myocardium , and the endocardium ( see Figure 19.5 ) .
The outermost layer of the wall of the heart is also the innermost layer of the pericardium , the epicardium , or the visceral pericardium discussed earlier .
The middle and thickest layer is the myocardium , made largely of cardiac muscle cells .
It is built upon a framework of collagenous fibers , plus the blood vessels that supply the myocardium and the nerve fibers that help regulate the heart .
It is the contraction of the myocardium that pumps blood through the heart and into the major arteries .
The muscle pattern is elegant and complex , as the muscle cells swirl and spiral around the chambers of the heart .
They form a figure 8 pattern around the atria and around the bases of the great vessels .
Deeper ventricular muscles also form a figure 8 around the two ventricles and proceed toward the apex .
More superficial layers of ventricular muscle wrap around both ventricles .
This complex swirling pattern allows the heart to pump blood more effectively than a simple linear pattern would .
Figure 19.7 illustrates the arrangement of muscle cells .
Although the ventricles on the right and left sides pump the same amount of blood per contraction , the muscle of the left ventricle is much thicker and better developed than that of the right ventricle .
In order to overcome the high resistance required to pump blood into the long systemic circuit , the left ventricle must generate a great amount of pressure .
The right ventricle does not need to generate as much pressure , since the pulmonary circuit is shorter and provides less resistance .
Figure 19.8 illustrates the differences in muscular thickness needed for each of the ventricles .
The innermost layer of the heart wall , the endocardium , is joined to the myocardium with a thin layer of connective tissue .
The endocardium lines the chambers where the blood circulates and covers the heart valves .
It is made of simple squamous epithelium called endothelium , which is continuous with the endothelial lining of the blood vessels ( see Figure 19.5 ) .
Once regarded as a simple lining layer , recent evidence indicates that the endothelium of the endocardium and the coronary that capillaries may play active roles in regulating the contraction of the muscle within the myocardium .
The endothelium may also regulate the growth patterns of the cardiac muscle cells throughout life , and the endothelins it secretes create an environment in the surrounding tissue fluids that regulates ionic concentrations and states of contractility .
Endothelins are potent vasoconstrictors and , in a normal individual , establish a homeostatic balance with other vasoconstrictors and vasodilators .
Recall the heart ’ s contraction cycle follows a dual pattern of circulation—the pulmonary and systemic circuits—because of the pairs of chambers that pump blood into the circulation .
In order to develop a more precise understanding of cardiac function , it is first necessary to explore the internal anatomical structures in more detail .
The word septum is derived from the Latin for “ something that encloses ; ” in this case , a septum ( plural = septa ) refers to a wall or partition that divides the heart into chambers .
The septa are physical extensions of the myocardium lined with endocardium .
Located between the two atria is the interatrial septum .
Normally in an adult heart , the interatrial septum bears an oval-shaped depression known as the fossa ovalis , a remnant of an opening in the fetal heart known as the foramen ovale .
The foramen ovale allowed blood in the fetal heart to pass directly from the right atrium to the left atrium , allowing some blood to bypass the pulmonary circuit .
Within seconds after birth , a flap of tissue known as the septum primum that previously acted as a valve closes the foramen ovale and establishes the typical cardiac circulation pattern .
Between the two ventricles is a second septum known as the interventricular septum .
Unlike the interatrial septum , the interventricular septum is normally intact after its formation during fetal development .
It is substantially thicker than the interatrial septum , since the ventricles generate far greater pressure when they contract .
The septum between the atria and ventricles is known as the atrioventricular septum .
It is marked by the presence of four openings that allow blood to move from the atria into the ventricles and from the ventricles into the pulmonary trunk and aorta .
Located in each of these openings between the atria and ventricles is a valve , a specialized structure that ensures one-way flow of blood .
The valves between the atria and ventricles are known generically as atrioventricular valves .
The valves at the openings that lead to the pulmonary trunk and aorta are known generically as semilunar valves .
The interventricular septum is visible in Figure 19.9 .
In this figure , the atrioventricular septum has been removed to better show the bicupid and tricuspid valves ; the interatrial septum is not visible , since its location is covered by the aorta and pulmonary trunk .
Since these openings and valves structurally weaken the atrioventricular septum , the remaining tissue is heavily reinforced with dense connective tissue called the cardiac skeleton , or skeleton of the heart .
It includes four rings that surround the openings between the atria and ventricles , and the openings to the pulmonary trunk and aorta , and serve as the point of attachment for the heart valves .
The cardiac skeleton also provides an important boundary in the heart electrical conduction system .
One very common form of interatrial septum pathology is patent foramen ovale , which occurs when the septum primum does not close at birth , and the fossa ovalis is unable to fuse .
The word patent is from the Latin root patens for “ open. ” It may be benign or asymptomatic , perhaps never being diagnosed , or in extreme cases , it may require surgical repair to close the opening permanently .
As much as 20–25 percent of the general population may have a patent foramen ovale , but fortunately , most have the benign , asymptomatic version .
Patent foramen ovale is normally detected by auscultation of a heart murmur ( an abnormal heart sound ) and confirmed by imaging with an echocardiogram .
Despite its prevalence in the general population , the causes of patent ovale are unknown , and there are no known risk factors .
In nonlife-threatening cases , it is better to monitor the condition than to risk heart surgery to repair and seal the opening .
Coarctation of the aorta is a congenital abnormal narrowing of the aorta that is normally located at the insertion of the ligamentum arteriosum , the remnant of the fetal shunt called the ductus arteriosus .
If severe , this condition drastically restricts blood flow through the primary systemic artery , which is life threatening .
In some individuals , the condition may be fairly benign and not detected until later in life .
Detectable symptoms in an infant include difficulty breathing , poor appetite , trouble feeding , or failure to thrive .
In older individuals , symptoms include dizziness , fainting , shortness of breath , chest pain , fatigue , headache , and nosebleeds .
Treatment involves surgery to resect ( remove ) the affected region or angioplasty to open the abnormally narrow passageway .
Studies have shown that the earlier the surgery is performed , the better the chance of survival .
A patent ductus arteriosus is a congenital condition in which the ductus arteriosus fails to close .
The condition may range from severe to benign .
Failure of the ductus arteriosus to close results in blood flowing from the higher pressure aorta into the lower pressure pulmonary trunk .
This additional fluid moving toward the lungs increases pulmonary pressure and makes respiration difficult .
Symptoms include shortness of breath ( dyspnea ) , tachycardia , enlarged heart , a widened pulse pressure , and poor weight gain in infants .
Treatments include surgical closure ( ligation ) , manual closure using platinum coils or specialized mesh inserted via the femoral artery or vein , or nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs to block the synthesis of prostaglandin E2 , which maintains the vessel in an open position .
If untreated , the condition can result in congestive heart failure .
Septal defects are not uncommon in individuals and may be congenital or caused by various disease processes .
Tetralogy of Fallot is a congenital condition that may also occur from exposure to unknown environmental factors ; it occurs when there is an opening in the interventricular septum caused by blockage of the pulmonary trunk , normally at the pulmonary semilunar valve .
This allows blood that is relatively low in oxygen from the right ventricle to flow into the left ventricle and mix with the blood that is relatively high in oxygen .
Symptoms include a distinct heart murmur , low blood oxygen percent saturation , dyspnea or difficulty in breathing , polycythemia , broadening ( clubbing ) of the fingers and toes , and in children , difficulty in feeding or failure to grow and develop .
It is the most common cause of cyanosis following birth .
Other heart defects may also accompany this condition , which is typically confirmed by echocardiography imaging .
Tetralogy of Fallot occurs in approximately 400 out of one million live births .
Normal treatment involves extensive surgical repair , including the use of stents to redirect blood flow and replacement of valves and patches to repair the septal defect , but the condition has a relatively high mortality .
Survival rates are currently 75 percent during the first year of life ; 60 percent by 4 years of age ; 30 percent by 10 years ; and 5 percent by 40 years .
Septal defects are commonly first detected through auscultation , listening to the chest using a stethoscope .
In this case , instead of hearing normal heart sounds attributed to the flow of blood and closing of heart valves , unusual heart sounds may be detected .
This is often followed by medical imaging to confirm or rule out a diagnosis .
In many cases , treatment may not be needed .
Some common congenital heart defects are illustrated in Figure 19.10 .
The right atrium serves as the receiving chamber for blood returning to the heart from the systemic circulation .
The two major systemic veins , the superior and inferior venae cavae , and the large coronary vein called the coronary sinus that drains the heart myocardium empty into the right atrium .
The superior vena cava drains blood from regions superior to the diaphragm : the head , neck , upper limbs , and the thoracic region .
It empties into the superior and posterior portions of the right atrium .
The inferior vena cava drains blood from areas inferior to the diaphragm : the lower limbs and abdominopelvic region of the body .
It , too , empties into the posterior portion of the atria , but inferior to the opening of the superior vena cava .
Immediately superior and slightly medial to the opening of the inferior vena cava on the posterior surface of the atrium is the opening of the coronary sinus .
This thin-walled vessel drains most of the coronary veins that return systemic blood from the heart .
The majority of the internal heart structures discussed in this and subsequent sections are illustrated in Figure 19.9 .
While the bulk of the internal surface of the right atrium is smooth , the depression of the fossa ovalis is medial , and the anterior surface demonstrates prominent ridges of muscle called the pectinate muscles .
The right auricle also has pectinate muscles .
The left atrium does not have pectinate muscles except in the auricle .
The atria receive venous blood on a nearly continuous basis , preventing venous flow from stopping while the ventricles are contracting .
While most ventricular filling occurs while the atria are relaxed , they do demonstrate a contractile phase and actively pump blood into the ventricles just prior to ventricular contraction .
The opening between the atrium and ventricle is guarded by the tricuspid valve .
The right ventricle receives blood from the right atrium through the tricuspid valve .
Each flap of the valve is attached to strong strands of connective tissue , the chordae tendineae , literally “ tendinous cords , ” or sometimes more poetically referred to as “ heart strings. ” There are several chordae tendineae associated with each of the flaps .
They are composed of approximately 80 percent collagenous fibers with the remainder consisting of elastic fibers and endothelium .
They connect each of the flaps to a papillary muscle that extends from the inferior ventricular surface .
There are three papillary muscles in the right ventricle , called the anterior , posterior , and septal muscles , which correspond to the three sections of the valves .
When the myocardium of the ventricle contracts , pressure within the ventricular chamber rises .
Blood , like any fluid , flows from higher pressure to lower pressure areas , in this case , toward the pulmonary trunk and the atrium .
To prevent any potential backflow , the papillary muscles also contract , generating tension on the chordae tendineae .
This prevents the flaps of the valves from being forced into the atria and regurgitation of the blood back into the atria during ventricular contraction .
Figure 19.11 shows papillary muscles and chordae tendineae attached to the tricuspid valve .
The walls of the ventricle are lined with trabeculae carneae , ridges of cardiac muscle covered by endocardium .
In addition to these muscular ridges , a band of cardiac muscle , also covered by endocardium , known as the moderator band ( see Figure 19.9 ) reinforces the thin walls of the right ventricle and plays a crucial role in cardiac conduction .
It arises from the inferior portion of the interventricular septum and crosses the interior space of the right ventricle to connect with the inferior papillary muscle .
When the right ventricle contracts , it ejects blood into the pulmonary trunk , which branches into the left and right pulmonary arteries that carry it to each lung .
The superior surface of the right ventricle begins to taper as it approaches the pulmonary trunk .
At the base of the pulmonary trunk is the pulmonary semilunar valve that prevents backflow from the pulmonary trunk .
After exchange of gases in the pulmonary capillaries , blood returns to the left atrium high in oxygen via one of the four pulmonary veins .
While the left atrium does not contain pectinate muscles , it does have an auricle that includes these pectinate ridges .
Blood flows nearly continuously from the pulmonary veins back into the atrium , which acts as the receiving chamber , and from here through an opening into the left ventricle .
Most blood flows passively into the heart while both the atria and ventricles are relaxed , but toward the end of the ventricular relaxation period , the left atrium will contract , pumping blood into the ventricle .
This atrial contraction accounts for approximately 20 percent of ventricular filling .
The opening between the left atrium and ventricle is guarded by the mitral valve .
Recall that , although both sides of the heart will pump the same amount of blood , the muscular layer is much thicker in the left ventricle compared to the right ( see Figure 19.8 ) .
Like the right ventricle , the left also has trabeculae carneae , but there is no moderator band .
The mitral valve is connected to papillary muscles via chordae tendineae .
There are two papillary muscles on the left—the anterior and posterior—as opposed to three on the right .
The left ventricle is the major pumping chamber for the systemic circuit ; it ejects blood into the aorta through the aortic semilunar valve .
A transverse section through the heart slightly above the level of the atrioventricular septum reveals all four heart valves along the same plane ( Figure 19.12 ) .
The valves ensure unidirectional blood flow through the heart .
Between the right atrium and the right ventricle is the right atrioventricular valve , or tricuspid valve .
It typically consists of three flaps , or leaflets , made of endocardium reinforced with additional connective tissue .
The flaps are connected by chordae tendineae to the papillary muscles , which control the opening and closing of the valves .
Emerging from the right ventricle at the base of the pulmonary trunk is the pulmonary semilunar valve , or the pulmonary valve ; it is also known as the pulmonic valve or the right semilunar valve .
The pulmonary valve is comprised of three small flaps of endothelium reinforced with connective tissue .
When the ventricle relaxes , the pressure differential causes blood to flow back into the ventricle from the pulmonary trunk .
This flow of blood fills the pocket-like flaps of the pulmonary valve , causing the valve to close and producing an audible sound .
Unlike the atrioventricular valves , there are no papillary muscles or chordae tendineae associated with the pulmonary valve .
Located at the opening between the left atrium and left ventricle is the mitral valve , also called the bicuspid valve or the left atrioventricular valve .
Structurally , this valve consists of two cusps , known as the anterior medial cusp and the posterior medial cusp , compared to the three cusps of the tricuspid valve .
In a clinical setting , the valve is referred to as the mitral valve , rather than the bicuspid valve .
The two cusps of the mitral valve are attached by chordae tendineae to two papillary muscles that project from the wall of the ventricle .
At the base of the aorta is the aortic semilunar valve , or the aortic valve , which prevents backflow from the aorta .
It normally is composed of three flaps .
When the ventricle relaxes and blood attempts to flow back into the ventricle from the aorta , blood will fill the cusps of the valve , causing it to close and producing an audible sound .
In Figure 19.13a , the two atrioventricular valves are open and the two semilunar valves are closed .
This occurs when both atria and ventricles are relaxed and when the atria contract to pump blood into the ventricles .
Figure 19.13b shows a frontal view .
Although only the left side of the heart is illustrated , the process is virtually identical on the right .
Figure 19.14a shows the atrioventricular valves closed while the two semilunar valves are open .
This occurs when the ventricles contract to eject blood into the pulmonary trunk and aorta .
Closure of the two atrioventricular valves prevents blood from being forced back into the atria .
This stage can be seen from a frontal view in Figure 19.14b .
When the ventricles begin to contract , pressure within the ventricles rises and blood flows toward the area of lowest pressure , which is initially in the atria .
This backflow causes the cusps of the tricuspid and mitral ( bicuspid ) valves to close .
These valves are tied down to the papillary muscles by chordae tendineae .
During the relaxation phase of the cardiac cycle , the papillary muscles are also relaxed and the tension on the chordae tendineae is slight ( see Figure 19.13b ) .
However , as the myocardium of the ventricle contracts , so do the papillary muscles .
This creates tension on the chordae tendineae ( see Figure 19.14b ) , helping to hold the cusps of the atrioventricular valves in place and preventing them from being blown back into the atria .
The aortic and pulmonary semilunar valves lack the chordae tendineae and papillary muscles associated with the atrioventricular valves .
Instead , they consist of pocket-like folds of endocardium reinforced with additional connective tissue .
When the ventricles relax and the change in pressure forces the blood toward the ventricles , the blood presses against these cusps and seals the openings .
Visit this site ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/heartvalve ) to observe an echocardiogram of actual heart valves opening and closing .
Although much of the heart has been “ removed ” from this gif loop so the chordae tendineae are not visible , why is their presence more critical for the atrioventricular valves ( tricuspid and mitral ) than the semilunar ( aortic and pulmonary ) valves ?
When heart valves do not function properly , they are often described as incompetent and result in valvular heart disease , which can range from benign to lethal .
Some of these conditions are congenital , that is , the individual was born with the defect , whereas others may be attributed to disease processes or trauma .
Some malfunctions are treated with medications , others require surgery , and still others may be mild enough that the condition is merely monitored since treatment might trigger more serious consequences .
Valvular disorders are often caused by carditis , or inflammation of the heart .
One common trigger for this inflammation is rheumatic fever , or scarlet fever , an autoimmune response to the presence of a bacterium , Streptococcus pyogenes , normally a disease of childhood .
While any of the heart valves may be involved in valve disorders , mitral regurgitation is the most common , detected in approximately 2 percent of the population , and the pulmonary semilunar valve is the least frequently involved .
When a valve malfunctions , the flow of blood to a region will often be disrupted .
The resulting inadequate flow of blood to this region will be described in general terms as an insufficiency .
The specific type of insufficiency is named for the valve involved : aortic insufficiency , mitral insufficiency , tricuspid insufficiency , or pulmonary insufficiency .
If one of the cusps of the valve is forced backward by the force of the blood , the condition is referred to as a prolapsed valve .
Prolapse may occur if the chordae tendineae are damaged or broken , causing the closure mechanism to fail .
The failure of the valve to close properly disrupts the normal one-way flow of blood and results in regurgitation , when the blood flows backward from its normal path .
Using a stethoscope , the disruption to the normal flow of blood produces a heart murmur .
Stenosis is a condition in which the heart valves become rigid and may calcify over time .
The loss of flexibility of the valve interferes with normal function and may cause the heart to work harder to propel blood through the valve , which eventually weakens the heart .
Aortic stenosis affects approximately 2 percent of the population over 65 years of age , and the percentage increases to approximately 4 percent in individuals over 85 years .
Occasionally , one or more of the chordae tendineae will tear or the papillary muscle itself may die as a component of a myocardial infarction ( heart attack ) .
In this case , the patient ’ s condition will deteriorate dramatically and rapidly , and immediate surgical intervention may be required .
Auscultation , or listening to a patient ’ s heart sounds , is one of the most useful diagnostic tools , since it is proven , safe , and inexpensive .
The term auscultation is derived from the Latin for “ to listen , ” and the technique has been used for diagnostic purposes as far back as the ancient Egyptians .
Valve and septal disorders will trigger abnormal heart sounds .
If a valvular disorder is detected or suspected , a test called an echocardiogram , or simply an “ echo , ” may be ordered .
Echocardiograms are sonograms of the heart and can help in the diagnosis of valve disorders as well as a wide variety of heart pathologies .
Visit this site ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/heartsounds ) for a free download , including excellent animations and audio of heart sounds .
Cardiologists are medical doctors that specialize in the diagnosis and treatment of diseases of the heart .
After completing 4 years of medical school , cardiologists complete a three-year residency in internal medicine followed by an additional three or more years in cardiology .
Following this 10-year period of medical training and clinical experience , they qualify for a rigorous two-day examination administered by the Board of Internal Medicine that tests their academic training and clinical abilities , including diagnostics and treatment .
After successful completion of this examination , a physician becomes a board-certified cardiologist .
Some board-certified cardiologists may be invited to become a Fellow of the American College of Cardiology ( FACC ) .
This professional recognition is awarded to outstanding physicians based upon merit , including outstanding credentials , achievements , and community contributions to cardiovascular medicine .
Visit this site ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/cardiologist ) to learn more about cardiologists .
Cardiovascular technologists/technicians are trained professionals who perform a variety of imaging techniques , such as sonograms or echocardiograms , used by physicians to diagnose and treat diseases of the heart .
Nearly all of these positions require an associate degree , and these technicians earn a median salary of $ 49,410 as of May 2010 , according to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics .
Growth within the field is fast , projected at 29 percent from 2010 to 2020 .
There is a considerable overlap and complementary skills between cardiac technicians and vascular technicians , and so the term cardiovascular technician is often used .
Special certifications within the field require documenting appropriate experience and completing additional and often expensive certification examinations .
this site ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/cardiotech ) for more information on cardiovascular technologists/ Visit technicians .
You will recall that the heart is a remarkable pump composed largely of cardiac muscle cells that are incredibly active throughout life .
Like all other cells , a cardiomyocyte requires a reliable supply of oxygen and nutrients , and a way to remove wastes , so it needs a dedicated , complex , and extensive coronary circulation .
And because of the critical and nearly ceaseless activity of the heart throughout life , this need for a blood supply is even greater than for a typical cell .
However , coronary circulation is not continuous ; rather , it cycles , reaching a peak when the heart muscle is relaxed and nearly ceasing while it is contracting .
Coronary arteries supply blood to the myocardium and other components of the heart .
The first portion of the aorta after it arises from the left ventricle gives rise to the coronary arteries .
There are three dilations in the wall of the aorta just superior to the aortic semilunar valve .
Two of these , the left posterior aortic sinus and anterior aortic sinus , give rise to the left and right coronary arteries , respectively .
The third sinus , the right posterior aortic sinus , typically does not give rise to a vessel .
Coronary vessel branches that remain on the surface of the artery and follow the sulci are called epicardial coronary arteries .
The left coronary artery distributes blood to the left side of the heart , the left atrium and ventricle , and the interventricular septum .
The circumflex artery arises from the left coronary artery and follows the coronary sulcus to the left .
Eventually , it will fuse with the small branches of the right coronary artery .
The larger anterior interventricular artery , also known as the left anterior descending artery ( LAD ) , is the second major branch arising from the left coronary artery .
It follows the anterior interventricular sulcus around the pulmonary trunk .
Along the way it gives rise to numerous smaller branches that interconnect with the branches of the posterior interventricular artery , forming anastomoses .
An anastomosis is an area where vessels unite to form interconnections that normally allow blood to circulate to a region even if there may be partial blockage in another branch .
The anastomoses in the heart are very small .
Therefore , this ability is somewhat restricted in the heart so a coronary artery blockage often results in death of the cells ( myocardial infarction ) supplied by the particular vessel .
The right coronary artery proceeds along the coronary sulcus and distributes blood to the right atrium , portions of both ventricles , and the heart conduction system .
Normally , one or more marginal arteries arise from the right coronary artery inferior to the right atrium .
The marginal arteries supply blood to the superficial portions of the right ventricle .
On the posterior surface of the heart , the right coronary artery gives rise to the posterior interventricular artery , also known as the posterior descending artery .
It runs along the posterior portion of the interventricular sulcus toward the apex of the heart , giving rise to branches that supply the interventricular septum and portions of both ventricles .
Figure 19.15 presents views of the coronary circulation from both the anterior and posterior views .
Myocardial infarction ( MI ) is the formal term for what is commonly referred to as a heart attack .
It normally results from a lack of blood flow ( ischemia ) and oxygen ( hypoxia ) to a region of the heart , resulting in death of the cardiac muscle cells .
An MI often occurs when a coronary artery is blocked by the buildup of atherosclerotic plaque consisting of lipids , cholesterol and fatty acids , and white blood cells , primarily macrophages .
It can also occur when a portion of an unstable atherosclerotic plaque travels through the coronary arterial system and lodges in one of the smaller vessels .
The resulting blockage restricts the flow of blood and oxygen to the myocardium and causes death of the tissue .
MIs may be triggered by excessive exercise , in which the partially occluded artery is no longer able to pump sufficient quantities of blood , or severe stress , which may induce spasm of the smooth muscle in the walls of the vessel .
In the case of acute MI , there is often sudden pain beneath the sternum ( retrosternal pain ) called angina pectoris , often radiating down the left arm in males but not in female patients .
Until this anomaly between the sexes was discovered , many female patients suffering MIs were misdiagnosed and sent home .
Many of the symptoms are shared with other medical conditions , including anxiety attacks and simple indigestion , so differential diagnosis is critical .
It is estimated that between 22 and 64 percent of MIs present without any symptoms .
An MI can be confirmed by examining the patient ’ s ECG , which frequently reveals alterations in the ST and Q components .
Some classification schemes of MI are referred to as ST-elevated MI ( STEMI ) and non-elevated MI ( nonSTEMI ) .
In addition , echocardiography or cardiac magnetic resonance imaging may be employed .
Immediate treatments for MI are essential and include administering supplemental oxygen , aspirin that helps to break up clots , and nitroglycerine administered sublingually ( under the tongue ) to facilitate its absorption .
Longer-term treatments include injections of thrombolytic agents such as streptokinase that dissolve the clot , the anticoagulant heparin , balloon angioplasty and stents to open blocked vessels , and bypass surgery to allow blood to pass around the site of blockage .
If the damage is extensive , coronary replacement with a donor heart or coronary assist device , a sophisticated mechanical device that supplements the pumping activity of the heart , may be employed .
Despite the attention , development of artificial hearts to augment the severely limited supply of heart donors has proven less than satisfactory but will likely improve in the future .
MIs may trigger cardiac arrest , but the two are not synonymous .
Coronary veins drain the heart and generally parallel the large surface arteries ( see Figure 19.15 ) .
The great cardiac vein can be seen initially on the surface of the heart following the interventricular sulcus , but it eventually flows along the coronary sulcus into the coronary sinus on the posterior surface .
The great cardiac vein initially parallels the anterior interventricular artery and drains the areas supplied by this vessel .
It receives several major branches , including the posterior cardiac vein , the middle cardiac vein , and the small cardiac vein .
The posterior cardiac vein parallels and drains the areas supplied by the marginal artery branch of the circumflex artery .
The middle cardiac vein parallels and drains the areas supplied by the posterior interventricular artery .
The small cardiac vein parallels the right coronary artery and drains the blood from the posterior surfaces of the right atrium and ventricle .
The coronary sinus is a large , thin-walled vein on the posterior surface of the heart lying within the atrioventricular sulcus and emptying directly into the right atrium .
The anterior cardiac veins parallel the small cardiac arteries and drain the anterior surface of the right ventricle .
Unlike these other cardiac veins , it bypasses the coronary sinus and drains directly into the right atrium .
Coronary artery disease is the leading cause of death worldwide .
It occurs when the buildup of plaque—a fatty material including cholesterol , connective tissue , white blood cells , and some smooth muscle cells—within the walls of the arteries obstructs the flow of blood and decreases the flexibility or compliance of the vessels .
This condition is called atherosclerosis , a hardening of the arteries that involves the accumulation of plaque .
As the coronary blood vessels become occluded , the flow of blood to the tissues will be restricted , a condition called ischemia that causes the cells to receive insufficient amounts of oxygen , called hypoxia .
Figure 19.16 shows the blockage of coronary arteries highlighted by the injection of dye .
Some individuals with coronary artery disease report pain radiating from the chest called angina pectoris , but others remain asymptomatic .
If untreated , coronary artery disease can lead to MI or a heart attack .
The disease progresses slowly and often begins in children and can be seen as fatty “ streaks ” in the vessels .
It then gradually progresses throughout life .
Well-documented risk factors include smoking , family history , hypertension , obesity , diabetes , high alcohol consumption , lack of exercise , stress , and hyperlipidemia or high circulating levels of lipids in the blood .
Treatments may include medication , changes to diet and exercise , angioplasty with a balloon catheter , insertion of a stent , or coronary bypass procedure .
Angioplasty is a procedure in which the occlusion is mechanically widened with a balloon .
A specialized catheter with an expandable tip is inserted into a superficial vessel , normally in the leg , and then directed to the site of the occlusion .
At this point , the balloon is inflated to compress the plaque material and to open the vessel to increase blood flow .
Then , the balloon is deflated and retracted .
A stent consisting of a specialized mesh is typically inserted at the site of occlusion to reinforce the weakened and damaged walls .
Stent insertions have been routine in cardiology for more than 40 years .
Coronary bypass surgery may also be performed .
This surgical procedure grafts a replacement vessel obtained from another , less vital portion of the body to bypass the occluded area .
This procedure is clearly effective in treating patients experiencing a MI , but overall does not increase longevity .
Nor does it seem advisable in patients with stable although diminished cardiac capacity since frequently loss of mental acuity occurs following the procedure .
Long-term changes to behavior , emphasizing diet and exercise plus a medicine regime tailored to lower blood pressure , lower cholesterol and lipids , and reduce clotting are equally as effective .
Not the least of these exceptional properties is its ability to initiate an electrical potential at a fixed rate that spreads rapidly from cell to cell to trigger the contractile mechanism .
This property is known as autorhythmicity .
Neither smooth nor skeletal muscle can do this .
Even though cardiac muscle has autorhythmicity , heart rate is modulated by the endocrine and nervous systems .
There are two major types of cardiac muscle cells : myocardial contractile cells and myocardial conducting cells .
The myocardial contractile cells constitute the bulk ( 99 percent ) of the cells in the atria and ventricles .
Contractile cells conduct impulses and are responsible for contractions that pump blood through the body .
The myocardial conducting cells ( 1 percent of the cells ) form the conduction system of the heart .
Except for Purkinje cells , they are generally much smaller than the contractile cells and have few of the myofibrils or filaments needed for contraction .
Their function is similar in many respects to neurons , although they are specialized muscle cells .
Myocardial conduction cells initiate and propagate the action potential ( the electrical impulse ) that travels throughout the heart and triggers the contractions that propel the blood .
Compared to the giant cylinders of skeletal muscle , cardiac muscle cells , or cardiomyocytes , are considerably shorter with much smaller diameters .
Cardiac muscle also demonstrates striations , the alternating pattern of dark A bands and light I bands attributed to the precise arrangement of the myofilaments and fibrils that are organized in sarcomeres along the length of the cell ( Figure 19.17a ) .
These contractile elements are virtually identical to skeletal muscle .
T ( transverse ) tubules penetrate from the surface plasma membrane , the sarcolemma , to the interior of the cell , allowing the electrical impulse to reach the interior .
The T tubules are only found at the Z discs , whereas in skeletal muscle , they are found at the junction of the A and I bands .
Therefore , there are one-half as many T tubules in cardiac muscle as in skeletal muscle .
In addition , the sarcoplasmic reticulum stores few calcium ions , so most of the calcium ions must come from outside the cells .
The result is a slower onset of contraction .
Mitochondria are plentiful , providing energy for the contractions of the heart .
Typically , cardiomyocytes have a single , central nucleus , but two or more nuclei may be found in some cells .
Cardiac muscle cells branch freely .
A junction between two adjoining cells is marked by a critical structure called an intercalated disc , which helps support the synchronized contraction of the muscle ( Figure 19.17b ) .
The sarcolemmas from adjacent cells bind together at the intercalated discs .
They consist of desmosomes , specialized linking proteoglycans , tight junctions , and large numbers of gap junctions that allow the passage of ions between the cells and help to synchronize the contraction ( Figure 19.17c ) .
Intercellular connective tissue also helps to bind the cells together .
The importance of strongly binding these cells together is necessitated by the forces exerted by contraction .
Cardiac muscle undergoes aerobic respiration patterns , primarily metabolizing lipids and carbohydrates .
Myoglobin , lipids , and glycogen are all stored within the cytoplasm .
Cardiac muscle cells undergo twitch-type contractions with long refractory periods followed by brief relaxation periods .
The relaxation is essential so the heart can fill with blood for the next cycle .
The refractory period is very long to prevent the possibility of tetany , a condition in which muscle remains involuntarily contracted .
In the heart , tetany is not compatible with life , since it would prevent the heart from pumping blood .
Damaged cardiac muscle cells have extremely limited abilities to repair themselves or to replace dead cells via mitosis .
Recent evidence indicates that at least some stem cells remain within the heart that continue to divide and at least potentially replace these dead cells .
However , newly formed or repaired cells are rarely as functional as the original cells , and cardiac function is reduced .
In the event of a heart attack or MI , dead cells are often replaced by patches of scar tissue .
Autopsies performed on individuals who had successfully received heart transplants show some proliferation of original cells .
If researchers can unlock the mechanism that generates new cells and restore full mitotic capabilities to heart muscle , the prognosis for heart attack survivors will be greatly enhanced .
To date , myocardial cells produced within the patient ( in situ ) by cardiac stem cells seem to be nonfunctional , although those grown in Petri dishes ( in vitro ) do beat .
Perhaps soon this mystery will be solved , and new advances in treatment will be commonplace .
If embryonic heart cells are separated into a Petri dish and kept alive , each is capable of generating its own electrical impulse followed by contraction .
When two independently beating embryonic cardiac muscle cells are placed together , the cell with the higher inherent rate sets the pace , and the impulse spreads from the faster to the slower cell to trigger a contraction .
As more cells are joined together , the fastest cell continues to assume control of the rate .
A fully developed adult heart maintains the capability of generating its own electrical impulse , triggered by the fastest cells , as part of the cardiac conduction system .
The components of the cardiac conduction system include the sinoatrial node , the atrioventricular node , the atrioventricular bundle , the atrioventricular bundle branches , and the Purkinje cells ( Figure 19.18 ) .
Normal cardiac rhythm is established by the sinoatrial ( SA ) node , a specialized clump of myocardial conducting cells located in the superior and posterior walls of the right atrium in close proximity to the orifice of the superior vena cava .
The SA node has the highest inherent rate of depolarization and is known as the pacemaker of the heart .
It initiates the sinus rhythm , or normal electrical pattern followed by contraction of the heart .
This impulse spreads from its initiation in the SA node throughout the atria through specialized internodal pathways , to the atrial myocardial contractile cells and the atrioventricular node .
The internodal pathways consist of three bands ( anterior , middle , and posterior ) that lead directly from the SA node to the next node in the conduction system , the atrioventricular node ( see Figure 19.18 ) .
The impulse takes approximately 50 ms ( milliseconds ) to travel between these two nodes .
The relative importance of this pathway has been debated since the impulse would reach the atrioventricular node simply following the cell-by-cell pathway through the contractile cells of the myocardium in the atria .
In addition , there is a specialized pathway called Bachmann ’ s bundle or the interatrial band that conducts the impulse directly from the right atrium to the left atrium .
Regardless of the pathway , as the impulse reaches the atrioventricular septum , the connective tissue of the cardiac skeleton prevents the impulse from spreading into the myocardial cells in the ventricles except at the atrioventricular node .
Figure 19.19 illustrates the initiation of the impulse in the SA node that then spreads the impulse throughout the atria to the atrioventricular node .
The electrical event , the wave of depolarization , is the trigger for muscular contraction .
The wave of depolarization begins in the right atrium , and the impulse spreads across the superior portions of both atria and then down through the contractile cells .
The contractile cells then begin contraction from the superior to the inferior portions of the atria , efficiently pumping blood into the ventricles .
The atrioventricular ( AV ) node is a second clump of specialized myocardial conductive cells , located in the inferior portion of the right atrium within the atrioventricular septum .
The septum prevents the impulse from spreading directly to the ventricles without passing through the AV node .
There is a critical pause before the AV node depolarizes and transmits the impulse to the atrioventricular bundle ( see Figure 19.19 , step 3 ) .
This delay in transmission is partially attributable to the small diameter of the cells of the node , which slow the impulse .
Also , conduction between nodal cells is less efficient than between conducting cells .
These factors mean that it takes the impulse approximately 100 ms to pass through the node .
This pause is critical to heart function , as it allows the atrial cardiomyocytes to complete their contraction that pumps blood into the ventricles before the impulse is transmitted to the cells of the ventricle itself .
With extreme stimulation by the SA node , the AV node can transmit impulses maximally at 220 per minute .
This establishes the typical maximum heart rate in a healthy young individual .
Damaged hearts or those stimulated by drugs can contract at higher rates , but at these rates , the heart can no longer effectively pump blood .
Arising from the AV node , the atrioventricular bundle , or bundle of His , proceeds through the interventricular septum before dividing into two atrioventricular bundle branches , commonly called the left and right bundle branches .
The left bundle branch has two fascicles .
The left bundle branch supplies the left ventricle , and the right bundle branch the right ventricle .
Since the left ventricle is much larger than the right , the left bundle branch is also considerably larger than the right .
Portions of the right bundle branch are found in the moderator band and supply the right papillary muscles .
Because of this connection , each papillary muscle receives the impulse at approximately the same time , so they begin to contract simultaneously just prior to the remainder of the myocardial contractile cells of the ventricles .
This is believed to allow tension to develop on the chordae tendineae prior to right ventricular contraction .
There is no corresponding moderator band on the left .
Both bundle branches descend and reach the apex of the heart where they connect with the Purkinje fibers ( see Figure 19.19 , step 4 ) .
This passage takes approximately 25 ms .
The Purkinje fibers are additional myocardial conductive fibers that spread the impulse to the myocardial contractile cells in the ventricles .
They extend throughout the myocardium from the apex of the heart toward the atrioventricular septum and the base of the heart .
The Purkinje fibers have a fast inherent conduction rate , and the electrical impulse reaches all of the ventricular muscle cells in about 75 ms ( see Figure 19.19 , step 5 ) .
Since the electrical stimulus begins at the apex , the contraction also begins at the apex and travels toward the base of the heart , similar to squeezing a tube of toothpaste from the bottom .
This allows the blood to be pumped out of the ventricles and into the aorta and pulmonary trunk .
The total time elapsed from the initiation of the impulse in the SA node until depolarization of the ventricles is approximately 225 ms. Action potentials are considerably different between cardiac conductive cells and cardiac contractive cells .
While Na and K play essential roles , Ca is also critical for both types of cells .
Unlike skeletal muscles and neurons , cardiac conductive cells do not have a stable resting potential .
Conductive cells contain a series of sodium ion channels that allow a normal and slow influx of sodium ions that causes the membrane potential to rise slowly from an initial value of −60 mV up to about –40 mV .
The resulting movement of sodium ions creates spontaneous depolarization ( or prepotential depolarization ) .
At this point , calcium ion channels open and Ca enters the cell , further depolarizing it at a more rapid rate until it reaches a value of approximately +5 mV .
At this point , the calcium ion channels close and K channels open , allowing outflux of K and resulting in repolarization .
When the membrane potential reaches approximately −60 mV , the K channels close and Na channels open , and the prepotential phase begins again .
This phenomenon explains the autorhythmicity properties of cardiac muscle ( Figure 19.20 ) .
There is a distinctly different electrical pattern involving the contractile cells .
In this case , there is a rapid depolarization , followed by a plateau phase and then repolarization .
This phenomenon accounts for the long refractory periods required for the cardiac muscle cells to pump blood effectively before they are capable of firing for a second time .
These cardiac myocytes normally do not initiate their own electrical potential but rather wait for an impulse to reach them .
Contractile cells demonstrate a much more stable resting phase than conductive cells at approximately −80 mV for cells in the atria and −90 mV for cells in the ventricles .
Despite this initial difference , the other components of their action potentials are virtually identical .
In both cases , when stimulated by an action potential , voltage-gated channels rapidly open , beginning the positive-feedback mechanism of depolarization .
This rapid influx of positively charged ions raises the membrane potential to approximately +30 mV , at which point the sodium channels close .
The rapid depolarization period typically lasts 3–5 ms. Depolarization is followed by the plateau phase , in which membrane potential declines relatively slowly .
This is due in large part to the opening of the slow Ca channels , allowing Ca to enter the cell while few K channels are open , allowing K to exit the cell .
The relatively long plateau phase lasts approximately 175 ms. Once the membrane potential reaches approximately zero , the Ca channels close and K channels open , allowing K to exit the cell .
The repolarization lasts approximately 75 ms. At this point , membrane potential drops until it reaches resting levels once more and the cycle repeats .
The entire event lasts between 250 and 300 ms ( Figure 19.21 ) .
The absolute refractory period for cardiac contractile muscle lasts approximately 200 ms , and the relative refractory period lasts approximately 50 ms , for a total of 250 ms .
This extended period is critical , since the heart muscle must contract to pump blood effectively and the contraction must follow the electrical events .
Without extended refractory periods , premature contractions would occur in the heart and would not be compatible with life .
Calcium ions play two critical roles in the physiology of cardiac muscle .
Their influx through slow calcium channels accounts for the prolonged plateau phase and absolute refractory period that enable cardiac muscle to function properly .
Calcium ions also combine with the regulatory protein troponin in the troponin-tropomyosin complex ; this complex removes the inhibition that prevents the heads of the myosin molecules from forming cross bridges with the active sites on actin that provide the power stroke of contraction .
This mechanism is virtually identical to that of skeletal muscle .
Approximately 20 percent of the calcium required for contraction is supplied by the influx of Ca during the plateau phase .
The remaining Ca for contraction is released from storage in the sarcoplasmic reticulum .
The pattern of prepotential or spontaneous depolarization , followed by rapid depolarization and repolarization just described , are seen in the SA node and a few other conductive cells in the heart .
Since the SA node is the pacemaker , it reaches threshold faster than any other component of the conduction system .
It will initiate the impulses spreading to the other conducting cells .
The SA node , without nervous or endocrine control , would initiate a heart impulse approximately 80–100 times per minute .
Although each component of the conduction system is capable of generating its own impulse , the rate progressively slows as you proceed from the SA node to the Purkinje fibers .
Without the SA node , the AV node would generate a heart rate of 40–60 beats per minute .
If the AV node were blocked , the atrioventricular bundle would fire at a rate of approximately 30–40 impulses per minute .
The bundle branches would have an inherent rate of 20–30 impulses per minute , and the Purkinje fibers would fire at 15–20 impulses per minute .
Depending upon the specific individual , as rates fall much below this level , the heart would be unable to maintain adequate flow of blood to vital tissues , initially resulting in decreasing loss of function across the systems , unconsciousness , and ultimately death .
By careful placement of surface electrodes on the body , it is possible to record the complex , compound electrical signal of the heart .
This tracing of the electrical signal is the electrocardiogram ( ECG ) , also commonly abbreviated EKG ( K coming kardiology , from the German term for cardiology ) .
Careful analysis of the ECG reveals a detailed picture of both normal and abnormal heart function , and is an indispensable clinical diagnostic tool .
The standard electrocardiograph ( the instrument that generates an ECG ) uses 3 , 5 , or 12 leads .
The greater the number of leads an electrocardiograph uses , the more information the ECG provides .
The term “ lead ” may be used to refer to the cable from the electrode to the electrical recorder , but it typically describes the voltage difference between two of the electrodes .
The 12-lead electrocardiograph uses 10 electrodes placed in standard locations on the patient ’ s skin ( Figure 19.22 ) .
In continuous ambulatory electrocardiographs , the patient wears a small , portable , battery-operated device known as a Holter monitor , or simply a Holter , that continuously monitors heart electrical activity , typically for a period of 24 hours during the patient ’ s normal routine .
A normal ECG tracing is presented in Figure 19.23 .
Each component , segment , and interval is labeled and corresponds to important electrical events , demonstrating the relationship between these events and contraction in the heart .
There are five prominent points on the ECG : the P wave , the QRS complex , and the T wave .
The small P wave represents the depolarization of the atria .
The atria begin contracting approximately 25 ms after the start of the P wave .
The large QRS complex represents the depolarization of the ventricles , which requires a much stronger electrical signal because of the larger size of the ventricular cardiac muscle .
The ventricles begin to contract as the QRS reaches the peak of the R wave .
Lastly , the T wave represents the repolarization of the ventricles .
The repolarization of the atria occurs during the QRS complex , which masks it on an ECG .
The major segments and intervals of an ECG tracing are indicated in Figure 19.23 .
Segments are defined as the regions between two waves .
Intervals include one segment plus one or more waves .
For example , the PR segment begins at the end of the P wave and ends at the beginning of the QRS complex .
The PR interval starts at the beginning of the P wave and ends with the beginning of the QRS complex .
The PR interval is more clinically relevant , as it measures the duration from the beginning of atrial depolarization ( the P wave ) to the initiation of the QRS complex .
Since the Q wave may be difficult to view in some tracings , the measurement is often extended to the R that is more easily visible .
Should there be a delay in passage of the impulse from the SA node to the AV node , it would be visible in the PR interval .
Figure 19.24 correlates events of heart contraction to the corresponding segments and intervals of an ECG .
Visit this site ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/ECG ) for a more detailed analysis of ECGs .
Occassionally , an area of the heart other than the SA node will initiate an impulse that will be followed by a premature contraction .
Such an area , which may actually be a component of the conduction system or some other contractile cells , is known as an ectopic focus or ectopic pacemaker .
An ectopic focus may be stimulated by localized ischemia ; exposure to certain drugs , including caffeine , digitalis , or acetylcholine ; elevated stimulation by both sympathetic or parasympathetic divisions of the autonomic nervous system ; or a number of disease or pathological conditions .
Occasional occurances are generally transitory and nonlife threatening , but if the condition becomes chronic , it may lead to either an arrhythmia , a deviation from the normal pattern of impulse conduction and contraction , or to fibrillation , an uncoordinated beating of the heart .
While interpretation of an ECG is possible and extremely valuable after some training , a full understanding of the complexities and intricacies generally requires several years of experience .
In general , the size of the electrical variations , the duration of the events , and detailed vector analysis provide the most comprehensive picture of cardiac function .
For example , an amplified P wave may indicate enlargement of the atria , an enlarged Q wave may indicate a MI , and an enlarged suppressed or inverted Q wave often indicates enlarged ventricles .
T waves often appear flatter when insufficient oxygen is being delivered to the myocardium .
An elevation of the ST segment above baseline is often seen in patients with an acute MI , and may appear depressed below the baseline when hypoxia is occurring .
As useful as analyzing these electrical recordings may be , there are limitations .
For example , not all areas suffering a MI may be obvious on the ECG .
Additionally , it will not reveal the effectiveness of the pumping , which requires further testing , such as an ultrasound test called an echocardiogram or nuclear medicine imaging .
It is also possible for there to be pulseless electrical activity , which will show up on an ECG tracing , although there is no corresponding pumping action .
Common abnormalities that may be detected by the ECGs are shown in Figure 19.25 .
Visit this site ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/abnormalECG ) for a more complete library of abnormal ECGs .
In the event that the electrical activity of the heart is severely disrupted , cessation of electrical activity or fibrillation may occur .
In fibrillation , the heart beats in a wild , uncontrolled manner , which prevents it from being able to pump effectively .
Atrial fibrillation ( see Figure 19.25b ) is a serious condition , but as long as the ventricles continue to pump blood , the patient ’ s life may not be in immediate danger .
Ventricular fibrillation ( see Figure 19.25d ) is a medical emergency that requires life support , because the ventricles are not effectively pumping blood .
In a hospital setting , it is often described as “ code blue. ” If untreated for as little as a few minutes , ventricular fibrillation may lead to brain death .
The most common treatment is defibrillation , which uses special paddles to apply a charge to the heart from an external electrical source in an attempt to establish a normal sinus rhythm ( Figure 19.26 ) .
A defibrillator effectively stops the heart so that the SA node can trigger a normal conduction cycle .
Because of their effectiveness in reestablishing a normal sinus rhythm , external automated defibrillators ( EADs ) are being placed in areas frequented by large numbers of people , such as schools , restaurants , and airports .
These devices contain simple and direct verbal instructions that can be followed by nonmedical personnel in an attempt to save a life .
A heart block refers to an interruption in the normal conduction pathway .
The nomenclature for these is very straightforward .
SA nodal blocks occur within the SA node .
AV nodal blocks occur within the AV node .
Infra-Hisian blocks involve the bundle of His .
Bundle branch blocks occur within either the left or right atrioventricular bundle branches .
Hemiblocks are partial and occur within one or more fascicles of the atrioventricular bundle branch .
Clinically , the most common types are the AV nodal and infra-Hisian blocks .
AV blocks are often described by degrees .
A first-degree or partial block indicates a delay in conduction between the SA and AV nodes .
This can be recognized on the ECG as an abnormally long PR interval .
A second-degree or incomplete block occurs when some impulses from the SA node reach the AV node and continue , while others do not .
In this instance , the ECG would reveal some P waves not followed by a QRS complex , while others would appear normal .
In the third-degree or complete block , there is no correlation between atrial activity ( the P wave ) and ventricular activity ( the QRS complex ) .
Even in the event of a total SA block , the AV node will assume the role of pacemaker and continue initiating contractions at 40–60 contractions per minute , which is adequate to maintain consciousness .
Secondand third-degree blocks are demonstrated on the ECG presented in Figure 19.25 .
When arrhythmias become a chronic problem , the heart maintains a junctional rhythm , which originates in the AV node .
In order to speed up the heart rate and restore full sinus rhythm , a cardiologist can implant an artificial pacemaker , which delivers electrical impulses to the heart muscle to ensure that the heart continues to contract and pump blood effectively .
These artificial pacemakers are programmable by the cardiologists and can either provide stimulation temporarily upon demand or on a continuous basis .
Some devices also contain built-in defibrillators .
Normally , cardiac muscle metabolism is entirely aerobic .
Oxygen from the lungs is brought to the heart , and every other organ , attached to the hemoglobin molecules within the erythrocytes .
Heart cells also store appreciable amounts of oxygen in myoglobin .
Normally , these two mechanisms , circulating oxygen and oxygen attached to myoglobin , can supply sufficient oxygen to the heart , even during peak performance .
Fatty acids and glucose from the circulation are broken down within the mitochondria to release energy in the form of ATP .
Both fatty acid droplets and glycogen are stored within the sarcoplasm and provide additional nutrient supply .
( Seek additional content for more detail about metabolism . )
The period of contraction that the heart undergoes while it pumps blood into circulation is called systole .
The period of relaxation that occurs as the chambers fill with blood is called diastole .
Both the atria and ventricles undergo systole and diastole , and it is essential that these components be carefully regulated and coordinated to ensure blood is pumped efficiently to the body .
Fluids , whether gases or liquids , are materials that flow according to pressure gradients—that is , they move from regions that are higher in pressure to regions that are lower in pressure .
Accordingly , when the heart chambers are relaxed ( diastole ) , blood will flow into the atria from the veins , which are higher in pressure .
As blood flows into the atria , the pressure will rise , so the blood will initially move passively from the atria into the ventricles .
When the action potential triggers the muscles in the atria to contract ( atrial systole ) , the pressure within the atria rises further , pumping blood into the ventricles .
During ventricular systole , pressure rises in the ventricles , pumping blood into the pulmonary trunk from the right ventricle and into the aorta from the left ventricle .
Again , as you consider this flow and relate it to the conduction pathway , the elegance of the system should become apparent .
At the beginning of the cardiac cycle , both the atria and ventricles are relaxed ( diastole ) .
Blood is flowing into the right atrium from the superior and inferior venae cavae and the coronary sinus .
Blood flows into the left atrium from the four pulmonary veins .
The two atrioventricular valves , the tricuspid and mitral valves , are both open , so blood flows unimpeded from the atria and into the ventricles .
Approximately 70–80 percent of ventricular filling occurs by this method .
The two semilunar valves , the pulmonary and aortic valves , are closed , preventing backflow of blood into the right and left ventricles from the pulmonary trunk on the right and the aorta on the left .
Contraction of the atria follows depolarization , represented by the P wave of the ECG .
As the atrial muscles contract from the superior portion of the atria toward the atrioventricular septum , pressure rises within the atria and blood is pumped into the ventricles through the open atrioventricular ( tricuspid , and mitral or bicuspid ) valves .
At the start of atrial systole , the ventricles are normally filled with approximately 70–80 percent of their capacity due to inflow during diastole .
Atrial contraction , also referred to as the “ atrial kick , ” contributes the remaining 20–30 percent of filling ( see Figure 19.27 ) .
Atrial systole lasts approximately 100 ms and ends prior to ventricular systole , as the atrial muscle returns to diastole .
Ventricular systole ( see Figure 19.27 ) follows the depolarization of the ventricles and is represented by the QRS complex in the ECG .
It may be conveniently divided into two phases , lasting a total of 270 ms. At the end of atrial systole and just prior to atrial contraction , the ventricles contain approximately 130 mL blood in a resting adult in a standing position .
This volume is known as the end diastolic volume ( EDV ) or preload .
Initially , as the muscles in the ventricle contract , the pressure of the blood within the chamber rises , but it is not yet high enough to open the semilunar ( pulmonary and aortic ) valves and be ejected from the heart .
However , blood pressure quickly rises above that of the atria that are now relaxed and in diastole .
This increase in pressure causes blood to flow back toward the atria , closing the tricuspid and mitral valves .
Since blood is not being ejected from the ventricles at this early stage , the volume of blood within the chamber remains constant .
Consequently , this initial phase of ventricular systole is known as isovolumic contraction , also called isovolumetric contraction ( see Figure 19.27 ) .
In the second phase of ventricular systole , the ventricular ejection phase , the contraction of the ventricular muscle has raised the pressure within the ventricle to the point that it is greater than the pressures in the pulmonary trunk and the aorta .
Blood is pumped from the heart , pushing open the pulmonary and aortic semilunar valves .
Pressure generated by the left ventricle will be appreciably greater than the pressure generated by the right ventricle , since the existing pressure in the aorta will be so much higher .
Nevertheless , both ventricles pump the same amount of blood .
This quantity is referred to as stroke volume .
Stroke volume will normally be in the range of 70–80 mL .
Since ventricular systole began with an EDV of approximately 130 mL of blood , this means that there is still 50–60 mL of blood remaining in the ventricle following contraction .
This volume of blood is known as the end systolic volume ( ESV ) .
Ventricular relaxation , or diastole , follows repolarization of the ventricles and is represented by the T wave of the ECG .
It too is divided into two distinct phases and lasts approximately 430 ms. During the early phase of ventricular diastole , as the ventricular muscle relaxes , pressure on the remaining blood within the ventricle begins to fall .
When pressure within the ventricles drops below pressure in both the pulmonary trunk and aorta , blood flows back toward the heart , producing the dicrotic notch ( small dip ) seen in blood pressure tracings .
The semilunar valves close to prevent backflow into the heart .
In the second phase of ventricular diastole , called late ventricular diastole , as the ventricular muscle relaxes , pressure on the blood within the ventricles drops even further .
Eventually , it drops below the pressure in the atria .
When this occurs , blood flows from the atria into the ventricles , pushing open the tricuspid and mitral valves .
As pressure drops within the ventricles , blood flows from the major veins into the relaxed atria and from there into the ventricles .
Both chambers are in diastole , the atrioventricular valves are open , and the semilunar valves remain closed ( see Figure 19.27 ) .
The cardiac cycle is complete .
Figure 19.28 illustrates the relationship between the cardiac cycle and the ECG .
One of the simplest , yet effective , diagnostic techniques applied to assess the state of a patient ’ s heart is auscultation using a stethoscope .
In a normal , healthy heart , there are only two audible heart sounds : S and S .
S is the sound created by the closing of the atrioventricular valves during ventricular contraction and is normally described as a “ lub , ” or first heart sound .
The second heart sound , S , is the sound of the closing of the semilunar valves during ventricular diastole and is described as a “ dub ” ( Figure 19.29 ) .
In both cases , as the valves close , the openings within the atrioventricular septum guarded by the valves will become reduced , and blood flow through the opening will become more turbulent until the valves are fully closed .
There is a third heart sound , S , but it is rarely heard in healthy individuals .
It may be the sound of blood flowing into the atria , or blood sloshing back and forth in the ventricle , or even tensing of the chordae tendineae .
S may be heard in youth , some athletes , and pregnant women .
If the sound is heard later in life , it may indicate congestive heart failure , warranting further tests .
Some cardiologists refer to the collective S , S , and S sounds as the “ Kentucky gallop , ” because they mimic those produced by a galloping horse .
The fourth heart sound , S , results from the contraction of the atria pushing blood into a stiff or hypertrophic ventricle , indicating failure of the left ventricle .
S occurs prior to S and the collective sounds S , S , and S are referred to by some cardiologists as the “ Tennessee gallop , ” because of their similarity to the sound produced by a galloping horse with a different gait .
A few individuals may have both S and S , and this combined sound is referred to as S .
The term murmur is used to describe an unusual sound coming from the heart that is caused by the turbulent flow of blood .
Murmurs are graded on a scale of 1 to 6 , with 1 being the most common , the most difficult sound to detect , and the least serious .
The most severe is a 6 .
Phonocardiograms or auscultograms can be used to record both normal and abnormal sounds using specialized electronic stethoscopes .
During auscultation , it is common practice for the clinician to ask the patient to breathe deeply .
This procedure not only allows for listening to airflow , but it may also amplify heart murmurs .
Inhalation increases blood flow into the right side of the heart and may increase the amplitude of right-sided heart murmurs .
Expiration partially restricts blood flow into the left side of the heart and may amplify left-sided heart murmurs .
Figure 19.30 indicates proper placement of the bell of the stethoscope to facilitate auscultation .
Neural and endocrine controls are vital to the regulation of cardiac function .
In addition , the heart is sensitive to several environmental factors , including electrolytes .
Cardiac output ( CO ) is a measurement of the amount of blood pumped by each ventricle in one minute .
To calculate this value , multiply stroke volume ( SV ) , the amount of blood pumped by each ventricle , by heart rate ( HR ) , in contractions per minute ( or beats per minute , bpm ) .
It can be represented mathematically by the following equation : CO = HR × SV SV is normally measured using an echocardiogram to record EDV and ESV , and calculating the difference : SV = EDV – ESV .
SV can also be measured using a specialized catheter , but this is an invasive procedure and far more dangerous to the patient .
A mean SV for a resting 70-kg ( 150-lb ) individual would be approximately 70 mL .
There are several important variables , including size of the heart , physical and mental condition of the individual , sex , contractility , duration of contraction , preload or EDV , and afterload or resistance .
Normal range for SV would be 55–100 mL .
An average resting HR would be approximately 75 bpm but could range from 60–100 in some individuals .
Using these numbers , the mean CO is 5.25 L/min , with a range of 4.0–8.0 L/min .
Remember , however , that these numbers refer to CO from each ventricle separately , not the total for the heart .
Factors influencing CO are summarized in Figure 19.31 .
SVs are also used to calculate ejection fraction , which is the portion of the blood that is pumped or ejected from the heart with each contraction .
To calculate ejection fraction , SV is divided by EDV .
Despite the name , the ejection fraction is normally expressed as a percentage .
Ejection fractions range from approximately 55–70 percent , with a mean of 58 percent .
In healthy young individuals , HR may increase to 150 bpm during exercise .
SV can also increase from 70 to approximately 130 mL due to increased strength of contraction .
This would increase CO to approximately 19.5 L/min , 4–5 times the resting rate .
Top cardiovascular athletes can achieve even higher levels .
At their peak performance , they may increase resting CO by 7–8 times .
Since the heart is a muscle , exercising it increases its efficiency .
The difference between maximum and resting CO is known as the cardiac reserve .
It measures the residual capacity of the heart to pump blood .
HRs vary considerably , not only with exercise and fitness levels , but also with age .
Newborn resting HRs may be 120 bpm .
HR gradually decreases until young adulthood and then gradually increases again with age .
Maximum HRs are normally in the range of 200–220 bpm , although there are some extreme cases in which they may reach higher levels .
As one ages , the ability to generate maximum rates decreases .
This may be estimated by taking the maximal value of 220 bpm and subtracting the individual ’ s age .
So a 40-year-old individual would be expected to hit a maximum rate of approximately 180 , and a 60-year-old person would achieve a HR of 160 .
For an adult , normal resting HR will be in the range of 60–100 bpm .
Bradycardia is the condition in which resting rate drops below 60 bpm , and tachycardia is the condition in which the resting rate is above 100 bpm .
Trained athletes typically have very low HRs .
If the patient is not exhibiting other symptoms , such as weakness , fatigue , dizziness , fainting , chest discomfort , palpitations , or respiratory distress , bradycardia is not considered clinically significant .
However , if any of these symptoms are present , they may indicate that the heart is not providing sufficient oxygenated blood to the tissues .
The term relative bradycardia may be used with a patient who has a HR in the normal range but is still suffering from these symptoms .
Most patients remain asymptomatic as long as the HR remains above 50 bpm .
Bradycardia may be caused by either inherent factors or causes external to the heart .
While the condition may be inherited , typically it is acquired in older individuals .
Inherent causes include abnormalities in either the SA or AV node .
If the condition is serious , a pacemaker may be required .
Other causes include ischemia to the heart muscle or diseases of the heart vessels or valves .
External causes include metabolic disorders , pathologies of the endocrine system often involving the thyroid , electrolyte imbalances , neurological disorders including inappropriate autonomic responses , autoimmune pathologies , over-prescription of beta blocker drugs that reduce HR , recreational drug use , or even prolonged bed rest .
Treatment relies upon establishing the underlying cause of the disorder and may necessitate supplemental oxygen .
Tachycardia is not normal in a resting patient but may be detected in pregnant women or individuals experiencing extreme stress .
In the latter case , it would likely be triggered by stimulation from the limbic system or disorders of the autonomic nervous system .
In some cases , tachycardia may involve only the atria .
Some individuals may remain asymptomatic , but when present , symptoms may include dizziness , shortness of breath , lightheadedness , rapid pulse , heart palpations , chest pain , or fainting ( syncope ) .
While tachycardia is defined as a HR above 100 bpm , there is considerable variation among people .
Elevated rates in an exercising or resting patient are normal and expected .
Resting rate should always be taken after recovery from exercise .
Treatment depends upon the underlying cause but may include medications , implantable cardioverter defibrillators , ablation , or surgery .
Initially , physiological conditions that cause HR to increase also trigger an increase in SV .
During exercise , the rate of blood returning to the heart increases .
However as the HR rises , there is less time spent in diastole and consequently less time for the ventricles to fill with blood .
Even though there is less filling time , SV will initially remain high .
However , as HR continues to increase , SV gradually decreases due to decreased filling time .
CO will initially stabilize as the increasing HR compensates for the decreasing SV , but at very high rates , CO will eventually decrease as increasing rates are no longer able to compensate for the decreasing SV .
Consider this phenomenon in a healthy young individual .
Initially , as HR increases from resting to approximately 120 bpm , CO will rise .
As HR increases from 120 to 160 bpm , CO remains stable , since the increase in rate is offset by decreasing ventricular filling time and , consequently , SV .
As HR continues to rise above 160 bpm , CO actually decreases as SV falls faster than HR increases .
So although aerobic exercises are critical to maintain the health of the heart , individuals are cautioned to monitor their HR to ensure they stay within the target heart rate range of between 120 and 160 bpm , so CO is maintained .
The target HR is loosely defined as the range in which both the heart and lungs receive the maximum benefit from the aerobic workout and is dependent upon age .
Nervous control over HR is centralized within the two paired cardiovascular centers of the medulla oblongata ( Figure 19.32 ) .
The cardioaccelerator regions stimulate activity via sympathetic stimulation of the cardioaccelerator nerves , and the cardioinhibitory centers decrease heart activity via parasympathetic stimulation as one component of the vagus nerve , cranial nerve X .
During rest , both centers provide slight stimulation to the heart , contributing to autonomic tone .
This is a similar concept to tone in skeletal muscles .
Normally , vagal stimulation predominates as , left unregulated , the SA node would initiate a sinus rhythm of approximately 100 bpm .
Both sympathetic and parasympathetic stimulations flow through a paired complex network of nerve fibers known as the cardiac plexus near the base of the heart .
The cardioaccelerator center also sends additional fibers , forming the cardiac nerves via sympathetic ganglia ( the cervical ganglia plus superior thoracic ganglia T1–T4 ) to both the SA and AV nodes , plus additional fibers to the atria and ventricles .
The ventricles are more richly innervated by sympathetic fibers than parasympathetic fibers .
Sympathetic stimulation causes the release of the neurotransmitter norepinephrine ( NE ) at the neuromuscular junction of the cardiac nerves .
NE shortens the repolarization period , thus speeding the rate of depolarization and contraction , which results in an increase in HR .
It opens chemicalor ligand-gated sodium and calcium ion channels , allowing an influx of positively charged ions .
NE binds to the beta-1 receptor .
Some cardiac medications ( for example , beta blockers ) work by blocking these receptors , thereby slowing HR and are one possible treatment for hypertension .
Overprescription of these drugs may lead to bradycardia and even stoppage of the heart .
Parasympathetic stimulation originates from the cardioinhibitory region with impulses traveling via the vagus nerve ( cranial nerve X ) .
The vagus nerve sends branches to both the SA and AV nodes , and to portions of both the atria and ventricles .
Parasympathetic stimulation releases the neurotransmitter acetylcholine ( ACh ) at the neuromuscular junction .
ACh slows HR by opening chemicalor ligand-gated potassium ion channels to slow the rate of spontaneous depolarization , which extends repolarization and increases the time before the next spontaneous depolarization occurs .
Without any nervous stimulation , the SA node would establish a sinus rhythm of approximately 100 bpm .
Since resting rates are considerably less than this , it becomes evident that parasympathetic stimulation normally slows HR .
This is similar to an individual driving a car with one foot on the brake pedal .
To speed up , one need merely remove one ’ s foot from the break and let the engine increase speed .
In the case of the heart , decreasing parasympathetic stimulation decreases the release of ACh , which allows HR to increase up to approximately 100 bpm .
Any increases beyond this rate would require sympathetic stimulation .
Figure 19.33 illustrates the effects of parasympathetic and sympathetic stimulation on the normal sinus rhythm .
The cardiovascular center receives input from a series of visceral receptors with impulses traveling through visceral sensory fibers within the vagus and sympathetic nerves via the cardiac plexus .
Among these receptors are various proprioreceptors , baroreceptors , and chemoreceptors , plus stimuli from the limbic system .
Collectively , these inputs normally enable the cardiovascular centers to regulate heart function precisely , a process known as cardiac reflexes .
Increased physical activity results in increased rates of firing by various proprioreceptors located in muscles , joint capsules , and tendons .
Any such increase in physical activity would logically warrant increased blood flow .
The cardiac centers monitor these increased rates of firing , and suppress parasympathetic stimulation and increase sympathetic stimulation as needed in order to increase blood flow .
Similarly , baroreceptors are stretch receptors located in the aortic sinus , carotid bodies , the venae cavae , and other locations , including pulmonary vessels and the right side of the heart itself .
Rates of firing from the baroreceptors represent blood pressure , level of physical activity , and the relative distribution of blood .
The cardiac centers monitor baroreceptor firing to maintain cardiac homeostasis , a mechanism called the baroreceptor reflex .
With increased pressure and stretch , the rate of baroreceptor firing increases , and the cardiac centers decrease sympathetic stimulation and increase parasympathetic stimulation .
As pressure and stretch decrease , the rate of baroreceptor firing decreases , and the cardiac centers increase sympathetic stimulation and decrease parasympathetic stimulation .
There is a similar reflex , called the atrial reflex or Bainbridge reflex , associated with varying rates of blood flow to the atria .
Increased venous return stretches the walls of the atria where specialized baroreceptors are located .
However , as the atrial baroreceptors increase their rate of firing and as they stretch due to the increased blood pressure , the cardiac center responds by increasing sympathetic stimulation and inhibiting parasympathetic stimulation to increase HR .
The opposite is also true .
Increased metabolic byproducts associated with increased activity , such as carbon dioxide , hydrogen ions , and lactic acid , plus falling oxygen levels , are detected by a suite of chemoreceptors innervated by the glossopharyngeal and vagus nerves .
These chemoreceptors provide feedback to the cardiovascular centers about the need for increased or decreased blood flow , based on the relative levels of these substances .
The limbic system can also significantly impact HR related to emotional state .
During periods of stress , it is not unusual to identify higher than normal HRs , often accompanied by a surge in the stress hormone cortisol .
Individuals experiencing extreme anxiety may manifest panic attacks with symptoms that resemble those of heart attacks .
These events are typically transient and treatable .
Meditation techniques have been developed to ease anxiety and have been shown to lower HR effectively .
Doing simple deep and slow breathing exercises with one ’ s eyes closed can also significantly reduce this anxiety and HR .
Extreme stress from such life events as the death of a loved one , an emotional break up , loss of income , or foreclosure of a home may lead to a condition commonly referred to as broken heart syndrome .
This condition may also be called Takotsubo cardiomyopathy , transient apical ballooning syndrome , apical ballooning cardiomyopathy , stress-induced cardiomyopathy , Gebrochenes-Herz syndrome , and stress cardiomyopathy .
The recognized effects on the heart include congestive heart failure due to a profound weakening of the myocardium not related to lack of oxygen .
This may lead to acute heart failure , lethal arrhythmias , or even the rupture of a ventricle .
The exact etiology is not known , but several factors have been suggested , including transient vasospasm , dysfunction of the cardiac capillaries , or thickening of the myocardium—particularly in the left ventricle—that may lead to the critical circulation of blood to this region .
While many patients survive the initial acute event with treatment to restore normal function , there is a strong correlation with death .
Using a combination of autorhythmicity and innervation , the cardiovascular center is able to provide relatively precise control over HR .
After reading this section , the importance of maintaining homeostasis should become even more apparent .
The catecholamines , epinephrine and NE , secreted by the adrenal medulla form one component of the extended fight-orflight mechanism .
The other component is sympathetic stimulation .
Epinephrine and NE have similar effects : binding to the beta-1 receptors , and opening sodium and calcium ion chemicalor ligand-gated channels .
The rate of depolarization is increased by this additional influx of positively charged ions , so the threshold is reached more quickly and the period of repolarization is shortened .
However , massive releases of these hormones coupled with sympathetic stimulation may actually lead to arrhythmias .
There is no parasympathetic stimulation to the adrenal medulla .
In general , increased levels of thyroid hormone , or thyroxin , increase cardiac rate and contractility .
The impact of thyroid hormone is typically of a much longer duration than that of the catecholamines .
The physiologically active form of thyroid hormone , T or triiodothyronine , has been shown to directly enter cardiomyocytes and alter activity at the level of the genome .
It also impacts the beta adrenergic response similar to epinephrine and NE described above .
Excessive levels of thyroxin may trigger tachycardia .
Calcium ion levels have great impacts upon both HR and contractility ; as the levels of calcium ions increase , so do HR and contractility .
High levels of calcium ions ( hypercalcemia ) may be implicated in a short QT interval and a widened T wave in the ECG .
The QT interval represents the time from the start of depolarization to repolarization of the ventricles , and includes the period of ventricular systole .
Extremely high levels of calcium may induce cardiac arrest .
Drugs known as calcium channel blockers slow HR by binding to these channels and blocking or slowing the inward movement of calcium ions .
Caffeine and nicotine are not found naturally within the body .
Both of these nonregulated drugs have an excitatory effect on membranes of neurons in general and have a stimulatory effect on the cardiac centers specifically , causing an increase in HR .
Caffeine works by increasing the rates of depolarization at the SA node , whereas nicotine stimulates the activity of the sympathetic neurons that deliver impulses to the heart .
Although it is the world ’ s most widely consumed psychoactive drug , caffeine is legal and not regulated .
While precise quantities have not been established , “ normal ” consumption is not considered harmful to most people , although it may cause disruptions to sleep and acts as a diuretic .
Its consumption by pregnant women is cautioned against , although no evidence of negative effects has been confirmed .
Tolerance and even physical and mental addiction to the drug result in individuals who routinely consume the substance .
Nicotine , too , is a stimulant and produces addiction .
While legal and nonregulated , concerns about nicotine ’ s safety and documented links to respiratory and cardiac disease have resulted in warning labels on cigarette packages .
HR can be slowed when a person experiences altered sodium and potassium levels , hypoxia , acidosis , alkalosis , and hypothermia ( see Table 19.1 ) .
The relationship between electrolytes and HR is complex , but maintaining electrolyte balance is critical to the normal wave of depolarization .
Of the two ions , potassium has the greater clinical significance .
Initially , both hyponatremia ( low sodium levels ) and hypernatremia ( high sodium levels ) may lead to tachycardia .
Severely high hypernatremia may lead to fibrillation , which may cause CO to cease .
Severe hyponatremia leads to both bradycardia and other arrhythmias .
Hypokalemia ( low potassium levels ) also leads to arrhythmias , whereas hyperkalemia ( high potassium levels ) causes the heart to become weak and flaccid , and ultimately to fail .
Acidosis is a condition in which excess hydrogen ions are present , and the patient ’ s blood expresses a low pH value .
Alkalosis is a condition in which there are too few hydrogen ions , and the patient ’ s blood has an elevated pH .
Normal blood pH falls in the range of 7.35–7.45 , so a number lower than this range represents acidosis and a higher number represents alkalosis .
Recall that enzymes are the regulators or catalysts of virtually all biochemical reactions ; they are sensitive to pH and will change shape slightly with values outside their normal range .
These variations in pH and accompanying slight physical changes to the active site on the enzyme decrease the rate of formation of the enzyme-substrate complex , subsequently decreasing the rate of many enzymatic reactions , which can have complex effects on HR .
Severe changes in pH will lead to denaturation of the enzyme .
The last variable is body temperature .
Elevated body temperature is called hyperthermia , and suppressed body temperature is called hypothermia .
Slight hyperthermia results in increasing HR and strength of contraction .
Hypothermia slows the rate and strength of heart contractions .
This distinct slowing of the heart is one component of the larger diving reflex that diverts blood to essential organs while submerged .
If sufficiently chilled , the heart will stop beating , a technique that may be employed during open heart surgery .
In this case , the patient ’ s blood is normally diverted to an artificial heart-lung machine to maintain the body ’ s blood supply and gas exchange until the surgery is complete , and sinus rhythm can be restored .
Excessive hyperthermia and hypothermia will both result in death , as enzymes drive the body systems to cease normal function , beginning with the central nervous system .
Many of the same factors that regulate HR also impact cardiac function by altering SV .
While a number of variables are involved , SV is ultimately dependent upon the difference between EDV and ESV .
These factors are summarized in Table 19.1 and Table 19.2 .
Preload is another way of expressing EDV .
Therefore , the greater the EDV is , the greater the preload is .
One of the primary factors to consider is filling time , or the duration of ventricular diastole during which filling occurs .
The more rapidly the heart contracts , the shorter the filling time becomes , and the lower the EDV and preload are .
This effect can be partially overcome by increasing the second variable , contractility , and raising SV , but over time , the heart is unable to compensate for decreased filling time , and preload also decreases .
With increasing ventricular filling , both EDV or preload increase , and the cardiac muscle itself is stretched to a greater degree .
At rest , there is little stretch of the ventricular muscle , and the sarcomeres remain short .
With increased ventricular filling , the ventricular muscle is increasingly stretched and the sarcomere length increases .
As the sarcomeres reach their optimal lengths , they will contract more powerfully , because more of the myosin heads can bind to the actin on the thin filaments , forming cross bridges and increasing the strength of contraction and SV .
If this process were to continue and the sarcomeres stretched beyond their optimal lengths , the force of contraction would decrease .
However , due to the physical constraints of the location of the heart , this excessive stretch is not a concern .
The relationship between ventricular stretch and contraction has been stated in the well-known Frank-Starling mechanism or simply Starling ’ s Law of the Heart .
This principle states that , within physiological limits , the force of heart contraction is directly proportional to the initial length of the muscle fiber .
This means that the greater the stretch of the ventricular muscle ( within limits ) , the more powerful the contraction is , which in turn increases SV .
Therefore , by increasing preload , you increase the second variable , contractility .
Otto Frank ( 1865–1944 ) was a German physiologist ; among his many published works are detailed studies of this important heart relationship .
Ernest Starling ( 1866–1927 ) was an important English physiologist who also studied the heart .
Although they worked largely independently , their combined efforts and similar conclusions have been recognized in the name “ Frank-Starling mechanism. ” Any sympathetic stimulation to the venous system will increase venous return to the heart , which contributes to ventricular filling , and EDV and preload .
While much of the ventricular filling occurs while both atria and ventricles are in diastole , the contraction of the atria , the atrial kick , plays a crucial role by providing the last 20–30 percent of ventricular filling .
It is virtually impossible to consider preload or ESV without including an early mention of the concept of contractility .
Indeed , the two parameters are intimately linked .
Contractility refers to the force of the contraction of the heart muscle , which controls SV , and is the primary parameter for impacting ESV .
The more forceful the contraction is , the greater the SV and smaller the ESV are .
Less forceful contractions result in smaller SVs and larger ESVs .
Factors that increase contractility are described as positive inotropic factors , and those that decrease contractility are described as negative inotropic factors ( ino= “ fiber ; ” -tropic = “ turning toward ” ) .
Not surprisingly , sympathetic stimulation is a positive inotrope , whereas parasympathetic stimulation is a negative inotrope .
Sympathetic stimulation triggers the release of NE at the neuromuscular junction from the cardiac nerves and also stimulates the adrenal cortex to secrete epinephrine and NE .
In addition to their stimulatory effects on HR , they also bind to both alpha and beta receptors on the cardiac muscle cell membrane to increase metabolic rate and the force of contraction .
This combination of actions has the net effect of increasing SV and leaving a smaller residual ESV in the ventricles .
In comparison , parasympathetic stimulation releases ACh at the neuromuscular junction from the vagus nerve .
The membrane hyperpolarizes and inhibits contraction to decrease the strength of contraction and SV , and to raise ESV .
Since parasympathetic fibers are more widespread in the atria than in the ventricles , the primary site of action is in the upper chambers .
Parasympathetic stimulation in the atria decreases the atrial kick and reduces EDV , which decreases ventricular stretch and preload , thereby further limiting the force of ventricular contraction .
Stronger parasympathetic stimulation also directly decreases the force of contraction of the ventricles .
Several synthetic drugs , including dopamine and isoproterenol , have been developed that mimic the effects of epinephrine and NE by stimulating the influx of calcium ions from the extracellular fluid .
Higher concentrations of intracellular calcium ions increase the strength of contraction .
Excess calcium ( hypercalcemia ) also acts as a positive inotropic agent .
The drug digitalis lowers HR and increases the strength of the contraction , acting as a positive inotropic agent by blocking the sequestering of calcium ions into the sarcoplasmic reticulum .
This leads to higher intracellular calcium levels and greater strength of contraction .
In addition to the catecholamines from the adrenal medulla , other hormones also demonstrate positive inotropic effects .
These include thyroid hormones and glucagon from the pancreas .
Negative inotropic agents include hypoxia , acidosis , hyperkalemia , and a variety of synthetic drugs .
These include numerous beta blockers and calcium channel blockers .
Early beta blocker drugs include propranolol and pronethalol , and are credited with revolutionizing treatment of cardiac patients experiencing angina pectoris .
There is also a large class of dihydropyridine , phenylalkylamine , and benzothiazepine calcium channel blockers that may be administered decreasing the strength of contraction and SV .
Afterload refers to the tension that the ventricles must develop to pump blood effectively against the resistance in the vascular system .
Any condition that increases resistance requires a greater afterload to force open the semilunar valves and pump the blood .
Damage to the valves , such as stenosis , which makes them harder to open will also increase afterload .
Any decrease in resistance decreases the afterload .
Figure 19.34 summarizes the major factors influencing SV , Figure 19.35 summarizes the major factors influencing CO , and Table 19.3 and Table 19.4 summarize cardiac responses to increased and decreased blood flow and pressure in order to restore homeostasis .
By the end of this section , you will be able to : Describe the embryological development of heart structures Relate fetal heart structures to adult counterparts Identify five regions of the fetal heart The human heart is the first functional organ to develop .
It begins beating and pumping blood around day 21 or 22 , a mere three weeks after fertilization .
This emphasizes the critical nature of the heart in distributing blood through the vessels and the vital exchange of nutrients , oxygen , and wastes both to and from the developing baby .
The critical early development of the heart is reflected by the prominent heart bulge that appears on the anterior surface of the embryo .
The heart forms from an embryonic tissue called mesoderm around 18 to 19 days after fertilization .
Mesoderm is one of the three primary germ layers that differentiates early in development that collectively gives rise to all subsequent tissues and organs .
The heart begins to develop near the head of the embryo in a region known as the cardiogenic area .
Following chemical signals called factors from the underlying endoderm ( another of the three primary germ layers ) , the cardiogenic area begins to form two strands called the cardiogenic cords ( Figure 19.36 ) .
As the cardiogenic cords develop , a lumen rapidly develops within them .
At this point , they are referred to as endocardial tubes .
The two tubes migrate together and fuse to form a single primitive heart tube .
The primitive heart tube quickly forms five distinct regions .
From head to tail , these include the truncus arteriosus , bulbus cordis , primitive ventricle , primitive atrium , and the sinus venosus .
Initially , all venous blood flows into the sinus venosus , and contractions propel the blood from tail to head , or from the sinus venosus to the truncus arteriosus .
This is a very different pattern from that of an adult .
The five regions of the primitive heart tube develop into recognizable structures in a fully developed heart .
The truncus arteriosus will eventually divide and give rise to the ascending aorta and pulmonary trunk .
The bulbus cordis develops into the right ventricle .
The primitive ventricle forms the left ventricle .
The primitive atrium becomes the anterior portions of both the right and left atria , and the two auricles .
The sinus venosus develops into the posterior portion of the right atrium , the SA node , and the coronary sinus .
As the primitive heart tube elongates , it begins to fold within the pericardium , eventually forming an S shape , which places the chambers and major vessels into an alignment similar to the adult heart .
This process occurs between days 23 and 28 .
The remainder of the heart development pattern includes development of septa and valves , and remodeling of the actual chambers .
Partitioning of the atria and ventricles by the interatrial septum , interventricular septum , and atrioventricular septum is complete by the end of the fifth week , although the fetal blood shunts remain until birth or shortly after .
The atrioventricular valves form between weeks five and eight , and the semilunar valves form between weeks five and nine .
When vessel functioning is reduced , blood-borne substances do not circulate effectively throughout the body .
As a result , tissue injury occurs , metabolism is impaired , and the functions of every bodily system are threatened .
An artery is a blood vessel that carries blood away from the heart , where it branches into ever-smaller vessels .
Arteries and veins transport blood in two distinct circuits : the systemic circuit and the pulmonary circuit ( Figure 20.2 ) .
Systemic arteries provide blood rich in oxygen to the body ’ s tissues .
The blood returned to the heart through systemic veins has less oxygen , since much of the oxygen carried by the arteries has been delivered to the cells .
In contrast , in the pulmonary circuit , arteries carry blood low in oxygen exclusively to the lungs for gas exchange .
Pulmonary veins then return freshly oxygenated blood from the lungs to the heart to be pumped back out into systemic circulation .
Although arteries and veins differ structurally and functionally , they share certain features .
Different types of blood vessels vary slightly in their structures , but they share the same general features .
Arteries and arterioles have thicker walls than veins and venules because they are closer to the heart and receive blood that is surging at a far greater pressure ( Figure 20.3 ) .
Each type of vessel has a lumen —a hollow passageway through which blood flows .
Arteries have smaller lumens than veins , a characteristic that helps to maintain the pressure of blood moving through the system .
Together , their thicker walls and smaller diameters give arterial lumens a more rounded appearance in cross section than the lumens of veins .
By the time blood has passed through capillaries and entered venules , the pressure initially exerted upon it by heart contractions has diminished .
In other words , in comparison to arteries , venules and veins withstand a much lower pressure from the blood that flows through them .
Their walls are considerably thinner and their lumens are correspondingly larger in diameter , allowing more blood to flow with less vessel resistance .
In addition , many veins of the body , particularly those of the limbs , contain valves that assist the unidirectional flow of blood toward the heart .
This is critical because blood flow becomes sluggish in the extremities , as a result of the lower pressure and the effects of gravity .
The walls of arteries and veins are largely composed of living cells and their products ( including collagenous and elastic fibers ) ; the cells require nourishment and produce waste .
Since blood passes through the larger vessels relatively quickly , there is limited opportunity for blood in the lumen of the vessel to provide nourishment to or remove waste from the vessel ’ s cells .
Further , the walls of the larger vessels are too thick for nutrients to diffuse through to all of the cells .
Larger arteries and veins contain small blood vessels within their walls known as the vasa vasorum —literally “ vessels of the vessel ” —to provide them with this critical exchange .
Since the pressure within arteries is relatively high , the vasa vasorum must function in the outer layers of the vessel ( see Figure 20.3 ) or the pressure exerted by the blood passing through the vessel would collapse it , preventing any exchange from occurring .
The lower pressure within veins allows the vasa vasorum to be located closer to the lumen .
The restriction of the vasa vasorum to the outer layers of arteries is thought to be one reason that arterial diseases are more common than venous diseases , since its location makes it more difficult to nourish the cells of the arteries and remove waste products .
There are also minute nerves within the walls of both types of vessels that control the contraction and dilation of smooth muscle .
These minute nerves are known as the nervi vasorum .
Both arteries and veins have the same three distinct tissue layers , called tunics ( from the Latin term tunica ) , for the garments first worn by ancient Romans ; the term tunic is also used for some modern garments .
From the most interior layer to the outer , these tunics are the tunica intima , the tunica media , and the tunica externa ( see Figure 20.3 ) .
Table 20.1 compares and contrasts the tunics of the arteries and veins .
The tunica intima ( also called the tunica interna ) is composed of epithelial and connective tissue layers .
Lining the tunica intima is the specialized simple squamous epithelium called the endothelium , which is continuous throughout the entire vascular system , including the lining of the chambers of the heart .
Damage to this endothelial lining and exposure of blood to the collagenous fibers beneath is one of the primary causes of clot formation .
Until recently , the endothelium was viewed simply as the boundary between the blood in the lumen and the walls of the vessels .
Recent studies , however , have shown that it is physiologically critical to such activities as helping to regulate capillary exchange and altering blood flow .
The endothelium releases local chemicals called endothelins that can constrict the smooth muscle within the walls of the vessel to increase blood pressure .
Uncompensated overproduction of endothelins may contribute to hypertension ( high blood pressure ) and cardiovascular disease .
Next to the endothelium is the basement membrane , or basal lamina , that effectively binds the endothelium to the connective tissue .
The basement membrane provides strength while maintaining flexibility , and it is permeable , allowing materials to pass through it .
The thin outer layer of the tunica intima contains a small amount of areolar connective tissue that consists primarily of elastic fibers to provide the vessel with additional flexibility ; it also contains some collagenous fibers to provide additional strength .
In larger arteries , there is also a thick , distinct layer of elastic fibers known as the internal elastic membrane ( also called the internal elastic lamina ) at the boundary with the tunica media .
Like the other components of the tunica intima , the internal elastic membrane provides structure while allowing the vessel to stretch .
It is permeated with small openings that allow exchange of materials between the tunics .
The internal elastic membrane is not apparent in veins .
In addition , many veins , particularly in the lower limbs , contain valves formed by sections of thickened endothelium that are reinforced with connective tissue , extending into the lumen .
Under the microscope , the lumen and the entire tunica intima of a vein will appear smooth , whereas those of an artery will normally appear wavy because of the partial constriction of the smooth muscle in the tunica media , the next layer of blood vessel walls .
The tunica media is the substantial middle layer of the vessel wall ( see Figure 20.3 ) .
It is generally the thickest layer in arteries , and it is much thicker in arteries than it is in veins .
The tunica media consists of layers of smooth muscle supported by connective tissue that is primarily made up of elastic fibers , most of which are arranged in circular sheets .
Toward the outer portion of the tunic , there are also layers of longitudinal muscle .
Contraction and relaxation of the circular muscles decrease and increase the diameter of the vessel lumen , respectively .
Specifically in arteries , vasoconstriction decreases blood flow as the smooth muscle in the walls of the tunica media contracts , making the lumen narrower and increasing blood pressure .
Similarly , vasodilation increases blood flow as the smooth muscle relaxes , allowing the lumen to widen and blood pressure to drop .
Both vasoconstriction and vasodilation are regulated in part by small vascular nerves , known as nervi vasorum , or “ nerves of the vessel , ” that run within the walls of blood vessels .
These are generally all sympathetic fibers , although some trigger vasodilation and others induce vasoconstriction , depending upon the nature of the neurotransmitter and receptors located on the target cell .
Parasympathetic stimulation does trigger vasodilation as well as erection during sexual arousal in the external genitalia of both sexes .
Nervous control over vessels tends to be more generalized than the specific targeting of individual blood vessels .
Local controls , discussed later , account for this phenomenon .
( Seek additional content for more information on these dynamic aspects of the autonomic nervous system . )
Hormones and local chemicals also control blood vessels .
Together , these neural and chemical mechanisms reduce or increase blood flow in response to changing body conditions , from exercise to hydration .
Regulation of both blood flow and blood pressure is discussed in detail later in this chapter .
The smooth muscle layers of the tunica media are supported by a framework of collagenous fibers that also binds the tunica media to the inner and outer tunics .
Along with the collagenous fibers are large numbers of elastic fibers that appear as wavy lines in prepared slides .
Separating the tunica media from the outer tunica externa in larger arteries is the external elastic membrane ( also called the external elastic lamina ) , which also appears wavy in slides .
This structure is not usually seen in smaller arteries , nor is it seen in veins .
The outer tunic , the tunica externa ( also called the tunica adventitia ) , is a substantial sheath of connective tissue composed primarily of collagenous fibers .
Some bands of elastic fibers are found here as well .
The tunica externa in veins also contains groups of smooth muscle fibers .
This is normally the thickest tunic in veins and may be thicker than the tunica media in some larger arteries .
The outer layers of the tunica externa are not distinct but rather blend with the surrounding connective tissue outside the vessel , helping to hold the vessel in relative position .
If you are able to palpate some of the superficial veins on your upper limbs and try to move them , you will find that the tunica externa prevents this .
If the tunica externa did not hold the vessel in place , any movement would likely result in disruption of blood flow .
An artery is a blood vessel that conducts blood away from the heart .
All arteries have relatively thick walls that can withstand the high pressure of blood ejected from the heart .
However , those close to the heart have the thickest walls , containing a high percentage of elastic fibers in all three of their tunics .
This type of artery is known as an elastic artery ( Figure 20.4 ) .
Vessels larger than 10 mm in diameter are typically elastic .
Their abundant elastic fibers allow them to expand , as blood pumped from the ventricles passes through them , and then to recoil after the surge has passed .
Artery walls would have to become even thicker in response to this increased pressure .
The elastic recoil of the vascular wall helps to maintain the pressure gradient that drives the blood through the arterial system .
An elastic artery is also known as a conducting artery , because the large diameter of the lumen enables it to accept a large volume of blood from the heart and conduct it to smaller branches .
Farther from the heart , where the surge of blood has dampened , the percentage of elastic fibers in an artery ’ s tunica intima decreases and the amount of smooth muscle in its tunica media increases .
The artery at this point is described as a muscular artery .
The diameter of muscular arteries typically ranges from 0.1 mm to 10 mm .
Their thick tunica media allows muscular arteries to play a leading role in vasoconstriction .
In contrast , their decreased quantity of elastic fibers limits their ability to expand .
Fortunately , because the blood pressure has eased by the time it reaches these more distant vessels , elasticity has become less important .
Notice that although the distinctions between elastic and muscular arteries are important , there is no “ line of demarcation ” where an elastic artery suddenly becomes muscular .
Rather , there is a gradual transition as the vascular tree repeatedly branches .
In turn , muscular arteries branch to distribute blood to the vast network of arterioles .
For this reason , a muscular artery is also known as a distributing artery .
An arteriole is a very small artery that leads to a capillary .
Arterioles have the same three tunics as the larger vessels , but the thickness of each is greatly diminished .
The critical endothelial lining of the tunica intima is intact .
The tunica media is restricted to one or two smooth muscle cell layers in thickness .
The tunica externa remains but is very thin ( see Figure 20.4 ) .
With a lumen averaging 30 micrometers or less in diameter , arterioles are critical in slowing down—or resisting—blood flow and , thus , causing a substantial drop in blood pressure .
Because of this , you may see them referred to as resistance vessels .
The muscle fibers in arterioles are normally slightly contracted , causing arterioles to maintain a consistent muscle tone—in this case referred to as vascular tone—in a similar manner to the muscular tone of skeletal muscle .
In reality , all blood vessels exhibit vascular tone due to the partial contraction of smooth muscle .
The importance of the arterioles is that they will be the primary site of both resistance and regulation of blood pressure .
The precise diameter of the lumen of an arteriole at any given moment is determined by neural and chemical controls , and vasoconstriction and vasodilation in the arterioles are the primary mechanisms for distribution of blood flow .
A capillary is a microscopic channel that supplies blood to the tissues themselves , a process called perfusion .
Exchange of gases and other substances occurs in the capillaries between the blood and the surrounding cells and their tissue fluid ( interstitial fluid ) .
The diameter of a capillary lumen ranges from 5–10 micrometers ; the smallest are just barely wide enough for an erythrocyte to squeeze through .
Flow through capillaries is often described as microcirculation .
The wall of a capillary consists of the endothelial layer surrounded by a basement membrane with occasional smooth muscle fibers .
There is some variation in wall structure : In a large capillary , several endothelial cells bordering each other may line the lumen ; in a small capillary , there may be only a single cell layer that wraps around to contact itself .
For capillaries to function , their walls must be leaky , allowing substances to pass through .
There are three major types of capillaries , which differ according to their degree of “ leakiness : ” continuous , fenestrated , and sinusoid capillaries ( Figure 20.5 ) .
The most common type of capillary , the continuous capillary , is found in almost all vascularized tissues .
Continuous capillaries are characterized by a complete endothelial lining with tight junctions between endothelial cells .
Although a tight junction is usually impermeable and only allows for the passage of water and ions , they are often incomplete in capillaries , leaving intercellular clefts that allow for exchange of water and other very small molecules between the blood plasma and the interstitial fluid .
Substances that can pass between cells include metabolic products , such as glucose , water , and small hydrophobic molecules like gases and hormones , as well as various leukocytes .
Continuous capillaries not associated with the brain are rich in transport vesicles , contributing to either endocytosis or exocytosis .
Those in the brain are part of the blood-brain barrier .
Here , there are tight junctions and no intercellular clefts , plus a thick basement membrane and astrocyte extensions called end feet ; these structures combine to prevent the movement of nearly all substances .
A fenestrated capillary is one that has pores ( or fenestrations ) in addition to tight junctions in the endothelial lining .
These make the capillary permeable to larger molecules .
The number of fenestrations and their degree of permeability vary , however , according to their location .
Fenestrated capillaries are common in the small intestine , which is the primary site of nutrient absorption , as well as in the kidneys , which filter the blood .
They are also found in the choroid plexus of the brain and many endocrine structures , including the hypothalamus , pituitary , pineal , and thyroid glands .
A sinusoid capillary ( or sinusoid ) is the least common type of capillary .
Sinusoid capillaries are flattened , and they have extensive intercellular gaps and incomplete basement membranes , in addition to intercellular clefts and fenestrations .
This gives them an appearance not unlike Swiss cheese .
These very large openings allow for the passage of the largest molecules , including plasma proteins and even cells .
Blood flow through sinusoids is very slow , allowing more time for exchange of gases , nutrients , and wastes .
Sinusoids are found in the liver and spleen , bone marrow , lymph nodes ( where they carry lymph , not blood ) , and many endocrine glands including the pituitary and adrenal glands .
Without these specialized capillaries , these organs would not be able to provide their myriad of functions .
For example , when bone marrow forms new blood cells , the cells must enter the blood supply and can only do so through the large openings of a sinusoid capillary ; they can not pass through the small openings of continuous or fenestrated capillaries .
The liver also requires extensive specialized sinusoid capillaries in order to process the materials brought to it by the hepatic portal vein from both the digestive tract and spleen , and to release plasma proteins into circulation .
A metarteriole is a type of vessel that has structural characteristics of both an arteriole and a capillary .
Slightly larger than the typical capillary , the smooth muscle of the tunica media of the metarteriole is not continuous but forms rings of smooth muscle ( sphincters ) prior to the entrance to the capillaries .
Each metarteriole arises from a terminal arteriole and branches to supply blood to a capillary bed that may consist of 10–100 capillaries .
The precapillary sphincters , circular smooth muscle cells that surround the capillary at its origin with the metarteriole , tightly regulate the flow of blood from a metarteriole to the capillaries it supplies .
Normally , the precapillary sphincters are closed .
When the surrounding tissues need oxygen and have excess waste products , the precapillary sphincters open , allowing blood to flow through and exchange to occur before closing once more ( Figure 20.6 ) .
If all of the precapillary sphincters in a capillary bed are closed , blood will flow from the metarteriole directly into a thoroughfare channel and then into the venous circulation , bypassing the capillary bed entirely .
This creates what is known as a vascular shunt .
In addition , an arteriovenous anastomosis may bypass the capillary bed and lead directly to the venous system .
Although you might expect blood flow through a capillary bed to be smooth , in reality , it moves with an irregular , pulsating flow .
This pattern is called vasomotion and is regulated by chemical signals that are triggered in response to changes in internal conditions , such as oxygen , carbon dioxide , hydrogen ion , and lactic acid levels .
During sleep or rest periods , vessels in both areas are largely closed ; they open only occasionally to allow oxygen and nutrient supplies to travel to the tissues to maintain basic life processes .
A venule is an extremely small vein , generally 8–100 micrometers in diameter .
Postcapillary venules join multiple capillaries exiting from a capillary bed .
Multiple venules join to form veins .
The walls of venules consist of endothelium , a thin middle layer with a few muscle cells and elastic fibers , plus an outer layer of connective tissue fibers that constitute a very thin tunica externa ( Figure 20.7 ) .
Venules as well as capillaries are the primary sites of emigration or diapedesis , in which the white blood cells adhere to the endothelial lining of the vessels and then squeeze through adjacent cells to enter the tissue fluid .
A vein is a blood vessel that conducts blood toward the heart .
Compared to arteries , veins are thin-walled vessels with large and irregular lumens ( see Figure 20.7 ) .
Because they are low-pressure vessels , larger veins are commonly equipped with valves that promote the unidirectional flow of blood toward the heart and prevent backflow toward the capillaries caused by the inherent low blood pressure in veins as well as the pull of gravity .
Table 20.2 compares the features of arteries and veins .
Despite the presence of valves and the contributions of other anatomical and physiological adaptations we will cover shortly , over the course of a day , some blood will inevitably pool , especially in the lower limbs , due to the pull of gravity .
Any blood that accumulates in a vein will increase the pressure within it , which can then be reflected back into the smaller veins , venules , and eventually even the capillaries .
Increased pressure will promote the flow of fluids out of the capillaries and into the interstitial fluid .
The presence of excess tissue fluid around the cells leads to a condition called edema .
Most people experience a daily accumulation of tissue fluid , especially if they spend much of their work life on their feet ( like most health professionals ) .
However , clinical edema goes beyond normal swelling and requires medical treatment .
Edema has many potential causes , including hypertension and heart failure , severe protein deficiency , renal failure , and many others .
In order to treat edema , which is a sign rather than a discrete disorder , the underlying cause must be diagnosed and alleviated .
Edema may be accompanied by varicose veins , especially in the superficial veins of the legs ( Figure 20.8 ) .
This disorder arises when defective valves allow blood to accumulate within the veins , causing them to distend , twist , and become visible on the surface of the integument .
Varicose veins may occur in both sexes , but are more common in women and are often related to pregnancy .
More than simple cosmetic blemishes , varicose veins are often painful and sometimes itchy or throbbing .
Without treatment , they tend to grow worse over time .
The use of support hose , as well as elevating the feet and legs whenever possible , may be helpful in alleviating this condition .
Laser surgery and interventional radiologic procedures can reduce the size and severity of varicose veins .
Severe cases may require conventional surgery to remove the damaged vessels .
As there are typically redundant circulation patterns , that is , anastomoses , for the smaller and more superficial veins , removal does not typically impair the circulation .
There is evidence that patients with varicose veins suffer a greater risk of developing a thrombus or clot .
In addition to their primary function of returning blood to the heart , veins may be considered blood reservoirs , since systemic veins contain approximately 64 percent of the blood volume at any given time ( Figure 20.9 ) .
Their ability to hold this much blood is due to their high capacitance , that is , their capacity to distend ( expand ) readily to store a high volume of blood , even at a low pressure .
The large lumens and relatively thin walls of veins make them far more distensible than arteries ; thus , they are said to be capacitance vessels .
When blood flow needs to be redistributed to other portions of the body , the vasomotor center located in the medulla oblongata sends sympathetic stimulation to the smooth muscles in the walls of the veins , causing constriction—or in this case , venoconstriction .
Less dramatic than the vasoconstriction seen in smaller arteries and arterioles , venoconstriction may be likened to a “ stiffening ” of the vessel wall .
This increases pressure on the blood within the veins , speeding its return to the heart .
As you will note in Figure 20.9 , approximately 21 percent of the venous blood is located in venous networks within the liver , bone marrow , and integument .
This volume of blood is referred to as venous reserve .
Through venoconstriction , this “ reserve ” volume of blood can get back to the heart more quickly for redistribution to other parts of the circulation .
Vascular surgery is a specialty in which the physician deals primarily with diseases of the vascular portion of the cardiovascular system .
This includes repair and replacement of diseased or damaged vessels , removal of plaque from vessels , minimally invasive procedures including the insertion of venous catheters , and traditional surgery .
Following completion of medical school , the physician generally completes a 5-year surgical residency followed by an additional 1 to 2 years of vascular specialty training .
In the United States , most vascular surgeons are members of the Society of Vascular Surgery .
Vascular technicians are specialists in imaging technologies that provide information on the health of the vascular system .
They may also assist physicians in treating disorders involving the arteries and veins .
This profession often overlaps with cardiovascular technology , which would also include treatments involving the heart .
Although recognized by the American Medical Association , there are currently no licensing requirements for vascular technicians , and licensing is voluntary .
Vascular technicians typically have an Associate ’ s degree or certificate , involving 18 months to 2 years of training .
The United States Bureau of Labor projects this profession to grow by 29 percent from 2010 to 2020 .
Visit this site ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/vascsurgery ) to learn more about vascular surgery .
Visit this site ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/vasctechs ) to learn more about vascular technicians .
It is initiated by the contraction of the ventricles of the heart .
Ventricular contraction ejects blood into the major arteries , resulting in flow from regions of higher pressure to regions of lower pressure , as blood encounters smaller arteries and arterioles , then capillaries , then the venules and veins of the venous system .
This section discusses a number of critical variables that contribute to blood flow throughout the body .
It also discusses the factors that impede or slow blood flow , a phenomenon known as resistance .
As noted earlier , hydrostatic pressure is the force exerted by a fluid due to gravitational pull , usually against the wall of the container in which it is located .
One form of hydrostatic pressure is blood pressure , the force exerted by blood upon the walls of the blood vessels or the chambers of the heart .
In clinical practice , this pressure is measured in mm Hg and is usually obtained using the brachial artery of the arm .
Arterial blood pressure in the larger vessels consists of several distinct components ( Figure 20.10 ) : systolic and diastolic pressures , pulse pressure , and mean arterial pressure .
When systemic arterial blood pressure is measured , it is recorded as a ratio of two numbers ( e.g. , 120/80 is a normal adult blood pressure ) , expressed as systolic pressure over diastolic pressure .
The systolic pressure is the higher value ( typically around 120 mm Hg ) and reflects the arterial pressure resulting from the ejection of blood during ventricular contraction , or systole .
The diastolic pressure is the lower value ( usually about 80 mm Hg ) and represents the arterial pressure of blood during ventricular relaxation , or diastole .
As shown in Figure 20.10 , the difference between the systolic pressure and the diastolic pressure is the pulse pressure .
For example , an individual with a systolic pressure of 120 mm Hg and a diastolic pressure of 80 mm Hg would have a pulse pressure of 40 mmHg .
Generally , a pulse pressure should be at least 25 percent of the systolic pressure .
A pulse pressure below this level is described as low or narrow .
This may occur , for example , in patients with a low stroke volume , which may be seen in congestive heart failure , stenosis of the aortic valve , or significant blood loss following trauma .
In contrast , a high or wide pulse pressure is common in healthy people following strenuous exercise , when their resting pulse pressure of 30–40 mm Hg may increase temporarily to 100 mm Hg as stroke volume increases .
A persistently high pulse pressure at or above 100 mm Hg may indicate excessive resistance in the arteries and can be caused by a variety of disorders .
Chronic high resting pulse pressures can degrade the heart , brain , and kidneys , and warrant medical treatment .
Mean arterial pressure ( MAP ) represents the “ average ” pressure of blood in the arteries , that is , the average force driving blood into vessels that serve the tissues .
Mean is a statistical concept and is calculated by taking the sum of the values divided by the number of values .
Normally , the MAP falls within the range of 70–110 mm Hg .
If the value falls below 60 mm Hg for an extended time , blood pressure will not be high enough to ensure circulation to and through the tissues , which results in ischemia , or insufficient blood flow .
A condition called hypoxia , inadequate oxygenation of tissues , commonly accompanies ischemia .
The term hypoxemia refers to low levels of oxygen in systemic arterial blood .
Neurons are especially sensitive to hypoxia and may die or be damaged if blood flow and oxygen supplies are not quickly restored .
After blood is ejected from the heart , elastic fibers in the arteries help maintain a high-pressure gradient as they expand to accommodate the blood , then recoil .
This expansion and recoiling effect , known as the pulse , can be palpated manually or measured electronically .
Although the effect diminishes over distance from the heart , elements of the systolic and diastolic components of the pulse are still evident down to the level of the arterioles .
Because pulse indicates heart rate , it is measured clinically to provide clues to a patient ’ s state of health .
It is recorded as beats per minute .
Both the rate and the strength of the pulse are important clinically .
A high or irregular pulse rate can be caused by physical activity or other temporary factors , but it may also indicate a heart condition .
The pulse strength indicates the strength of ventricular contraction and cardiac output .
If the pulse is strong , then systolic pressure is high .
If it is weak , systolic pressure has fallen , and medical intervention may be warranted .
Pulse can be palpated manually by placing the tips of the fingers across an artery that runs close to the body surface and pressing lightly .
While this procedure is normally performed using the radial artery in the wrist or the common carotid artery in the neck , any superficial artery that can be palpated may be used ( Figure 20.11 ) .
A variety of commercial electronic devices are also available to measure pulse .
Blood pressure is one of the critical parameters measured on virtually every patient in every healthcare setting .
The technique used today was developed more than 100 years ago by a pioneering Russian physician , Dr. Nikolai Korotkoff .
Turbulent blood flow through the vessels can be heard as a soft ticking while measuring blood pressure ; these sounds are known as Korotkoff sounds .
The technique of measuring blood pressure requires the use of a sphygmomanometer ( a blood pressure cuff attached to a measuring device ) and a stethoscope .
The technique is as follows : The clinician wraps an inflatable cuff tightly around the patient ’ s arm at about the level of the heart .
The clinician squeezes a rubber pump to inject air into the cuff , raising pressure around the artery and temporarily cutting off blood flow into the patient ’ s arm .
The clinician places the stethoscope on the patient ’ s antecubital region and , while gradually allowing air within the cuff to escape , listens for the Korotkoff sounds .
Although there are five recognized Korotkoff sounds , only two are normally recorded .
Initially , no sounds are heard since there is no blood flow through the vessels , but as air pressure drops , the cuff relaxes , and blood flow returns to the arm .
As shown in Figure 20.12 , the first sound heard through the stethoscope—the first Korotkoff sound—indicates systolic pressure .
As more air is released from the cuff , blood is able to flow freely through the brachial artery and all sounds disappear .
The point at which the last sound is heard is recorded as the patient ’ s diastolic pressure .
The majority of hospitals and clinics have automated equipment for measuring blood pressure that work on the same principles .
An even more recent innovation is a small instrument that wraps around a patient ’ s wrist .
The patient then holds the wrist over the heart while the device measures blood flow and records pressure .
Five variables influence blood flow and blood pressure : Cardiac output Compliance Volume of the blood Viscosity of the blood Blood vessel length and diameter Recall that blood moves from higher pressure to lower pressure .
It is pumped from the heart into the arteries at high pressure .
If you increase pressure in the arteries ( afterload ) , and cardiac function does not compensate , blood flow will actually decrease .
In the venous system , the opposite relationship is true .
Increased pressure in the veins does not decrease flow as it does in arteries , but actually increases flow .
Since pressure in the veins is normally relatively low , for blood to flow back into the heart , the pressure in the atria during atrial diastole must be even lower .
It normally approaches zero , except when the atria contract ( see Figure 20.10 ) .
Cardiac output is the measurement of blood flow from the heart through the ventricles , and is usually measured in liters per minute .
Any factor that causes cardiac output to increase , by elevating heart rate or stroke volume or both , will elevate blood pressure and promote blood flow .
These factors include sympathetic stimulation , the catecholamines epinephrine and norepinephrine , thyroid hormones , and increased calcium ion levels .
Conversely , any factor that decreases cardiac output , by decreasing heart rate or stroke volume or both , will decrease arterial pressure and blood flow .
These factors include parasympathetic stimulation , elevated or decreased potassium ion levels , decreased calcium levels , anoxia , and acidosis .
Compliance is the ability of any compartment to expand to accommodate increased content .
A metal pipe , for example , is not compliant , whereas a balloon is .
The greater the compliance of an artery , the more effectively it is able to expand to accommodate surges in blood flow without increased resistance or blood pressure .
Veins are more compliant than arteries and can expand to hold more blood .
When vascular disease causes stiffening of arteries , compliance is reduced and resistance to blood flow is increased .
The result is more turbulence , higher pressure within the vessel , and reduced blood flow .
This increases the work of the heart .
Jean Louis Marie Poiseuille was a French physician and physiologist who devised a mathematical equation describing blood flow and its relationship to known parameters .
The same equation also applies to engineering studies of the flow of fluids .
Although understanding the math behind the relationships among the factors affecting blood flow is not necessary to understand blood flow , it can help solidify an understanding of their relationships .
Please note that even if the equation looks intimidating , breaking it down into its components and following the relationships will make these relationships clearer , even if you are weak in math .
Focus on the three critical variables : radius ( r ) , vessel length ( λ ) , and viscosity ( η ) .
Poiseuille ’ s equation : π is the Greek letter pi , used to represent the mathematical constant that is the ratio of a circle ’ s circumference to its diameter .
It may commonly be represented as 3.14 , although the actual number extends to infinity .
ΔP represents the difference in pressure .
r is the radius ( one-half of the diameter ) of the vessel to the fourth power .
η is the Greek letter eta and represents the viscosity of the blood .
λ is the Greek letter lambda and represents the length of a blood vessel .
One of several things this equation allows us to do is calculate the resistance in the vascular system .
The important thing to remember is this : Two of these variables , viscosity and vessel length , will change slowly in the body .
Only one of these factors , the radius , can be changed rapidly by vasoconstriction and vasodilation , thus dramatically impacting resistance and flow .
Further , small changes in the radius will greatly affect flow , since it is raised to the fourth power in the equation .
The relationship between blood volume , blood pressure , and blood flow is intuitively obvious .
Water may merely trickle along a creek bed in a dry season , but rush quickly and under great pressure after a heavy rain .
Similarly , as blood volume decreases , pressure and flow decrease .
As blood volume increases , pressure and flow increase .
Under normal circumstances , blood volume varies little .
Low blood volume , called hypovolemia , may be caused by bleeding , dehydration , vomiting , severe burns , or some medications used to treat hypertension .
It is important to recognize that other regulatory mechanisms in the body are so effective at maintaining blood pressure that an individual may be asymptomatic until 10–20 percent of the blood volume has been lost .
Treatment typically includes intravenous fluid replacement .
Hypervolemia , excessive fluid volume , may be caused by retention of water and sodium , as seen in patients with heart failure , liver cirrhosis , some forms of kidney disease , hyperaldosteronism , and some glucocorticoid steroid treatments .
Restoring homeostasis in these patients depends upon reversing the condition that triggered the hypervolemia .
Viscosity is the thickness of fluids that affects their ability to flow .
Clean water , for example , is less viscous than mud .
The viscosity of blood is directly proportional to resistance and inversely proportional to flow ; therefore , any condition that causes viscosity to increase will also increase resistance and decrease flow .
For example , imagine sipping milk , then a milkshake , through the same size straw .
You experience more resistance and therefore less flow from the milkshake .
Conversely , any condition that causes viscosity to decrease ( such as when the milkshake melts ) will decrease resistance and increase flow .
Normally the viscosity of blood does not change over short periods of time .
The two primary determinants of blood viscosity are the formed elements and plasma proteins .
Since the vast majority of formed elements are erythrocytes , any condition affecting erythropoiesis , such as polycythemia or anemia , can alter viscosity .
Since most plasma proteins are produced by the liver , any condition affecting liver function can also change the viscosity slightly and therefore alter blood flow .
Liver abnormalities such as hepatitis , cirrhosis , alcohol damage , and drug toxicities result in decreased levels of plasma proteins , which decrease blood viscosity .
While leukocytes and platelets are normally a small component of the formed elements , there are some rare conditions in which severe overproduction can impact viscosity as well .
The length of a vessel is directly proportional to its resistance : the longer the vessel , the greater the resistance and the lower the flow .
As with blood volume , this makes intuitive sense , since the increased surface area of the vessel will impede the flow of blood .
Likewise , if the vessel is shortened , the resistance will decrease and flow will increase .
The length of our blood vessels increases throughout childhood as we grow , of course , but is unchanging in adults under normal physiological circumstances .
Further , the distribution of vessels is not the same in all tissues .
Adipose tissue does not have an extensive vascular supply .
One pound of adipose tissue contains approximately 200 miles of vessels , whereas skeletal muscle contains more than twice that .
Overall , vessels decrease in length only during loss of mass or amputation .
An individual weighing 150 pounds has approximately 60,000 miles of vessels in the body .
Gaining about 10 pounds adds from 2000 to 4000 miles of vessels , depending upon the nature of the gained tissue .
One of the great benefits of weight reduction is the reduced stress to the heart , which does not have to overcome the resistance of as many miles of vessels .
In contrast to length , the diameter of blood vessels changes throughout the body , according to the type of vessel , as we discussed earlier .
The diameter of any given vessel may also change frequently throughout the day in response to neural and chemical signals that trigger vasodilation and vasoconstriction .
The vascular tone of the vessel is the contractile state of the smooth muscle and the primary determinant of diameter , and thus of resistance and flow .
The effect of vessel diameter on resistance is inverse : Given the same volume of blood , an increased diameter means there is less blood contacting the vessel wall , thus lower friction and lower resistance , subsequently increasing flow .
A decreased diameter means more of the blood contacts the vessel wall , and resistance increases , subsequently decreasing flow .
The influence of lumen diameter on resistance is dramatic : A slight increase or decrease in diameter causes a huge decrease or increase in resistance .
This is because resistance is inversely proportional to the radius of the blood vessel ( one-half of the vessel ’ s diameter ) raised to the fourth power ( R = 1/r ) .
This means , for example , that if an artery or arteriole constricts to one-half of its original radius , the resistance to flow will increase 16 times .
And if an artery or arteriole dilates to twice its initial radius , then resistance in the vessel will decrease to 1/16 of its original value and flow will increase 16 times .
Recall that we classified arterioles as resistance vessels , because given their small lumen , they dramatically slow the flow of blood from arteries .
In fact , arterioles are the site of greatest resistance in the entire vascular network .
This may seem surprising , given that capillaries have a smaller size .
How can this phenomenon be explained ?
Figure 20.13 compares vessel diameter , total cross-sectional area , average blood pressure , and blood velocity through the systemic vessels .
Notice in parts ( a ) and ( b ) that the total cross-sectional area of the body ’ s capillary beds is far greater than any other type of vessel .
Although the diameter of an individual capillary is significantly smaller than the diameter of an arteriole , there are vastly more capillaries in the body than there are other types of blood vessels .
Part ( c ) shows that blood pressure drops unevenly as blood travels from arteries to arterioles , capillaries , venules , and veins , and encounters greater resistance .
However , the site of the most precipitous drop , and the site of greatest resistance , is the arterioles .
This explains why vasodilation and vasoconstriction of arterioles play more significant roles in regulating blood pressure than do the vasodilation and vasoconstriction of other vessels .
Part ( d ) shows that the velocity ( speed ) of blood flow decreases dramatically as the blood moves from arteries to arterioles to capillaries .
This slow flow rate allows more time for exchange processes to occur .
As blood flows through the veins , the rate of velocity increases , as blood is returned to the heart .
Compliance allows an artery to expand when blood is pumped through it from the heart , and then to recoil after the surge has passed .
This helps promote blood flow .
In arteriosclerosis , compliance is reduced , and pressure and resistance within the vessel increase .
This is a leading cause of hypertension and coronary heart disease , as it causes the heart to work harder to generate a pressure great enough to overcome the resistance .
Arteriosclerosis begins with injury to the endothelium of an artery , which may be caused by irritation from high blood glucose , infection , tobacco use , excessive blood lipids , and other factors .
Artery walls that are constantly stressed by blood flowing at high pressure are also more likely to be injured—which means that hypertension can promote arteriosclerosis , as well as result from it .
Recall that tissue injury causes inflammation .
As inflammation spreads into the artery wall , it weakens and scars it , leaving it stiff ( sclerotic ) .
As a result , compliance is reduced .
Moreover , circulating triglycerides and cholesterol can seep between the damaged lining cells and become trapped within the artery wall , where they are frequently joined by leukocytes , calcium , and cellular debris .
Eventually , this buildup , called plaque , can narrow arteries enough to impair blood flow .
The term for this condition , atherosclerosis ( athero= “ porridge ” ) describes the mealy deposits ( Figure 20.14 ) .
Sometimes a plaque can rupture , causing microscopic tears in the artery wall that allow blood to leak into the tissue on the other side .
When this happens , platelets rush to the site to clot the blood .
This clot can further obstruct the artery and—if it occurs in a coronary or cerebral artery—cause a sudden heart attack or stroke .
Alternatively , plaque can break off and travel through the bloodstream as an embolus until it blocks a more distant , smaller artery .
Even without total blockage , vessel narrowing leads to ischemia—reduced blood flow—to the tissue region “ downstream ” of the narrowed vessel .
Ischemia in turn leads to hypoxia—decreased supply of oxygen to the tissues .
Hypoxia involving cardiac muscle or brain tissue can lead to cell death and severe impairment of brain or heart function .
A major risk factor for both arteriosclerosis and atherosclerosis is advanced age , as the conditions tend to progress over time .
Arteriosclerosis is normally defined as the more generalized loss of compliance , “ hardening of the arteries , ” whereas atherosclerosis is a more specific term for the build-up of plaque in the walls of the vessel and is a specific type of arteriosclerosis .
There is also a distinct genetic component , and pre-existing hypertension and/or diabetes also greatly increase the risk .
However , obesity , poor nutrition , lack of physical activity , and tobacco use all are major risk factors .
Treatment includes lifestyle changes , such as weight loss , smoking cessation , regular exercise , and adoption of a diet low in sodium and saturated fats .
Medications to reduce cholesterol and blood pressure may be prescribed .
For blocked coronary arteries , surgery is warranted .
In angioplasty , a catheter is inserted into the vessel at the point of narrowing , and a second catheter with a balloon-like tip is inflated to widen the opening .
To prevent subsequent collapse of the vessel , a small mesh tube called a stent is often inserted .
In an endarterectomy , plaque is surgically removed from the walls of a vessel .
This operation is typically performed on the carotid arteries of the neck , which are a prime source of oxygenated blood for the brain .
In a coronary bypass procedure , a non-vital superficial vessel from another part of the body ( often the great saphenous vein ) or a synthetic vessel is inserted to create a path around the blocked area of a coronary artery .
The pumping action of the heart propels the blood into the arteries , from an area of higher pressure toward an area of lower pressure .
If blood is to flow from the veins back into the heart , the pressure in the veins must be greater than the pressure in the atria of the heart .
Two factors help maintain this pressure gradient between the veins and the heart .
First , the pressure in the atria during diastole is very low , often approaching zero when the atria are relaxed ( atrial diastole ) .
Second , two physiologic “ pumps ” increase pressure in the venous system .
The use of the term “ pump ” implies a physical device that speeds flow .
These physiological pumps are less obvious .
In many body regions , the pressure within the veins can be increased by the contraction of the surrounding skeletal muscle .
This mechanism , known as the skeletal muscle pump ( Figure 20.15 ) , helps the lower-pressure veins counteract the force of gravity , increasing pressure to move blood back to the heart .
As leg muscles contract , for example during walking or running , they exert pressure on nearby veins with their numerous one-way valves .
This increased pressure causes blood to flow upward , opening valves superior to the contracting muscles so blood flows through .
Simultaneously , valves inferior to the contracting muscles close ; thus , blood should not seep back downward toward the feet .
Military recruits are trained to flex their legs slightly while standing at attention for prolonged periods .
Failure to do so may allow blood to pool in the lower limbs rather than returning to the heart .
Consequently , the brain will not receive enough oxygenated blood , and the individual may lose consciousness .
The respiratory pump aids blood flow through the veins of the thorax and abdomen .
During inhalation , the volume of the thorax increases , largely through the contraction of the diaphragm , which moves downward and compresses the abdominal cavity .
The elevation of the chest caused by the contraction of the external intercostal muscles also contributes to the increased volume of the thorax .
The volume increase causes air pressure within the thorax to decrease , allowing us to inhale .
Additionally , as air pressure within the thorax drops , blood pressure in the thoracic veins also decreases , falling below the pressure in the abdominal veins .
This causes blood to flow along its pressure gradient from veins outside the thorax , where pressure is higher , into the thoracic region , where pressure is now lower .
This in turn promotes the return of blood from the thoracic veins to the atria .
During exhalation , when air pressure increases within the thoracic cavity , pressure in the thoracic veins increases , speeding blood flow into the heart while valves in the veins prevent blood from flowing backward from the thoracic and abdominal veins .
Although vessel diameter increases from the smaller venules to the larger veins and eventually to the venae cavae ( singular = vena cava ) , the total cross-sectional area actually decreases ( see Figure 20.15a and b ) .
The individual veins are larger in diameter than the venules , but their total number is much lower , so their total cross-sectional area is also lower .
Also notice that , as blood moves from venules to veins , the average blood pressure drops ( see Figure 20.15c ) , but the blood velocity actually increases ( see Figure 20.15 ) .
This pressure gradient drives blood back toward the heart .
Again , the presence of one-way valves and the skeletal muscle and respiratory pumps contribute to this increased flow .
Since approximately 64 percent of the total blood volume resides in systemic veins , any action that increases the flow of blood through the veins will increase venous return to the heart .
Maintaining vascular tone within the veins prevents the veins from merely distending , dampening the flow of blood , and as you will see , vasoconstriction actually enhances the flow .
As previously discussed , vasoconstriction of an artery or arteriole decreases the radius , increasing resistance and pressure , but decreasing flow .
Venoconstriction , on the other hand , has a very different outcome .
The walls of veins are thin but irregular ; thus , when the smooth muscle in those walls constricts , the lumen becomes more rounded .
The more rounded the lumen , the less surface area the blood encounters , and the less resistance the vessel offers .
Vasoconstriction increases pressure within a vein as it does in an artery , but in veins , the increased pressure increases flow .
Recall that the pressure in the atria , into which the venous blood will flow , is very low , approaching zero for at least part of the relaxation phase of the cardiac cycle .
Thus , venoconstriction increases the return of blood to the heart .
Another way of stating this is that venoconstriction increases the preload or stretch of the cardiac muscle and increases contraction .
Small molecules , such as gases , lipids , and lipid-soluble molecules , can diffuse directly through the membranes of the endothelial cells of the capillary wall .
Glucose , amino acids , and ions—including sodium , potassium , calcium , and chloride—use transporters to move through specific channels in the membrane by facilitated diffusion .
Glucose , ions , and larger molecules may also leave the blood through intercellular clefts .
Larger molecules can pass through the pores of fenestrated capillaries , and even large plasma proteins can pass through the great gaps in the sinusoids .
Some large proteins in blood plasma can move into and out of the endothelial cells packaged within vesicles by endocytosis and exocytosis .
Water moves by osmosis .
The mass movement of fluids into and out of capillary beds requires a transport mechanism far more efficient than mere diffusion .
This movement , often referred to as bulk flow , involves two pressure-driven mechanisms : Volumes of fluid move from an area of higher pressure in a capillary bed to an area of lower pressure in the tissues via filtration .
In contrast , the movement of fluid from an area of higher pressure in the tissues into an area of lower pressure in the capillaries is reabsorption .
Two types of pressure interact to drive each of these movements : hydrostatic pressure and osmotic pressure .
The primary force driving fluid transport between the capillaries and tissues is hydrostatic pressure , which can be defined as the pressure of any fluid enclosed in a space .
Blood hydrostatic pressure is the force exerted by the blood confined within blood vessels or heart chambers .
Even more specifically , the pressure exerted by blood against the wall of a capillary is called capillary hydrostatic pressure ( CHP ) , and is the same as capillary blood pressure .
CHP is the force that drives fluid out of capillaries and into the tissues .
As fluid exits a capillary and moves into tissues , the hydrostatic pressure in the interstitial fluid correspondingly rises .
This opposing hydrostatic pressure is called the interstitial fluid hydrostatic pressure ( IFHP ) .
Generally , the CHP originating from the arterial pathways is considerably higher than the IFHP , because lymphatic vessels are continually absorbing excess fluid from the tissues .
Thus , fluid generally moves out of the capillary and into the interstitial fluid .
This process is called filtration .
The net pressure that drives reabsorption—the movement of fluid from the interstitial fluid back into the capillaries—is called osmotic pressure ( sometimes referred to as oncotic pressure ) .
Whereas hydrostatic pressure forces fluid out of the capillary , osmotic pressure draws fluid back in .
Osmotic pressure is determined by osmotic concentration gradients , that is , the difference in the solute-to-water concentrations in the blood and tissue fluid .
A region higher in solute concentration ( and lower in water concentration ) draws water across a semipermeable membrane from a region higher in water concentration ( and lower in solute concentration ) .
As we discuss osmotic pressure in blood and tissue fluid , it is important to recognize that the formed elements of blood do not contribute to osmotic concentration gradients .
Rather , it is the plasma proteins that play the key role .
Solutes also move across the capillary wall according to their concentration gradient , but overall , the concentrations should be similar and not have a significant impact on osmosis .
Because of their large size and chemical structure , plasma proteins are not truly solutes , that is , they do not dissolve but are dispersed or suspended in their fluid medium , forming a colloid rather than a solution .
The pressure created by the concentration of colloidal proteins in the blood is called the blood colloidal osmotic pressure ( BCOP ) .
Its effect on capillary exchange accounts for the reabsorption of water .
The plasma proteins suspended in blood can not move across the semipermeable capillary cell membrane , and so they remain in the plasma .
As a result , blood has a higher colloidal concentration and lower water concentration than tissue fluid .
It therefore attracts water .
We can also say that the BCOP is higher than the interstitial fluid colloidal osmotic pressure ( IFCOP ) , which is always very low because interstitial fluid contains few proteins .
Thus , water is drawn from the tissue fluid back into the capillary , carrying dissolved molecules with it .
This difference in colloidal osmotic pressure accounts for reabsorption .
The normal unit used to express pressures within the cardiovascular system is millimeters of mercury ( mm Hg ) .
When blood leaving an arteriole first enters a capillary bed , the CHP is quite high—about 35 mm Hg .
Gradually , this initial CHP declines as the blood moves through the capillary so that by the time the blood has reached the venous end , the CHP has dropped to approximately 18 mm Hg .
In comparison , the plasma proteins remain suspended in the blood , so the BCOP remains fairly constant at about 25 mm Hg throughout the length of the capillary and considerably below the osmotic pressure in the interstitial fluid .
The net filtration pressure ( NFP ) represents the interaction of the hydrostatic and osmotic pressures , driving fluid out of the capillary .
It is equal to the difference between the CHP and the BCOP .
Since filtration is , by definition , the movement of fluid out of the capillary , when reabsorption is occurring , the NFP is a negative number .
NFP changes at different points in a capillary bed ( Figure 20.16 ) .
Close to the arterial end of the capillary , it is approximately 10 mm Hg , because the CHP of 35 mm Hg minus the BCOP of 25 mm Hg equals 10 mm Hg .
Recall that the hydrostatic and osmotic pressures of the interstitial fluid are essentially negligible .
Thus , the NFP of 10 mm Hg drives a net movement of fluid out of the capillary at the arterial end .
At approximately the middle of the capillary , the CHP is about the same as the BCOP of 25 mm Hg , so the NFP drops to zero .
At this point , there is no net change of volume : Fluid moves out of the capillary at the same rate as it moves into the capillary .
Near the venous end of the capillary , the CHP has dwindled to about 18 mm Hg due to loss of fluid .
Because the BCOP remains steady at 25 mm Hg , water is drawn into the capillary , that is , reabsorption occurs .
Another way of expressing this is to say that at the venous end of the capillary , there is an NFP of −7 mm Hg .
Since overall CHP is higher than BCOP , it is inevitable that more net fluid will exit the capillary through filtration at the arterial end than enters through reabsorption at the venous end .
Considering all capillaries over the course of a day , this can be quite a substantial amount of fluid : Approximately 24 liters per day are filtered , whereas 20.4 liters are reabsorbed .
This excess fluid is picked up by capillaries of the lymphatic system .
These extremely thin-walled vessels have copious numbers of valves that ensure unidirectional flow through ever-larger lymphatic vessels that eventually drain into the subclavian veins in the neck .
An important function of the lymphatic system is to return the fluid ( lymph ) to the blood .
Lymph may be thought of as recycled blood plasma .
( Seek additional content for more detail on the lymphatic system . )
Watch this video ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/capillaryfunct ) to explore capillaries and how they function in the body .
Capillaries are never more than 100 micrometers away .
What is the main component of interstitial fluid ?
In a very real sense , the cardiovascular system engages in resource allocation , because there is not enough blood flow to distribute blood equally to all tissues simultaneously .
For example , when an individual is exercising , more blood will be directed to skeletal muscles , the heart , and the lungs .
Following a meal , more blood is directed to the digestive system .
Only the brain receives a more or less constant supply of blood whether you are active , resting , thinking , or engaged in any other activity .
Table 20.3 provides the distribution of systemic blood at rest and during exercise .
Although most of the data appears logical , the values for the distribution of blood to the integument may seem surprising .
During exercise , the body distributes more blood to the body surface where it can dissipate the excess heat generated by increased activity into the environment .
Three homeostatic mechanisms ensure adequate blood flow , blood pressure , distribution , and ultimately perfusion : neural , endocrine , and autoregulatory mechanisms .
They are summarized in Figure 20.17 .
The nervous system plays a critical role in the regulation of vascular homeostasis .
The primary regulatory sites include the cardiovascular centers in the brain that control both cardiac and vascular functions .
In addition , more generalized neural responses from the limbic system and the autonomic nervous system are factors .
Neurological regulation of blood pressure and flow depends on the cardiovascular centers located in the medulla oblongata .
This cluster of neurons responds to changes in blood pressure as well as blood concentrations of oxygen , carbon dioxide , and hydrogen ions .
The cardiovascular center contains three distinct paired components : The cardioaccelerator centers stimulate cardiac function by regulating heart rate and stroke volume via sympathetic stimulation from the cardiac accelerator nerve .
The cardioinhibitor centers slow cardiac function by decreasing heart rate and stroke volume via parasympathetic stimulation from the vagus nerve .
The vasomotor centers control vessel tone or contraction of the smooth muscle in the tunica media .
Changes in diameter affect peripheral resistance , pressure , and flow , which affect cardiac output .
The majority of these neurons act via the release of the neurotransmitter norepinephrine from sympathetic neurons .
Although each center functions independently , they are not anatomically distinct .
There is also a small population of neurons that control vasodilation in the vessels of the brain and skeletal muscles by relaxing the smooth muscle fibers in the vessel tunics .
Many of these are cholinergic neurons , that is , they release acetylcholine , which in turn stimulates the vessels ’ endothelial cells to release nitric oxide ( NO ) , which causes vasodilation .
Others release norepinephrine that binds to β receptors .
A few neurons release NO directly as a neurotransmitter .
Recall that mild stimulation of the skeletal muscles maintains muscle tone .
A similar phenomenon occurs with vascular tone in vessels .
As noted earlier , arterioles are normally partially constricted : With maximal stimulation , their radius may be reduced to one-half of the resting state .
Full dilation of most arterioles requires that this sympathetic stimulation be suppressed .
When it is , an arteriole can expand by as much as 150 percent .
Such a significant increase can dramatically affect resistance , pressure , and flow .
Baroreceptors are specialized stretch receptors located within thin areas of blood vessels and heart chambers that respond to the degree of stretch caused by the presence of blood .
They send impulses to the cardiovascular center to regulate blood pressure .
There are also low-pressure baroreceptors located in the walls of the venae cavae and right atrium .
When blood pressure increases , the baroreceptors are stretched more tightly and initiate action potentials at a higher rate .
At lower blood pressures , the degree of stretch is lower and the rate of firing is slower .
When the cardiovascular center in the medulla oblongata receives this input , it triggers a reflex that maintains homeostasis ( Figure 20.18 ) : When blood pressure rises too high , the baroreceptors fire at a higher rate and trigger parasympathetic stimulation of the heart .
As a result , cardiac output falls .
Sympathetic stimulation of the peripheral arterioles will also decrease , resulting in vasodilation .
Combined , these activities cause blood pressure to fall .
When blood pressure drops too low , the rate of baroreceptor firing decreases .
This will trigger an increase in sympathetic stimulation of the heart , causing cardiac output to increase .
It will also trigger sympathetic stimulation of the peripheral vessels , resulting in vasoconstriction .
Combined , these activities cause blood pressure to rise .
The baroreceptors in the venae cavae and right atrium monitor blood pressure as the blood returns to the heart from the systemic circulation .
Normally , blood flow into the aorta is the same as blood flow back into the right atrium .
If blood is returning to the right atrium more rapidly than it is being ejected from the left ventricle , the atrial receptors will stimulate the cardiovascular centers to increase sympathetic firing and increase cardiac output until homeostasis is achieved .
The opposite is also true .
This mechanism is referred to as the atrial reflex .
In addition to the baroreceptors are chemoreceptors that monitor levels of oxygen , carbon dioxide , and hydrogen ions ( pH ) , and thereby contribute to vascular homeostasis .
Chemoreceptors monitoring the blood are located in close proximity to the baroreceptors in the aortic and carotid sinuses .
They signal the cardiovascular center as well as the respiratory centers in the medulla oblongata .
Since tissues consume oxygen and produce carbon dioxide and acids as waste products , when the body is more active , oxygen levels fall and carbon dioxide levels rise as cells undergo cellular respiration to meet the energy needs of activities .
This causes more hydrogen ions to be produced , causing the blood pH to drop .
When the body is resting , oxygen levels are higher , carbon dioxide levels are lower , more hydrogen is bound , and pH rises .
( Seek additional content for more detail about pH . )
The chemoreceptors respond to increasing carbon dioxide and hydrogen ion levels ( falling pH ) by stimulating the cardioaccelerator and vasomotor centers , increasing cardiac output and constricting peripheral vessels .
The cardioinhibitor centers are suppressed .
With falling carbon dioxide and hydrogen ion levels ( increasing pH ) , the cardioinhibitor centers are stimulated , and the cardioaccelerator and vasomotor centers are suppressed , decreasing cardiac output and causing peripheral vasodilation .
In order to maintain adequate supplies of oxygen to the cells and remove waste products such as carbon dioxide , it is essential that the respiratory system respond to changing metabolic demands .
In turn , the cardiovascular system will these gases to the lungs for exchange , again in accordance with metabolic demands .
This interrelationship of cardiovascular and respiratory control can not be overemphasized .
Other neural mechanisms can also have a significant impact on cardiovascular function .
These include the limbic system that links physiological responses to psychological stimuli , as well as generalized sympathetic and parasympathetic transport stimulation .
Endocrine control over the cardiovascular system involves the catecholamines , epinephrine and norepinephrine , as well as several hormones that interact with the kidneys in the regulation of blood volume .
The catecholamines epinephrine and norepinephrine are released by the adrenal medulla , and enhance and extend the body ’ s sympathetic or “ fight-or-flight ” response ( see Figure 20.17 ) .
They increase heart rate and force of contraction , while temporarily constricting blood vessels to organs not essential for flight-or-fight responses and redirecting blood flow to the liver , muscles , and heart .
Antidiuretic hormone ( ADH ) , also known as vasopressin , is secreted by the cells in the hypothalamus and transported via the hypothalamic-hypophyseal tracts to the posterior pituitary where it is stored until released upon nervous stimulation .
The primary trigger prompting the hypothalamus to release ADH is increasing osmolarity of tissue fluid , usually in response to significant loss of blood volume .
ADH signals its target cells in the kidneys to reabsorb more water , thus preventing the loss of additional fluid in the urine .
This will increase overall fluid levels and help restore blood volume and pressure .
In addition , ADH constricts peripheral vessels .
The renin-angiotensin-aldosterone mechanism has a major effect upon the cardiovascular system ( Figure 20.19 ) .
Renin is an enzyme , although because of its importance in the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone pathway , some sources identify it as a hormone .
Specialized cells in the kidneys found in the juxtaglomerular apparatus respond to decreased blood flow by secreting renin into the blood .
Renin converts the plasma protein angiotensinogen , which is produced by the liver , into its active form—angiotensin I. Angiotensin I circulates in the blood and is then converted into angiotensin II in the lungs .
This reaction is catalyzed by the enzyme angiotensin-converting enzyme ( ACE ) .
Angiotensin II is a powerful vasoconstrictor , greatly increasing blood pressure .
It also stimulates the release of ADH and aldosterone , a hormone produced by the adrenal cortex .
Aldosterone increases the reabsorption of sodium into the blood by the kidneys .
Since water follows sodium , this increases the reabsorption of water .
This in turn increases blood volume , raising blood pressure .
Angiotensin II also stimulates the thirst center in the hypothalamus , so an individual will likely consume more fluids , again increasing blood volume and pressure .
Erythropoietin ( EPO ) is released by the kidneys when blood flow and/or oxygen levels decrease .
EPO stimulates the production of erythrocytes within the bone marrow .
Erythrocytes are the major formed element of the blood and may contribute 40 percent or more to blood volume , a significant factor of viscosity , resistance , pressure , and flow .
In addition , EPO is a vasoconstrictor .
Overproduction of EPO or excessive intake of synthetic EPO , often to enhance athletic performance , will increase viscosity , resistance , and pressure , and decrease flow in addition to its contribution as a vasoconstrictor .
Secreted by cells in the atria of the heart , atrial natriuretic hormone ( ANH ) ( also known as atrial natriuretic peptide ) is secreted when blood volume is high enough to cause extreme stretching of the cardiac cells .
Cells in the ventricle produce a hormone with similar effects , called B-type natriuretic hormone .
Natriuretic hormones are antagonists to angiotensin II .
They promote loss of sodium and water from the kidneys , and suppress renin , aldosterone , and ADH production and release .
All of these actions promote loss of fluid from the body , so blood volume and blood pressure drop .
As the name would suggest , autoregulation mechanisms require neither specialized nervous stimulation nor endocrine control .
Rather , these are local , self-regulatory mechanisms that allow each region of tissue to adjust its blood flow—and thus its perfusion .
These local mechanisms include chemical signals and myogenic controls .
Chemical signals work at the level of the precapillary sphincters to trigger either constriction or relaxation .
As you know , opening a precapillary sphincter allows blood to flow into that particular capillary , whereas constricting a precapillary sphincter temporarily shuts off blood flow to that region .
These conditions in turn stimulate the release of NO , a powerful vasodilator , from endothelial cells ( see Figure 20.17 ) .
Contraction of the precapillary sphincter is triggered by the opposite levels of the regulators , which prompt the release of endothelins , powerful vasoconstricting peptides secreted by endothelial cells .
Platelet secretions and certain prostaglandins may also trigger constriction .
Again , these factors alter tissue perfusion via their effects on the precapillary sphincter mechanism , which regulates blood flow to capillaries .
Since the amount of blood is limited , not all capillaries can fill at once , so blood flow is allocated based upon the needs and metabolic state of the tissues as reflected in these parameters .
Bear in mind , however , that dilation and constriction of the arterioles feeding the capillary beds is the primary control mechanism .
The myogenic response is a reaction to the stretching of the smooth muscle in the walls of arterioles as changes in blood flow occur through the vessel .
This may be viewed as a largely protective function against dramatic fluctuations in blood pressure and blood flow to maintain homeostasis .
If perfusion of an organ is too low ( ischemia ) , the tissue will experience low levels of oxygen ( hypoxia ) .
In contrast , excessive perfusion could damage the organ ’ s smaller and more fragile vessels .
The myogenic response is a localized process that serves to stabilize blood flow in the capillary network that follows that arteriole .
When blood flow is low , the vessel ’ s smooth muscle will be only minimally stretched .
In response , it relaxes , allowing the vessel to dilate and thereby increase the movement of blood into the tissue .
When blood flow is too high , the smooth muscle will contract in response to the increased stretch , prompting vasoconstriction that reduces blood flow .
Figure 20.20 summarizes the effects of nervous , endocrine , and local controls on arterioles .
The heart is a muscle and , like any muscle , it responds dramatically to exercise .
For a healthy young adult , cardiac output ( heart rate × stroke volume ) increases in the nonathlete from approximately 5.0 liters ( 5.25 quarts ) per minute to a maximum of about 20 liters ( 21 quarts ) per minute .
Accompanying this will be an increase in blood pressure from about 120/80 to 185/75 .
However , well-trained aerobic athletes can increase these values substantially .
For these individuals , cardiac output soars from approximately 5.3 liters ( 5.57 quarts ) per minute resting to more than 30 liters ( 31.5 quarts ) per minute during maximal exercise .
Along with this increase in cardiac output , blood pressure increases from 120/80 at rest to 200/90 at maximum values .
In addition to improved cardiac function , exercise increases the size and mass of the heart .
The average weight of the heart for the nonathlete is about 300 g , whereas in an athlete it will increase to 500 g. This increase in size generally makes the heart stronger and more efficient at pumping blood , increasing both stroke volume and cardiac output .
Tissue perfusion also increases as the body transitions from a resting state to light exercise and eventually to heavy exercise ( see Figure 20.20 ) .
These changes result in selective vasodilation in the skeletal muscles , heart , lungs , liver , and integument .
Simultaneously , vasoconstriction occurs in the vessels leading to the kidneys and most of the digestive and reproductive organs .
The flow of blood to the brain remains largely unchanged whether at rest or exercising , since the vessels in the brain largely do not respond to regulatory stimuli , in most cases , because they lack the appropriate receptors .
As vasodilation occurs in selected vessels , resistance drops and more blood rushes into the organs they supply .
This blood eventually returns to the venous system .
Venous return is further enhanced by both the skeletal muscle and respiratory pumps .
As blood returns to the heart more quickly , preload rises and the Frank-Starling principle tells us that contraction of the cardiac muscle in the atria and ventricles will be more forceful .
Eventually , even the best-trained athletes will fatigue and must undergo a period of rest following exercise .
Cardiac output and distribution of blood then return to normal .
Regular exercise promotes cardiovascular health in a variety of ways .
Because an athlete ’ s heart is larger than a nonathlete ’ s , stroke volume increases , so the athletic heart can deliver the same amount of blood as the nonathletic heart but with a lower heart rate .
This increased efficiency allows the athlete to exercise for longer periods of time before muscles fatigue and places less stress on the heart .
Exercise also lowers overall cholesterol levels by removing from the circulation a complex form of cholesterol , triglycerides , and proteins known as low-density lipoproteins ( LDLs ) , which are widely associated with increased risk of cardiovascular disease .
Generally as little as 30 minutes of noncontinuous exercise over the course of each day has beneficial effects and has been shown to lower the rate of heart attack by nearly 50 percent .
While it is always advisable to follow a healthy diet , stop smoking , and lose weight , studies have clearly shown that fit , overweight people may actually be healthier overall than sedentary slender people .
Thus , the benefits of moderate exercise are undeniable .
Any disorder that affects blood volume , vascular tone , or any other aspect of vascular functioning is likely to affect vascular homeostasis as well .
That includes hypertension , hemorrhage , and shock .
Chronically elevated blood pressure is known clinically as hypertension .
It is defined as chronic and persistent blood pressure measurements of 140/90 mm Hg or above .
Pressures between 120/80 and 140/90 mm Hg are defined as prehypertension .
About 68 million Americans currently suffer from hypertension .
Unfortunately , hypertension is typically a silent disorder ; therefore , hypertensive patients may fail to recognize the seriousness of their condition and fail to follow their treatment plan .
The result is often a heart attack or stroke .
Hypertension may also lead to an aneurism ( ballooning of a blood vessel caused by a weakening of the wall ) , peripheral arterial disease ( obstruction of vessels in peripheral regions of the body ) , chronic kidney disease , or heart failure .
Listen to this CDC podcast ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/CDCpodcast ) to learn about hypertension , often described as a “ silent killer. ” What steps can you take to reduce your risk of a heart attack or stroke ?
Minor blood loss is managed by hemostasis and repair .
Hemorrhage is a loss of blood that can not be controlled by hemostatic mechanisms .
Initially , the body responds to hemorrhage by initiating mechanisms aimed at increasing blood pressure and maintaining blood flow .
Ultimately , however , blood volume will need to be restored , either through physiological processes or through medical intervention .
In response to blood loss , stimuli from the baroreceptors trigger the cardiovascular centers to stimulate sympathetic responses to increase cardiac output and vasoconstriction .
This typically prompts the heart rate to increase to about 180–200 contractions per minute , restoring cardiac output to normal levels .
Vasoconstriction of the arterioles increases vascular resistance , whereas constriction of the veins increases venous return to the heart .
Both of these steps will help increase blood pressure .
Sympathetic stimulation also triggers the release of epinephrine and norepinephrine , which enhance both cardiac output and vasoconstriction .
If blood loss were less than 20 percent of total blood volume , these responses together would usually return blood pressure to normal and redirect the remaining blood to the tissues .
Additional endocrine involvement is necessary , however , to restore the lost blood volume .
The angiotensin-reninaldosterone mechanism stimulates the thirst center in the hypothalamus , which increases fluid consumption to help restore the lost blood .
More importantly , it increases renal reabsorption of sodium and water , reducing water loss in urine output .
The kidneys also increase the production of EPO , stimulating the formation of erythrocytes that not only deliver oxygen to the tissues but also increase overall blood volume .
Figure 20.21 summarizes the responses to loss of blood volume .
The loss of too much blood may lead to circulatory shock , a life-threatening condition in which the circulatory system is unable to maintain blood flow to adequately supply sufficient oxygen and other nutrients to the tissues to maintain cellular metabolism .
It should not be confused with emotional or psychological shock .
Typically , the patient in circulatory shock will demonstrate an increased heart rate but decreased blood pressure , but there are cases in which blood pressure will remain normal .
Urine output will fall dramatically , and the patient may appear confused or lose consciousness .
Urine output less than 1 mL/kg body weight/hour is cause for concern .
Unfortunately , shock is an example of a positive-feedback loop that , if uncorrected , may lead to the death of the patient .
There are several recognized forms of shock : Hypovolemic shock in adults is typically caused by hemorrhage , although in children it may be caused by fluid losses related to severe vomiting or diarrhea .
Other causes for hypovolemic shock include extensive burns , exposure to some toxins , and excessive urine loss related to diabetes insipidus or ketoacidosis .
Treatments generally involve providing intravenous fluids to restore the patient to normal function and various drugs such as dopamine , epinephrine , and norepinephrine to raise blood pressure .
Cardiogenic shock results from the inability of the heart to maintain cardiac output .
Most often , it results from a myocardial infarction ( heart attack ) , but it may also be caused by arrhythmias , valve disorders , cardiomyopathies , cardiac failure , or simply insufficient flow of blood through the cardiac vessels .
Treatment involves repairing the damage to the heart or its vessels to resolve the underlying cause , rather than treating cardiogenic shock directly .
Vascular shock occurs when arterioles lose their normal muscular tone and dilate dramatically .
It may arise from a variety of causes , and treatments almost always involve fluid replacement and medications , called inotropic or pressor agents , which restore tone to the muscles of the vessels .
In addition , eliminating or at least alleviating the underlying cause of the condition is required .
This might include antibiotics and antihistamines , or select steroids , which may aid in the repair of nerve damage .
A common cause is sepsis ( or septicemia ) , also called “ blood poisoning , ” which is a widespread bacterial infection that results in an organismal-level inflammatory response known as septic shock .
Neurogenic shock is a form of vascular shock that occurs with cranial or spinal injuries that damage the cardiovascular centers in the medulla oblongata or the nervous fibers originating from this region .
Anaphylactic shock is a severe allergic response that causes the widespread release of histamines , triggering vasodilation throughout the body .
Obstructive shock , as the name would suggest , occurs when a significant portion of the vascular system is blocked .
It is not always recognized as a distinct condition and may be grouped with cardiogenic shock , including pulmonary embolism and cardiac tamponade .
Treatments depend upon the underlying cause and , in addition to administering fluids intravenously , often include the administration of anticoagulants , removal of fluid from the pericardial cavity , or air from the thoracic cavity , and surgery as required .
The most common cause is a pulmonary embolism , a clot that lodges in the pulmonary vessels and interrupts blood flow .
This includes the generalized and more specialized functions of transport of materials , capillary exchange , maintaining health by transporting white blood cells and various immunoglobulins ( antibodies ) , hemostasis , regulation of body temperature , and helping to maintain acid-base balance .
In addition to these shared functions , many systems enjoy a unique relationship with the circulatory system .
Figure 20.22 summarizes these relationships .
As you learn about the vessels of the systemic and pulmonary circuits , notice that many arteries and veins share the same names , parallel one another throughout the body , and are very similar on the right and left sides of the body .
These pairs of vessels will be traced through only one side of the body .
Where differences occur in branching patterns or when vessels are singular , this will be indicated .
For example , you will find a pair of femoral arteries and a pair of femoral veins , with one vessel on each side of the body .
In contrast , some vessels closer to the midline of the body , such as the aorta , are unique .
Moreover , some superficial veins , such as the great saphenous vein in the femoral region , have no arterial counterpart .
Another phenomenon that can make the study of vessels challenging is that names of vessels can change with location .
Like a street that changes name as it passes through an intersection , an artery or vein can change names as it passes an anatomical landmark .
For example , the left subclavian artery becomes the axillary artery as it passes through the body wall and into the axillary region , and then becomes the brachial artery as it flows from the axillary region into the upper arm ( or brachium ) .
You will also find examples of anastomoses where two blood vessels that previously branched reconnect .
Anastomoses are especially common in veins , where they help maintain blood flow even when one vessel is blocked or narrowed , although there are some important ones in the arteries supplying the brain .
As you read about circular pathways , notice that there is an occasional , very large artery referred to as a trunk , a term indicating that the vessel gives rise to several smaller arteries .
For example , the celiac trunk gives rise to the left gastric , common hepatic , and splenic arteries .
As you study this section , imagine you are on a “ Voyage of Discovery ” similar to Lewis and Clark ’ s expedition in 1804–1806 , which followed rivers and streams through unfamiliar territory , seeking a water route from the Atlantic to the Pacific Ocean .
You might envision being inside a miniature boat , exploring the various branches of the circulatory system .
This simple approach has proven effective for many students in mastering these major circulatory patterns .
Another approach that works well for many students is to create simple line drawings similar to the ones provided , labeling each of the major vessels .
It is beyond the scope of this text to name every vessel in the body .
However , we will attempt to discuss the major pathways for blood and acquaint you with the major named arteries and veins in the body .
Also , please keep in mind that individual variations in circulation patterns are not uncommon .
Visit this site ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/arts1 ) for a brief summary of the arteries .
Recall that blood returning from the systemic circuit enters the right atrium ( Figure 20.23 ) via the superior and inferior venae cavae and the coronary sinus , which drains the blood supply of the heart muscle .
These vessels will be described more fully later in this section .
This blood is relatively low in oxygen and relatively high in carbon dioxide , since much of the oxygen has been extracted for use by the tissues and the waste gas carbon dioxide was picked up to be transported to the lungs for elimination .
From the right atrium , blood moves into the right ventricle , which pumps it to the lungs for gas exchange .
This system of vessels is referred to as the pulmonary circuit .
The single vessel exiting the right ventricle is the pulmonary trunk .
At the base of the pulmonary trunk is the pulmonary semilunar valve , which prevents backflow of blood into the right ventricle during ventricular diastole .
As the pulmonary trunk reaches the superior surface of the heart , it curves posteriorly and rapidly bifurcates ( divides ) into two branches , a left and a right pulmonary artery .
To prevent confusion between these vessels , it is important to refer to the vessel exiting the heart as the pulmonary trunk , rather than also calling it a pulmonary artery .
The pulmonary arteries in turn branch many times within the lung , forming a series of smaller arteries and arterioles that eventually lead to the pulmonary capillaries .
The pulmonary capillaries surround lung structures known as alveoli that are the sites of oxygen and carbon dioxide exchange .
Once gas exchange is completed , oxygenated blood flows from the pulmonary capillaries into a series of pulmonary venules that eventually lead to a series of larger pulmonary veins .
Four pulmonary veins , two on the left and two on the right , return blood to the left atrium .
At this point , the pulmonary circuit is complete .
Table 20.4 defines the major arteries and veins of the pulmonary circuit discussed in the text .
Blood relatively high in oxygen concentration is returned from the pulmonary circuit to the left atrium via the four pulmonary veins .
From the left atrium , blood moves into the left ventricle , which pumps blood into the aorta .
The aorta and its branches—the systemic arteries—send blood to virtually every organ of the body ( Figure 20.24 ) .
The aorta is the largest artery in the body ( Figure 20.25 ) .
It arises from the left ventricle and eventually descends to the abdominal region , where it bifurcates at the level of the fourth lumbar vertebra into the two common iliac arteries .
The aorta consists of the ascending aorta , the aortic arch , and the descending aorta , which passes through the diaphragm and a landmark that divides into the superior thoracic and inferior abdominal components .
Arteries originating from the aorta ultimately distribute blood to virtually all tissues of the body .
At the base of the aorta is the aortic semilunar valve that prevents backflow of blood into the left ventricle while the heart is relaxing .
After exiting the heart , the ascending aorta moves in a superior direction for approximately 5 cm and ends at the sternal angle .
Following this ascent , it reverses direction , forming a graceful arc to the left , called the aortic arch .
The aortic arch descends toward the inferior portions of the body and ends at the level of the intervertebral disk between the fourth and fifth thoracic vertebrae .
Beyond this point , the descending aorta continues close to the bodies of the vertebrae and passes through an opening in the diaphragm known as the aortic hiatus .
Superior to the diaphragm , the aorta is called the thoracic aorta , and inferior to the diaphragm , it is called the abdominal aorta .
The abdominal aorta terminates when it bifurcates into the two common iliac arteries at the level of the fourth lumbar vertebra .
See Figure 20.25 for an illustration of the ascending aorta , the aortic arch , and the initial segment of the descending aorta plus major branches ; Table 20.5 summarizes the structures of the aorta .
The first vessels that branch from the ascending aorta are the paired coronary arteries ( see Figure 20.25 ) , which arise from two of the three sinuses in the ascending aorta just superior to the aortic semilunar valve .
These sinuses contain the aortic baroreceptors and chemoreceptors critical to maintain cardiac function .
The left coronary artery arises from the left posterior aortic sinus .
The right coronary artery arises from the anterior aortic sinus .
Normally , the right posterior aortic sinus does not give rise to a vessel .
The coronary arteries encircle the heart , forming a ring-like structure that divides into the next level of branches that supplies blood to the heart tissues .
( Seek additional content for more detail on cardiac circulation . )
There are three major branches of the aortic arch : the brachiocephalic artery , the left common carotid artery , and the left subclavian ( literally “ under the clavicle ” ) artery .
As you would expect based upon proximity to the heart , each of these vessels is classified as an elastic artery .
The brachiocephalic artery is located only on the right side of the body ; there is no corresponding artery on the left .
The brachiocephalic artery branches into the right subclavian artery and the right common carotid artery .
The left subclavian and left common carotid arteries arise independently from the aortic arch but otherwise follow a similar pattern and distribution to the corresponding arteries on the right side ( see Figure 20.23 ) .
Each subclavian artery supplies blood to the arms , chest , shoulders , back , and central nervous system .
It then gives rise to three major branches : the internal thoracic artery , the vertebral artery , and the thyrocervical artery .
The internal thoracic artery , or mammary artery , supplies blood to the thymus , the pericardium of the heart , and the anterior chest wall .
The vertebral artery passes through the vertebral foramen in the cervical vertebrae and then through the foramen magnum into the cranial cavity to supply blood to the brain and spinal cord .
The paired vertebral arteries join together to form the large basilar artery at the base of the medulla oblongata .
This is an example of an anastomosis .
The subclavian artery also gives rise to the thyrocervical artery that provides blood to the thyroid , the cervical region of the neck , and the upper back and shoulder .
The common carotid artery divides into internal and external carotid arteries .
The right common carotid artery arises from the brachiocephalic artery and the left common carotid artery arises directly from the aortic arch .
The external carotid artery supplies blood to numerous structures within the face , lower jaw , neck , esophagus , and larynx .
These branches include the lingual , facial , occipital , maxillary , and superficial temporal arteries .
The internal carotid artery initially forms an expansion known as the carotid sinus , containing the carotid baroreceptors and chemoreceptors .
Like their counterparts in the aortic sinuses , the information provided by these receptors is critical to maintaining cardiovascular homeostasis ( see Figure 20.23 ) .
The internal carotid arteries along with the vertebral arteries are the two primary suppliers of blood to the human brain .
Given the central role and vital importance of the brain to life , it is critical that blood supply to this organ remains uninterrupted .
Recall that blood flow to the brain is remarkably constant , with approximately 20 percent of blood flow directed to this organ at any given time .
When blood flow is interrupted , even for just a few seconds , a transient ischemic attack ( TIA ) , or mini-stroke , may occur , resulting in loss of consciousness or temporary loss of neurological function .
In some cases , the damage may be permanent .
Loss of blood flow for longer periods , typically between 3 and 4 minutes , will likely produce irreversible brain damage or a stroke , also called a cerebrovascular accident ( CVA ) .
The locations of the arteries in the brain not only provide blood flow to the brain tissue but also prevent interruption in the flow of blood .
As a rule , branches to the anterior portion of the cerebrum are normally fed by the internal carotid arteries ; the remainder of the brain receives blood flow from branches associated with the vertebral arteries .
The internal carotid artery continues through the carotid canal of the temporal bone and enters the base of the brain through the carotid foramen where it gives rise to several branches ( Figure 20.26 and Figure 20.27 ) .
One of these branches is the anterior cerebral artery that supplies blood to the frontal lobe of the cerebrum .
Another branch , the middle cerebral artery , supplies blood to the temporal and parietal lobes , which are the most common sites of CVAs .
The ophthalmic artery , the third major branch , provides blood to the eyes .
The right and left anterior cerebral arteries join together to form an anastomosis called the anterior communicating artery .
The initial segments of the anterior cerebral arteries and the anterior communicating artery form the anterior portion of the arterial circle .
The posterior portion of the arterial circle is formed by a left and a right posterior communicating artery that branches from the posterior cerebral artery , which arises from the basilar artery .
It provides blood to the posterior portion of the cerebrum and brain stem .
The basilar artery is an anastomosis that begins at the junction of the two vertebral arteries and sends branches to the cerebellum and brain stem .
It flows into the posterior cerebral arteries .
Table 20.6 summarizes the aortic arch branches , including the major branches supplying the brain .
The thoracic aorta begins at the level of vertebra T5 and continues through to the diaphragm at the level of T12 , initially traveling within the mediastinum to the left of the vertebral column .
As it passes through the thoracic region , the thoracic aorta gives rise to several branches , which are collectively referred to as visceral branches and parietal branches ( Figure 20.28 ) .
Those branches that supply blood primarily to visceral organs are known as the visceral branches and include the bronchial arteries , pericardial arteries , esophageal arteries , and the mediastinal arteries , each named after the tissues it supplies .
Each bronchial artery ( typically two on the left and one on the right ) supplies systemic blood to the lungs and visceral pleura , in addition to the blood pumped to the lungs for oxygenation via the pulmonary circuit .
The bronchial arteries follow the same path as the respiratory branches , beginning with the bronchi and ending with the bronchioles .
There is considerable , but not total , intermingling of the systemic and pulmonary blood at anastomoses in the smaller branches of the lungs .
This may sound incongruous—that is , the mixing of systemic arterial blood high in oxygen with the pulmonary arterial blood lower in oxygen—but the systemic vessels also deliver nutrients to the lung tissue just as they do elsewhere in the body .
The mixed blood drains into typical pulmonary veins , whereas the bronchial artery branches remain separate and drain into bronchial veins described later .
Each pericardial artery supplies blood to the pericardium , the esophageal artery provides blood to the esophagus , and the mediastinal artery provides blood to the mediastinum .
The remaining thoracic aorta branches are collectively referred to as parietal branches or somatic branches , and include the intercostal and superior phrenic arteries .
Each intercostal artery provides blood to the muscles of the thoracic cavity and vertebral column .
The superior phrenic artery provides blood to the superior surface of the diaphragm .
Table 20.7 lists the arteries of the thoracic region .
After crossing through the diaphragm at the aortic hiatus , the thoracic aorta is called the abdominal aorta ( see Figure 20.28 ) .
This vessel remains to the left of the vertebral column and is embedded in adipose tissue behind the peritoneal cavity .
It formally ends at approximately the level of vertebra L4 , where it bifurcates to form the common iliac arteries .
Before this division , the abdominal aorta gives rise to several important branches .
Two additional single vessels arise from the abdominal aorta .
These are the superior and inferior mesenteric arteries .
The superior mesenteric artery arises approximately 2.5 cm after the celiac trunk and branches into several major vessels that supply blood to the small intestine ( duodenum , jejunum , and ileum ) , the pancreas , and a majority of the large intestine .
The inferior mesenteric artery supplies blood to the distal segment of the large intestine , including the rectum .
It arises approximately 5 cm superior to the common iliac arteries .
In addition to these single branches , the abdominal aorta gives rise to several significant paired arteries along the way .
These include the inferior phrenic arteries , the adrenal arteries , the renal arteries , the gonadal arteries , and the lumbar arteries .
Each inferior phrenic artery is a counterpart of a superior phrenic artery and supplies blood to the inferior surface of the diaphragm .
The adrenal artery supplies blood to the adrenal ( suprarenal ) glands and arises near the superior mesenteric artery .
Each renal artery branches approximately 2.5 cm inferior to the superior mesenteric arteries and supplies a kidney .
The right renal artery is longer than the left since the aorta lies to the left of the vertebral column and the vessel must travel a greater distance to reach its target .
Renal arteries branch repeatedly to supply blood to the kidneys .
Each gonadal artery supplies blood to the gonads , or reproductive organs , and is also described as either an ovarian artery or a testicular artery ( internal spermatic ) , depending upon the sex of the individual .
An ovarian artery supplies blood to an ovary , uterine ( Fallopian ) tube , and the uterus , and is located within the suspensory ligament of the uterus .
It is considerably shorter than a testicular artery , which ultimately travels outside the body cavity to the testes , forming one component of the spermatic cord .
The gonadal arteries arise inferior to the renal arteries and are generally retroperitoneal .
The ovarian artery continues to the uterus where it forms an anastomosis with the uterine artery that supplies blood to the uterus .
Both the uterine arteries and vaginal arteries , which distribute blood to the vagina , are branches of the internal iliac artery .
The four paired lumbar arteries are the counterparts of the intercostal arteries and supply blood to the lumbar region , the abdominal wall , and the spinal cord .
In some instances , a fifth pair of lumbar arteries emerges from the median sacral artery .
The aorta divides at approximately the level of vertebra L4 into a left and a right common iliac artery but continues as a small vessel , the median sacral artery , into the sacrum .
The common iliac arteries provide blood to the pelvic region and ultimately to the lower limbs .
They split into external and internal iliac arteries approximately at the level of the lumbarsacral articulation .
Each internal iliac artery sends branches to the urinary bladder , the walls of the pelvis , the external genitalia , and the medial portion of the femoral region .
In females , they also provide blood to the uterus and vagina .
The much larger external iliac artery supplies blood to each of the lower limbs .
Figure 20.29 shows the distribution of the major branches of the aorta into the thoracic and abdominal regions .
Figure 20.30 shows the distribution of the major branches of the common iliac arteries .
Table 20.8 summarizes the major branches of the abdominal aorta .
As the subclavian artery exits the thorax into the axillary region , it is renamed the axillary artery .
Although it does branch and supply blood to the region near the head of the humerus ( via the humeral circumflex arteries ) , the majority of the vessel continues into the upper arm , or brachium , and becomes the brachial artery ( Figure 20.31 ) .
As the brachial artery approaches the coronoid fossa , it bifurcates into the radial and ulnar arteries , which continue into the forearm , or antebrachium .
The radial artery and ulnar artery parallel their namesake bones , giving off smaller branches until they reach the wrist , or carpal region .
At this level , they fuse to form the superficial and deep palmar arches that supply blood to the hand , as well as the digital arteries that supply blood to the digits .
Figure 20.32 shows the distribution of systemic arteries from the heart into the upper limb .
Table 20.9 summarizes the arteries serving the upper limbs .
The external iliac artery exits the body cavity and enters the femoral region of the lower leg ( Figure 20.33 ) .
As it passes through the body wall , it is renamed the femoral artery .
It gives off several smaller branches as well as the lateral deep femoral artery that in turn gives rise to a lateral circumflex artery .
These arteries supply blood to the deep muscles of the thigh as well as ventral and lateral regions of the integument .
The femoral artery also gives rise to the genicular artery , which provides blood to the region of the knee .
As the femoral artery passes posterior to the knee near the popliteal fossa , it is called the popliteal artery .
The popliteal artery branches into the anterior and posterior tibial arteries .
The anterior tibial artery is located between the tibia and fibula , and supplies blood to the muscles and integument of the anterior tibial region .
Upon reaching the tarsal region , it becomes the dorsalis pedis artery , which branches repeatedly and provides blood to the tarsal and dorsal regions of the foot .
The posterior tibial artery provides blood to the muscles and integument on the posterior surface of the tibial region .
The fibular or peroneal artery branches from the posterior tibial artery .
It bifurcates and becomes the medial plantar artery and lateral plantar artery , providing blood to the plantar surfaces .
There is an anastomosis with the dorsalis pedis artery , and the medial and lateral plantar arteries form two arches called the dorsal arch ( also called the arcuate arch ) and the plantar arch , which provide blood to the remainder of the foot and toes .
Figure 20.34 shows the distribution of the major systemic arteries in the lower limb .
Table 20.10 summarizes the major systemic arteries discussed in the text .
Systemic veins return blood to the right atrium .
Since the blood has already passed through the systemic capillaries , it will be relatively low in oxygen concentration .
In many cases , there will be veins draining organs and regions of the body with the same name as the arteries that supplied these regions and the two often parallel one another .
This is often described as a “ complementary ” pattern .
However , there is a great deal more variability in the venous circulation than normally occurs in the arteries .
For the sake of brevity and clarity , this text will discuss only the most commonly encountered patterns .
However , keep this variation in mind when you move from the classroom to clinical practice .
In both the neck and limb regions , there are often both superficial and deeper levels of veins .
The deeper veins generally correspond to the complementary arteries .
The superficial veins do not normally have direct arterial counterparts , but in addition to returning blood , they also make contributions to the maintenance of body temperature .
When the ambient temperature is warm , more blood is diverted to the superficial veins where heat can be more easily dissipated to the environment .
In colder weather , there is more constriction of the superficial veins and blood is diverted deeper where the body can retain more of the heat .
The “ Voyage of Discovery ” analogy and stick drawings mentioned earlier remain valid techniques for the study of systemic veins , but veins present a more difficult challenge because there are numerous anastomoses and multiple branches .
It is like following a river with many tributaries and channels , several of which interconnect .
Tracing blood flow through arteries follows the current in the direction of blood flow , so that we move from the heart through the large arteries and into the smaller arteries to the capillaries .
From the capillaries , we move into the smallest veins and follow the direction of blood flow into larger veins and back to the heart .
Figure 20.35 outlines the path of the major systemic veins .
Visit this site ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/veinsum ) for a brief online summary of the veins .
The right atrium receives all of the systemic venous return .
Most of the blood flows into either the superior vena cava or inferior vena cava .
If you draw an imaginary line at the level of the diaphragm , systemic venous circulation from above that line will generally flow into the superior vena cava ; this includes blood from the head , neck , chest , shoulders , and upper limbs .
The exception to this is that most venous blood flow from the coronary veins flows directly into the coronary sinus and from there directly into the right atrium .
Beneath the diaphragm , systemic venous flow enters the inferior vena cava , that is , blood from the abdominal and pelvic regions and the lower limbs .
The superior vena cava drains most of the body superior to the diaphragm ( Figure 20.36 ) .
On both the left and right sides , the subclavian vein forms when the axillary vein passes through the body wall from the axillary region .
It fuses with the external and internal jugular veins from the head and neck to form the brachiocephalic vein .
Each vertebral vein also flows into the brachiocephalic vein close to this fusion .
These veins arise from the base of the brain and the cervical region of the spinal cord , and flow largely through the intervertebral foramina in the cervical vertebrae .
They are the counterparts of the vertebral arteries .
Each internal thoracic vein , also known as an internal mammary vein , drains the anterior surface of the chest wall and flows into the brachiocephalic vein .
The remainder of the blood supply from the thorax drains into the azygos vein .
Each intercostal vein drains muscles of the thoracic wall , each esophageal vein delivers blood from the inferior portions of the esophagus , each bronchial vein drains the systemic circulation from the lungs , and several smaller veins drain the mediastinal region .
Bronchial veins carry approximately 13 percent of the blood that flows into the bronchial arteries ; the remainder intermingles with the pulmonary circulation and returns to the heart via the pulmonary veins .
These veins flow into the azygos vein , and with the smaller hemiazygos vein ( hemi= “ half ” ) on the left of the vertebral column , drain blood from the thoracic region .
The hemiazygos vein does not drain directly into the superior vena cava but enters the brachiocephalic vein via the superior intercostal vein .
The azygos vein passes through the diaphragm from the thoracic cavity on the right side of the vertebral column and begins in the lumbar region of the thoracic cavity .
It flows into the superior vena cava at approximately the level of T2 , making a significant contribution to the flow of blood .
It combines with the two large left and right brachiocephalic veins to form the superior vena cava .
Table 20.11 summarizes the veins of the thoracic region that flow into the superior vena cava .
Blood from the brain and the superficial facial vein flow into each internal jugular vein ( Figure 20.37 ) .
Blood from the more superficial portions of the head , scalp , and cranial regions , including the temporal vein and maxillary vein , flow into each external jugular vein .
Although the external and internal jugular veins are separate vessels , there are anastomoses between them close to the thoracic region .
Blood from the external jugular vein empties into the subclavian vein .
Table 20.12 summarizes the major veins of the head and neck .
Circulation to the brain is both critical and complex ( see Figure 20.37 ) .
Many smaller veins of the brain stem and the superficial veins of the cerebrum lead to larger vessels referred to as intracranial sinuses .
These include the superior and inferior sagittal sinuses , straight sinus , cavernous sinuses , left and right sinuses , the petrosal sinuses , and the occipital sinuses .
Ultimately , sinuses will lead back to either the inferior jugular vein or vertebral vein .
Most of the veins on the superior surface of the cerebrum flow into the largest of the sinuses , the superior sagittal sinus .
It is located midsagittally between the meningeal and periosteal layers of the dura mater within the falx cerebri and , at first glance in images or models , can be mistaken for the subarachnoid space .
Most reabsorption of cerebrospinal fluid occurs via the chorionic villi ( arachnoid granulations ) into the superior sagittal sinus .
Blood from most of the smaller vessels originating from the inferior cerebral veins flows into the great cerebral vein and into the straight sinus .
Other cerebral veins and those from the eye socket flow into the cavernous sinus , which flows into the petrosal sinus and then into the internal jugular vein .
The occipital sinus , sagittal sinus , and straight sinuses all flow into the left and right transverse sinuses near the lambdoid suture .
The transverse sinuses in turn flow into the sigmoid sinuses that pass through the jugular foramen and into the internal jugular vein .
The internal jugular vein flows parallel to the common carotid artery and is more or less its counterpart .
It empties into the brachiocephalic vein .
The veins draining the cervical vertebrae and the posterior surface of the skull , including some blood from the occipital sinus , flow into the vertebral veins .
These parallel the vertebral arteries and travel through the transverse foramina of the cervical vertebrae .
The vertebral veins also flow into the brachiocephalic veins .
Table 20.13 summarizes the major veins of the brain .
The digital veins in the fingers come together in the hand to form the palmar venous arches ( Figure 20.38 ) .
From here , the veins come together to form the radial vein , the ulnar vein , and the median antebrachial vein .
The radial vein and the ulnar vein parallel the bones of the forearm and join together at the antebrachium to form the brachial vein , a deep vein that flows into the axillary vein in the brachium .
The median antebrachial vein parallels the ulnar vein , is more medial in location , and joins the basilic vein in the forearm .
As the basilic vein reaches the antecubital region , it gives off a branch called the median cubital vein that crosses at an angle to join the cephalic vein .
The median cubital vein is the most common site for drawing venous blood in humans .
The basilic vein continues through the arm medially and superficially to the axillary vein .
The cephalic vein begins in the antebrachium and drains blood from the superficial surface of the arm into the axillary vein .
It is extremely superficial and easily seen along the surface of the biceps brachii muscle in individuals with good muscle tone and in those without excessive subcutaneous adipose tissue in the arms .
The subscapular vein drains blood from the subscapular region and joins the cephalic vein to form the axillary vein .
As it passes through the body wall and enters the thorax , the axillary vein becomes the subclavian vein .
Many of the larger veins of the thoracic and abdominal region and upper limb are further represented in the flow chart in Figure 20.39 .
Table 20.14 summarizes the veins of the upper limbs .
Other than the small amount of blood drained by the azygos and hemiazygos veins , most of the blood inferior to the diaphragm drains into the inferior vena cava before it is returned to the heart ( see Figure 20.36 ) .
Lying just beneath the parietal peritoneum in the abdominal cavity , the inferior vena cava parallels the abdominal aorta , where it can receive blood from abdominal veins .
The lumbar portions of the abdominal wall and spinal cord are drained by a series of lumbar veins , usually four on each side .
The ascending lumbar veins drain into either the azygos vein on the right or the hemiazygos vein on the left , and return to the superior vena cava .
The remaining lumbar veins drain directly into the inferior vena cava .
Blood supply from the kidneys flows into each renal vein , normally the largest veins entering the inferior vena cava .
A number of other , smaller veins empty into the left renal vein .
Each adrenal vein drains the adrenal or suprarenal glands located immediately superior to the kidneys .
The right adrenal vein enters the inferior vena cava directly , whereas the left adrenal vein enters the left renal vein .
From the male reproductive organs , each testicular vein flows from the scrotum , forming a portion of the spermatic cord .
Each ovarian vein drains an ovary in females .
Each of these veins is generically called a gonadal vein .
The right gonadal vein empties directly into the inferior vena cava , and the left gonadal vein empties into the left renal vein .
Each side of the diaphragm drains into a phrenic vein ; the right phrenic vein empties directly into the inferior vena cava , whereas the left phrenic vein empties into the left renal vein .
Blood supply from the liver drains into each hepatic vein and directly into the inferior vena cava .
Since the inferior vena cava lies primarily to the right of the vertebral column and aorta , the left renal vein is longer , as are the left phrenic , adrenal , and gonadal veins .
The longer length of the left renal vein makes the left kidney the primary target of surgeons removing this organ for donation .
Figure 20.40 provides a flow chart of the veins flowing into the inferior vena cava .
Table 20.15 summarizes the major veins of the abdominal region .
From the dorsal venous arch , blood supply drains into the anterior and posterior tibial veins .
The anterior tibial vein drains the area near the tibialis anterior muscle and combines with the posterior tibial vein and the fibular vein to form the popliteal vein .
The posterior tibial vein drains the posterior surface of the tibia and joins the popliteal vein .
The fibular vein drains the muscles and integument in proximity to the fibula and also joins the popliteal vein .
The small saphenous vein located on the lateral surface of the leg drains blood from the superficial regions of the lower leg and foot , and flows into to the popliteal vein .
As the popliteal vein passes behind the knee in the popliteal region , it becomes the femoral vein .
It is palpable in patients without excessive adipose tissue .
Close to the body wall , the great saphenous vein , the deep femoral vein , and the femoral circumflex vein drain into the femoral vein .
The great saphenous vein is a prominent surface vessel located on the medial surface of the leg and thigh that collects blood from the superficial portions of these areas .
The deep femoral vein , as the name suggests , drains blood from the deeper portions of the thigh .
The femoral circumflex vein forms a loop around the femur just inferior to the trochanters and drains blood from the areas in proximity to the head and neck of the femur .
As the femoral vein penetrates the body wall from the femoral portion of the upper limb , it becomes the external iliac vein , a large vein that drains blood from the leg to the common iliac vein .
The pelvic organs and integument drain into the internal iliac vein , which forms from several smaller veins in the region , including the umbilical veins that run on either side of the bladder .
The external and internal iliac veins combine near the inferior portion of the sacroiliac joint to form the common iliac vein .
In addition to blood supply from the external and internal iliac veins , the middle sacral vein drains the sacral region into the common iliac vein .
Similar to the common iliac arteries , the common iliac veins come together at the level of L5 to form the inferior vena cava .
Figure 20.42 is a flow chart of veins flowing into the lower limb .
Table 20.16 summarizes the major veins of the lower limbs .
The liver is a complex biochemical processing plant .
It packages nutrients absorbed by the digestive system ; produces plasma proteins , clotting factors , and bile ; and disposes of worn-out cell components and waste products .
Instead of entering the circulation directly , absorbed nutrients and certain wastes ( for example , materials produced by the spleen ) travel to the liver for processing .
They do so via the hepatic portal system ( Figure 20.43 ) .
Portal systems begin and end in capillaries .
In this case , the initial capillaries from the stomach , small intestine , large intestine , and spleen lead to the hepatic portal vein and end in specialized capillaries within the liver , the hepatic sinusoids .
You saw the only other portal system with the hypothalamic-hypophyseal portal vessel in the endocrine chapter .
The hepatic portal system consists of the hepatic portal vein and the veins that drain into it .
The hepatic portal vein itself is relatively short , beginning at the level of L2 with the confluence of the superior mesenteric and splenic veins .
It also receives branches from the inferior mesenteric vein , plus the splenic veins and all their tributaries .
The superior mesenteric vein receives blood from the small intestine , two-thirds of the large intestine , and the stomach .
The inferior mesenteric vein drains the distal third of the large intestine , including the descending colon , the sigmoid colon , and the rectum .
The splenic vein is formed from branches from the spleen , pancreas , and portions of the stomach , and the inferior mesenteric vein .
After its formation , the hepatic portal vein also receives branches from the gastric veins of the stomach and cystic veins from the gall bladder .
The hepatic portal vein delivers materials from these digestive and circulatory organs directly to the liver for processing .
Because of the hepatic portal system , the liver receives its blood supply from two different sources : from normal systemic circulation via the hepatic artery and from the hepatic portal vein .
The liver processes the blood from the portal system to remove certain wastes and excess nutrients , which are stored for later use .
This processed blood , as well as the systemic blood that came from the hepatic artery , exits the liver via the right , left , and middle hepatic veins , and flows into the inferior vena cava .
Overall systemic blood composition remains relatively stable , since the liver is able to metabolize the absorbed digestive components .
By the end of this section , you will be able to : Describe the development of blood vessels Describe the fetal circulation In a developing embryo , the heart has developed enough by day 21 post-fertilization to begin beating .
Circulation patterns are clearly established by the fourth week of embryonic life .
It is critical to the survival of the developing human that the circulatory system forms early to supply the growing tissue with nutrients and gases , and to remove waste products .
Blood cells and vessel production in structures outside the embryo proper called the yolk sac , chorion , and connecting stalk begin about 15 to 16 days following fertilization .
Development of these circulatory elements within the embryo itself begins approximately 2 days later .
You will learn more about the formation and function of these early structures when you study the chapter on development .
During those first few weeks , blood vessels begin to form from the embryonic mesoderm .
The precursor cells are known as hemangioblasts .
These in turn differentiate into angioblasts , which give rise to the blood vessels and pluripotent stem cells , which differentiate into the formed elements of blood .
( Seek additional content for more detail on fetal development and circulation . )
Together , these cells form masses known as blood islands scattered throughout the embryonic disc .
Spaces appear on the blood islands that develop into vessel lumens .
The endothelial lining of the vessels arise from the angioblasts within these islands .
Surrounding mesenchymal cells give rise to the smooth muscle and connective tissue layers of the vessels .
While the vessels are developing , the pluripotent stem cells begin to form the blood .
Vascular tubes also develop on the blood islands , and they eventually connect to one another as well as to the developing , tubular heart .
Thus , the developmental pattern , rather than beginning from the formation of one central vessel and spreading outward , occurs in many regions simultaneously with vessels later joining together .
This angiogenesis —the creation of new blood vessels from existing ones—continues as needed throughout life as we grow and develop .
Blood vessel development often follows the same pattern as nerve development and travels to the same target tissues and organs .
This occurs because the many factors directing growth of nerves also stimulate blood vessels to follow a similar pattern .
Whether a given vessel develops into an artery or a vein is dependent upon local concentrations of signaling proteins .
As the embryo grows within the mother ’ s uterus , its requirements for nutrients and gas exchange also grow .
The placenta—a circulatory organ unique to pregnancy—develops jointly from the embryo and uterine wall structures to fill this need .
Emerging from the placenta is the umbilical vein , which carries oxygen-rich blood from the mother to the fetal inferior vena cava via the ductus venosus to the heart that pumps it into fetal circulation .
Two umbilical arteries carry oxygendepleted fetal blood , including wastes and carbon dioxide , to the placenta .
Remnants of the umbilical arteries remain in the adult .
( Seek additional content for more information on the role of the placenta in fetal circulation . )
There are three major shunts—alternate paths for blood flow—found in the circulatory system of the fetus .
Two of these shunts divert blood from the pulmonary to the systemic circuit , whereas the third connects the umbilical vein to the inferior vena cava .
The first two shunts are critical during fetal life , when the lungs are compressed , filled with amniotic fluid , and nonfunctional , and gas exchange is provided by the placenta .
These shunts close shortly after birth , however , when the newborn begins to breathe .
The third shunt persists a bit longer but becomes nonfunctional once the umbilical cord is severed .
The three shunts are as follows ( Figure 20.44 ) : The foramen ovale is an opening in the interatrial septum that allows blood to flow from the right atrium to the left atrium .
A valve associated with this opening prevents backflow of blood during the fetal period .
As the newborn begins to breathe and blood pressure in the atria increases , this shunt closes .
The fossa ovalis remains in the interatrial septum after birth , marking the location of the former foramen ovale .
The ductus arteriosus is a short , muscular vessel that connects the pulmonary trunk to the aorta .
Most of the blood pumped from the right ventricle into the pulmonary trunk is thereby diverted into the aorta .
Only enough blood reaches the fetal lungs to maintain the developing lung tissue .
When the newborn takes the first breath , pressure within the lungs drops dramatically , and both the lungs and the pulmonary vessels expand .
As the amount of oxygen increases , the smooth muscles in the wall of the ductus arteriosus constrict , sealing off the passage .
Eventually , the muscular and endothelial components of the ductus arteriosus degenerate , leaving only the connective tissue component of the ligamentum arteriosum .
The ductus venosus is a temporary blood vessel that branches from the umbilical vein , allowing much of the freshly oxygenated blood from the placenta—the organ of gas exchange between the mother and fetus—to bypass the fetal liver and go directly to the fetal heart .
The ductus venosus closes slowly during the first weeks of infancy and degenerates to become the ligamentum venosum .
All five were diagnosed with a rare pneumonia caused by a fungus called Pneumocystis jirovecii ( formerly known as Pneumocystis carinii ) .
Why was this unusual ?
Although commonly found in the lungs of healthy individuals , this fungus is an opportunistic pathogen that causes disease in individuals with suppressed or underdeveloped immune systems .
The very young , whose immune systems have yet to mature , and the elderly , whose immune systems have declined with age , are particularly susceptible .
The five patients from LA , though , were between 29 and 36 years of age and should have been in the prime of their lives , immunologically speaking .
What could be going on ?
A few days later , a cluster of eight cases was reported in New York City , also involving young patients , this time exhibiting a rare form of skin cancer known as Kaposi ’ s sarcoma .
This cancer of the cells that line the blood and lymphatic vessels was previously observed as a relatively innocuous disease of the elderly .
The disease that doctors saw in 1981 was frighteningly more severe , with multiple , fast-growing lesions that spread to all parts of the body , including the trunk and face .
Could the immune systems of these young patients have been compromised in some way ?
Indeed , when they were tested , they exhibited extremely low numbers of a specific type of white blood cell in their bloodstreams , indicating that they had somehow lost a major part of the immune system .
Acquired immune deficiency syndrome , or AIDS , turned out to be a new disease caused by the previously unknown human immunodeficiency virus ( HIV ) .
Although nearly 100 percent fatal in those with active HIV infections in the early years , the development of anti-HIV drugs has transformed HIV infection into a chronic , manageable disease and not the certain death sentence it once was .
One positive outcome resulting from the emergence of HIV disease was that the public ’ s attention became focused as never before on the importance of having a functional and healthy immune system .
The lymphatic system , for most people , is associated with the immune system to such a degree that the two systems are virtually indistinguishable .
The lymphatic system is the system of vessels , cells , and organs that carries excess fluids to the bloodstream and filters pathogens from the blood .
The swelling of lymph nodes during an infection and the transport of lymphocytes via the lymphatic vessels are but two examples of the many connections between these critical organ systems .
A major function of the lymphatic system is to drain body fluids and return them to the bloodstream .
Blood pressure causes leakage of fluid from the capillaries , resulting in the accumulation of fluid in the interstitial space—that is , spaces between individual cells in the tissues .
In humans , 20 liters of plasma is released into the interstitial space of the tissues each day due to capillary filtration .
Once this filtrate is out of the bloodstream and in the tissue spaces , it is referred to as interstitial fluid .
Of this , 17 liters is reabsorbed directly by the blood vessels .
But what happens to the remaining three liters ?
This is where the lymphatic system comes into play .
It drains the excess fluid and empties it back into the bloodstream via a series of vessels , trunks , and ducts .
Lymph is the term used to describe interstitial fluid once it has entered the lymphatic system .
When the lymphatic system is damaged in some way , such as by being blocked by cancer cells or destroyed by injury , protein-rich interstitial fluid accumulates ( sometimes “ backs up ” from the lymph vessels ) in the tissue spaces .
This inappropriate accumulation of fluid referred to as lymphedema may lead to serious medical consequences .
As the vertebrate immune system evolved , the network of lymphatic vessels became convenient avenues for transporting the cells of the immune system .
Additionally , the transport of dietary lipids and fat-soluble vitamins absorbed in the gut uses this system .
Cells of the immune system not only use lymphatic vessels to make their way from interstitial spaces back into the circulation , but they also use lymph nodes as major staging areas for the development of critical immune responses .
A lymph node is one of the small , bean-shaped organs located throughout the lymphatic system .
Visit this website ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/lymphsystem ) for an overview of the lymphatic system .
What are the three main components of the lymphatic system ?
The lymphatic vessels begin as open-ended capillaries , which feed into larger and larger lymphatic vessels , and eventually empty into the bloodstream by a series of ducts .
Along the way , the lymph travels through the lymph nodes , which are commonly found near the groin , armpits , neck , chest , and abdomen .
Humans have about 500–600 lymph nodes throughout the body ( Figure 21.2 ) .
A major distinction between the lymphatic and cardiovascular systems in humans is that lymph is not actively pumped by the heart , but is forced through the vessels by the movements of the body , the contraction of skeletal muscles during body movements , and breathing .
One-way valves ( semi-lunar valves ) in lymphatic vessels keep the lymph moving toward the heart .
Lymph flows from the lymphatic capillaries , through lymphatic vessels , and then is dumped into the circulatory system via the lymphatic ducts located at the junction of the jugular and subclavian veins in the neck .
Lymphatic capillaries , also called the terminal lymphatics , are vessels where interstitial fluid enters the lymphatic system to become lymph fluid .
Located in almost every tissue in the body , these vessels are interlaced among the arterioles and venules of the circulatory system in the soft connective tissues of the body ( Figure 21.3 ) .
Exceptions are the central nervous system , bone marrow , bones , teeth , and the cornea of the eye , which do not contain lymph vessels .
Lymphatic capillaries are formed by a one cell-thick layer of endothelial cells and represent the open end of the system , allowing interstitial fluid to flow into them via overlapping cells ( see Figure 21.3 ) .
When interstitial pressure is low , the endothelial flaps close to prevent “ backflow. ” As interstitial pressure increases , the spaces between the cells open up , allowing the fluid to enter .
Entry of fluid into lymphatic capillaries is also enabled by the collagen filaments that anchor the capillaries to surrounding structures .
As interstitial pressure increases , the filaments pull on the endothelial cell flaps , opening up them even further to allow easy entry of fluid .
In the small intestine , lymphatic capillaries called lacteals are critical for the transport of dietary lipids and lipid-soluble vitamins to the bloodstream .
In the small intestine , dietary triglycerides combine with other lipids and proteins , and enter the lacteals to form a milky fluid called chyle .
The chyle then travels through the lymphatic system , eventually entering the bloodstream .
The lymphatic capillaries empty into larger lymphatic vessels , which are similar to veins in terms of their three-tunic structure and the presence of valves .
These one-way valves are located fairly close to one another , and each one causes a bulge in the lymphatic vessel , giving the vessels a beaded appearance ( see Figure 21.3 ) .
The superficial and deep lymphatics eventually merge to form larger lymphatic vessels known as lymphatic trunks .
On the right side of the body , the right sides of the head , thorax , and right upper limb drain lymph fluid into the right subclavian vein via the right lymphatic duct ( Figure 21.4 ) .
On the left side of the body , the remaining portions of the body drain into the larger thoracic duct , which drains into the left subclavian vein .
The thoracic duct itself begins just beneath the diaphragm in the cisterna chyli , a sac-like chamber that receives lymph from the lower abdomen , pelvis , and lower limbs by way of the left and right lumbar trunks and the intestinal trunk .
The overall drainage system of the body is asymmetrical ( see Figure 21.4 ) .
The right lymphatic duct receives lymph from only the upper right side of the body .
The lymph from the rest of the body enters the bloodstream through the thoracic duct via all the remaining lymphatic trunks .
In general , lymphatic vessels of the subcutaneous tissues of the skin , that is , the superficial lymphatics , follow the same routes as veins , whereas the deep lymphatic vessels of the viscera generally follow the paths of arteries .
The immune system is a collection of barriers , cells , and soluble proteins that interact and communicate with each other in extraordinarily complex ways .
The modern model of immune function is organized into three phases based on the timing of their effects .
In contrast with embryonic stem cells , hematopoietic stem cells are present throughout adulthood and allow for the continuous differentiation of blood cells to replace those lost to age or function .
The two basic types of lymphocytes , B cells and T cells , are identical morphologically with a large central nucleus surrounded by a thin layer of cytoplasm .
They are distinguished from each other by their surface protein markers as well as by the molecules they secrete .
While B cells mature in red bone marrow and T cells mature in the thymus , they both initially develop from bone marrow .
T cells migrate from bone marrow to the thymus gland where they further mature .
B cells and T cells are found in many parts of the body , circulating in the bloodstream and lymph , and residing in secondary lymphoid organs , including the spleen and lymph nodes , which will be described later in this section .
The human body contains approximately 10 lymphocytes .
B cells are immune cells that function primarily by producing antibodies .
An antibody is any of the group of proteins that binds specifically to pathogen-associated molecules known as antigens .
An antigen is a chemical structure on the surface of a pathogen that binds to T or B lymphocyte antigen receptors .
Once activated by binding to antigen , B cells differentiate into cells that secrete a soluble form of their surface antibodies .
These activated B cells are known as plasma cells .
The T cell , on the other hand , does not secrete antibody but performs a variety of functions in the adaptive immune response .
Different T cell types have the ability to either secrete soluble factors that communicate with other cells of the adaptive immune response or destroy cells infected with intracellular pathogens .
The roles of T and B lymphocytes in the adaptive immune response will be discussed further in this chapter .
Another type of lymphocyte of importance is the plasma cell .
A plasma cell is a B cell that has differentiated in response to antigen binding , and has thereby gained the ability to secrete soluble antibodies .
These cells differ in morphology from standard B and T cells in that they contain a large amount of cytoplasm packed with the protein-synthesizing machinery known as rough endoplasmic reticulum .
A fourth important lymphocyte is the natural killer cell , a participant in the innate immune response .
A natural killer cell ( NK ) is a circulating blood cell that contains cytotoxic ( cell-killing ) granules in its extensive cytoplasm .
It shares this mechanism with the cytotoxic T cells of the adaptive immune response .
NK cells are among the body ’ s first lines of defense against viruses and certain types of cancer .
Visit this website ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/immunecells ) to learn about the many different cell types in the immune system and their very specialized jobs .
What is the role of the dendritic cell in an HIV infection ?
Understanding the differentiation and development of B and T cells is critical to the understanding of the adaptive immune response .
It is through this process that the body ( ideally ) learns to destroy only pathogens and leaves the body ’ s own cells relatively intact .
The primary lymphoid organs are the bone marrow and thymus gland .
The lymphoid organs are where lymphocytes mature , proliferate , and are selected , which enables them to attack pathogens without harming the cells of the body .
In the embryo , blood cells are made in the yolk sac .
As development proceeds , this function is taken over by the spleen , lymph nodes , and liver .
Later , the bone marrow takes over most hematopoietic functions , although the final stages of the differentiation of some cells may take place in other organs .
The red bone marrow is a loose collection of cells where hematopoiesis occurs , and the yellow bone marrow is a site of energy storage , which consists largely of fat cells ( Figure 21.6 ) .
The B cell undergoes nearly all of its development in the red bone marrow , whereas the immature T cell , called a thymocyte , leaves the bone marrow and matures largely in the thymus gland .
The thymus gland is a bilobed organ found in the space between the sternum and the aorta of the heart ( Figure 21.7 ) .
Connective tissue holds the lobes closely together but also separates them and forms a capsule .
at http : //141.214.65.171/Histology/Lymphatic % 20System/ View the University of Michigan WebScope 140_HISTO_40X.svs/view.apml ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/thymusMG ) to explore the tissue sample in greater detail .
The connective tissue capsule further divides the thymus into lobules via extensions called trabeculae .
The outer region of the organ is known as the cortex and contains large numbers of thymocytes with some epithelial cells , macrophages , and dendritic cells ( two types of phagocytic cells that are derived from monocytes ) .
The cortex is densely packed so it stains more intensely than the rest of the thymus ( see Figure 21.7 ) .
The medulla , where thymocytes migrate before leaving the thymus , contains a less dense collection of thymocytes , epithelial cells , and dendritic cells .
By the year 2050 , 25 percent of the population of the United States will be 60 years of age or older .
The CDC estimates that 80 percent of those 60 years and older have one or more chronic disease associated with deficiencies of the immune systems .
This loss of immune function with age is called immunosenescence .
To treat this growing population , medical professionals must better understand the aging process .
At that pace , the total loss of thymic epithelial tissue and thymocytes would occur at about 120 years of age .
Thus , this age is a theoretical limit to a healthy human lifespan .
Thymic involution has been observed in all vertebrate species that have a thymus gland .
Animal studies have shown that transplanted thymic grafts between inbred strains of mice involuted according to the age of the donor and not of the recipient , implying the process is genetically programmed .
There is evidence that the thymic microenvironment , so vital to the development of naïve T cells , loses thymic epithelial cells according to the decreasing expression of the FOXN1 gene with age .
It is also known that thymic involution can be altered by hormone levels .
Sex hormones such as estrogen and testosterone enhance involution , and the hormonal changes in pregnant women cause a temporary thymic involution that reverses itself , when the size of the thymus and its hormone levels return to normal , usually after lactation ceases .
What does all this tell us ?
Can we reverse immunosenescence , or at least slow it down ?
The potential is there for using thymic transplants from younger donors to keep thymic output of naïve T cells high .
Gene therapies that target gene expression are also seen as future possibilities .
The more we learn through immunosenescence research , the more opportunities there will be to develop therapies , even though these therapies will likely take decades to develop .
The ultimate goal is for everyone to live and be healthy longer , but there may be limits to immortality imposed by our genes and hormones .
Lymphocytes develop and mature in the primary lymphoid organs , but they mount immune responses from the secondary lymphoid organs .
A naïve lymphocyte is one that has left the primary organ and entered a secondary lymphoid organ .
Naïve lymphocytes are fully functional immunologically , but have yet to encounter an antigen to respond to .
In addition to circulating in the blood and lymph , lymphocytes concentrate in secondary lymphoid organs , which include the lymph nodes , spleen , and lymphoid nodules .
Any bacteria that infect the interstitial fluid are taken up by the lymphatic capillaries and transported to a regional lymph node .
Dendritic cells and macrophages within this organ internalize and kill many of the pathogens that pass through , thereby removing them from the body .
The lymph node is also the site of adaptive immune responses mediated by T cells , B cells , and accessory cells of the adaptive immune system .
Like the thymus , the beanshaped lymph nodes are surrounded by a tough capsule of connective tissue and are separated into compartments by trabeculae , the extensions of the capsule .
In addition to the structure provided by the capsule and trabeculae , the structural support of the lymph node is provided by a series of reticular fibers laid down by fibroblasts .
at http : //141.214.65.171/Histology/Lymphatic % 20System/ View the University of Michigan WebScope 142_HISTO_40X.svs/view.apml ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/lymphnodeMG ) to explore the tissue sample in greater detail .
The major routes into the lymph node are via afferent lymphatic vessels ( see Figure 21.8 ) .
Cells and lymph fluid that leave the lymph node may do so by another set of vessels known as the efferent lymphatic vessels .
Lymph enters the lymph node via the subcapsular sinus , which is occupied by dendritic cells , macrophages , and reticular fibers .
Within the cortex of the lymph node are lymphoid follicles , which consist of germinal centers of rapidly dividing B cells surrounded by a layer of T cells and other accessory cells .
As the lymph continues to flow through the node , it enters the medulla , which consists of medullary cords of B cells and plasma cells , and the medullary sinuses where the lymph collects before leaving the node via the efferent lymphatic vessels .
In addition to the lymph nodes , the spleen is a major secondary lymphoid organ ( Figure 21.9 ) .
It is about 12 cm ( 5 in ) long and is attached to the lateral border of the stomach via the gastrosplenic ligament .
The spleen is a fragile organ without a strong capsule , and is dark red due to its extensive vascularization .
The spleen is sometimes called the “ filter of the blood ” because of its extensive vascularization and the presence of macrophages and dendritic cells that remove microbes and other materials from the blood , including dying red blood cells .
The spleen also functions as the location of immune responses to blood-borne pathogens .
The spleen is also divided by trabeculae of connective tissue , and within each splenic nodule is an area of red pulp , consisting of mostly red blood cells , and white pulp , which resembles the lymphoid follicles of the lymph nodes .
Upon entering the spleen , the splenic artery splits into several arterioles ( surrounded by white pulp ) and eventually into sinusoids .
Blood from the capillaries subsequently collects in the venous sinuses and leaves via the splenic vein .
The red pulp consists of reticular fibers with fixed macrophages attached , free macrophages , and all of the other cells typical of the blood , including some lymphocytes .
The white pulp surrounds a central arteriole and consists of germinal centers of dividing B cells surrounded by T cells and accessory cells , including macrophages and dendritic cells .
Thus , the red pulp primarily functions as a filtration system of the blood , using cells of the relatively nonspecific immune response , and white pulp is where adaptive T and B cell responses are mounted .
The other lymphoid tissues , the lymphoid nodules , have a simpler architecture than the spleen and lymph nodes in that they consist of a dense cluster of lymphocytes without a surrounding fibrous capsule .
These nodules are located in the respiratory and digestive tracts , areas routinely exposed to environmental pathogens .
Tonsils are lymphoid nodules located along the inner surface of the pharynx and are important in developing immunity to oral pathogens ( Figure 21.10 ) .
The tonsil located at the back of the throat , the pharyngeal tonsil , is sometimes referred to as the adenoid when swollen .
Such swelling is an indication of an active immune response to infection .
Histologically , tonsils do not contain a complete capsule , and the epithelial layer invaginates deeply into the interior of the tonsil to form tonsillar crypts .
These structures , which accumulate all sorts of materials taken into the body through eating and breathing , actually “ encourage ” pathogens to penetrate deep into the tonsillar tissues where they are acted upon by numerous lymphoid follicles and eliminated .
This seems to be the major function of tonsils—to help children ’ s bodies recognize , destroy , and develop immunity to common environmental pathogens so that they will be protected in their later lives .
Tonsils are often removed in those children who have recurring throat infections , especially those involving the palatine tonsils on either side of the throat , whose swelling may interfere with their breathing and/or swallowing .
at http : //141.214.65.171/Histology/Lymphatic % 20System/ View the University of Michigan WebScope 138_HISTO_20X.svs/view.apml ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/tonsilMG ) to explore the tissue sample in greater detail .
Mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue ( MALT ) consists of an aggregate of lymphoid follicles directly associated with the mucous membrane epithelia .
MALT makes up dome-shaped structures found underlying the mucosa of the gastrointestinal tract , breast tissue , lungs , and eyes .
Peyer ’ s patches , a type of MALT in the small intestine , are especially important for immune responses against ingested substances ( Figure 21.11 ) .
Peyer ’ s patches contain specialized endothelial cells called M ( or microfold ) cells that sample material from the intestinal lumen and transport it to nearby follicles so that adaptive immune responses to potential pathogens can be mounted .
Bronchus-associated lymphoid tissue ( BALT ) consists of lymphoid follicular structures with an overlying epithelial layer found along the bifurcations of the bronchi , and between bronchi and arteries .
They also have the typically less-organized structure of other lymphoid nodules .
These tissues , in addition to the tonsils , are effective against inhaled pathogens .
Any discussion of the innate immune response usually begins with the physical barriers that prevent pathogens from entering the body , destroy them after they enter , or flush them out before they can establish themselves in the hospitable environment of the body ’ s soft tissues .
Barrier defenses are part of the body ’ s most basic defense mechanisms .
The barrier defenses are not a response to infections , but they are continuously working to protect against a broad range of pathogens .
The different modes of barrier defenses are associated with the external surfaces of the body , where pathogens may try to enter ( Table 21.2 ) .
The primary barrier to the entrance of microorganisms into the body is the skin .
Not only is the skin covered with a layer of dead , keratinized epithelium that is too dry for bacteria in which to grow , but as these cells are continuously sloughed off from the skin , they carry bacteria and other pathogens with them .
Additionally , sweat and other skin secretions may lower pH , contain toxic lipids , and physically wash microbes away .
Another barrier is the saliva in the mouth , which is rich in lysozyme—an enzyme that destroys bacteria by digesting their cell walls .
The acidic environment of the stomach , which is fatal to many pathogens , is also a barrier .
Additionally , the mucus layer of the gastrointestinal tract , respiratory tract , reproductive tract , eyes , ears , and nose traps both microbes and debris , and facilitates their removal .
In the case of the upper respiratory tract , ciliated epithelial cells move potentially contaminated mucus upwards to the mouth , where it is then swallowed into the digestive tract , ending up in the harsh acidic environment of the stomach .
Considering how often you breathe compared to how often you eat or perform other activities that expose you to pathogens , it is not surprising that multiple barrier mechanisms have evolved to work in concert to protect this vital area .
A phagocyte is a cell that is able to surround and engulf a particle or cell , a process called phagocytosis .
The phagocytes of the immune system engulf other particles or cells , either to clean an area of debris , old cells , or to kill pathogenic organisms such as bacteria .
The phagocytes are the body ’ s fast acting , first line of immunological defense against organisms that have breached barrier defenses and have entered the vulnerable tissues of the body .
Many of the cells of the immune system have a phagocytic ability , at least at some point during their life cycles .
Phagocytosis is an important and effective mechanism of destroying pathogens during innate immune responses .
The phagocyte takes the organism inside itself as a phagosome , which subsequently fuses with a lysosome and its digestive enzymes , effectively killing many pathogens .
On the other hand , some bacteria including Mycobacteria tuberculosis , the cause of tuberculosis , may be resistant to these enzymes and are therefore much more difficult to clear from the body .
Macrophages , neutrophils , and dendritic cells are the major phagocytes of the immune system .
A macrophage is an irregularly shaped phagocyte that is amoeboid in nature and is the most versatile of the phagocytes in the body .
Macrophages move through tissues and squeeze through capillary walls using pseudopodia .
They not only participate in innate immune responses but have also evolved to cooperate with lymphocytes as part of the adaptive immune response .
Macrophages exist in many tissues of the body , either freely roaming through connective tissues or fixed to reticular fibers within specific tissues such as lymph nodes .
When pathogens breach the body ’ s barrier defenses , macrophages are the first line of defense ( Table 21.3 ) .
They are called different names , depending on the tissue : Kupffer cells in the liver , histiocytes in connective tissue , and alveolar macrophages in the lungs .
A neutrophil is a phagocytic cell that is attracted via chemotaxis from the bloodstream to infected tissues .
These spherical cells are granulocytes .
A granulocyte contains cytoplasmic granules , which in turn contain a variety of vasoactive mediators such as histamine .
In contrast , macrophages are agranulocytes .
An agranulocyte has few or no cytoplasmic granules .
Whereas macrophages act like sentries , always on guard against infection , neutrophils can be thought of as military reinforcements that are called into a battle to hasten the destruction of the enemy .
Although , usually thought of as the primary pathogen-killing cell of the inflammatory process of the innate immune response , new research has suggested that neutrophils play a role in the adaptive immune response as well , just as macrophages do .
A monocyte is a circulating precursor cell that differentiates into either a macrophage or dendritic cell , which can be rapidly attracted to areas of infection by signal molecules of inflammation .
NK cells are a type of lymphocyte that have the ability to induce apoptosis , that is , programmed cell death , in cells infected with intracellular pathogens such as obligate intracellular bacteria and viruses .
NK cells recognize these cells by mechanisms that are still not well understood , but that presumably involve their surface receptors .
NK cells can induce apoptosis , in which a cascade of events inside the cell causes its own death by either of two mechanisms : 1 ) NK cells are able to respond to chemical signals and express the fas ligand .
A perforin is a protein that forms pores in the membranes of infected cells .
A granzyme is a protein-digesting enzyme that enters the cell via the perforin pores and triggers apoptosis intracellularly .
Both mechanisms are especially effective against virally infected cells .
If apoptosis is induced before the virus has the ability to synthesize and assemble all its components , no infectious virus will be released from the cell , thus preventing further infection .
Cells of the innate immune response , the phagocytic cells , and the cytotoxic NK cells recognize patterns of pathogenspecific molecules , such as bacterial cell wall components or bacterial flagellar proteins , using pattern recognition receptors .
A pattern recognition receptor ( PRR ) is a membrane-bound receptor that recognizes characteristic features of a pathogen and molecules released by stressed or damaged cells .
These receptors , which are thought to have evolved prior to the adaptive immune response , are present on the cell surface whether they are needed or not .
Their variety , however , is limited by two factors .
First , the fact that each receptor type must be encoded by a specific gene requires the cell to allocate most or all of its DNA to make receptors able to recognize all pathogens .
Secondly , the variety of receptors is limited by the finite surface area of the cell membrane .
Thus , the innate immune system must “ get by ” using only a limited number of receptors that are active against as wide a variety of pathogens as possible .
This strategy is in stark contrast to the approach used by the adaptive immune system , which uses large numbers of different receptors , each highly specific to a particular pathogen .
Receptors vary somewhat according to cell type , but they usually include receptors for bacterial components and for complement , discussed below .
The previous discussions have alluded to chemical signals that can induce cells to change various physiological characteristics , such as the expression of a particular receptor .
These soluble factors are secreted during innate or early induced responses , and later during adaptive immune responses .
A cytokine is signaling molecule that allows cells to communicate with each other over short distances .
Cytokines are secreted into the intercellular space , and the action of the cytokine induces the receiving cell to change its physiology .
A chemokine is a soluble chemical mediator similar to cytokines except that its function is to attract cells ( chemotaxis ) from longer distances .
this website ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/chemotaxis ) to learn about phagocyte chemotaxis .
Phagocyte Visit chemotaxis is the movement of phagocytes according to the secretion of chemical messengers in the form of interleukins and other chemokines .
By what means does a phagocyte destroy a bacterium that it has ingested ?
Early induced proteins are those that are not constitutively present in the body , but are made as they are needed early during the innate immune response .
Interferons are an example of early induced proteins .
Cells infected with viruses secrete interferons that travel to adjacent cells and induce them to make antiviral proteins .
Thus , even though the initial cell is sacrificed , the surrounding cells are protected .
Other early induced proteins specific for bacterial cell wall components are mannose-binding protein and C-reactive protein , made in the liver , which bind specifically to polysaccharide components of the bacterial cell wall .
Phagocytes such as macrophages have receptors for these proteins , and they are thus able to recognize them as they are bound to the bacteria .
This brings the phagocyte and bacterium into close proximity and enhances the phagocytosis of the bacterium by the process known as opsonization .
Opsonization is the tagging of a pathogen for phagocytosis by the binding of an antibody or an antimicrobial protein .
The complement system is a series of proteins constitutively found in the blood plasma .
As such , these proteins are not considered part of the early induced immune response , even though they share features with some of the antibacterial proteins of this class .
Made in the liver , they have a variety of functions in the innate immune response , using what is known as the “ alternate pathway ” of complement activation .
Additionally , complement functions in the adaptive immune response as well , in what is called the classical pathway .
The complement system consists of several proteins that enzymatically alter and fragment later proteins in a series , which is why it is termed cascade .
The alternate pathway does not require an antibody to become activated .
The splitting of the C3 protein is the common step to both pathways .
In the alternate pathway , C3 is activated spontaneously and , after reacting with the molecules factor P , factor B , and factor D , splits apart .
The larger fragment , C3b , binds to the surface of the pathogen and C3a , the smaller fragment , diffuses outward from the site of activation and attracts phagocytes to the site of infection .
Surface-bound C3b then activates the rest of the cascade , with the last five proteins , C5–C9 , forming the membrane-attack complex ( MAC ) .
The MAC can kill certain pathogens by disrupting their osmotic balance .
The MAC is especially effective against a broad range of bacteria .
The classical pathway is similar , except the early stages of activation require the presence of antibody bound to antigen , and thus is dependent on the adaptive immune response .
The earlier fragments of the cascade also have important functions .
Phagocytic cells such as macrophages and neutrophils are attracted to an infection site by chemotactic attraction to smaller complement fragments .
Additionally , once they arrive , their receptors for surface-bound C3b opsonize the pathogen for phagocytosis and destruction .
The hallmark of the innate immune response is inflammation .
Inflammation is something everyone has experienced .
Stub a toe , cut a finger , or do any activity that causes tissue damage and inflammation will result , with its four characteristics : heat , redness , pain , and swelling ( “ loss of function ” is sometimes mentioned as a fifth characteristic ) .
It is important to note that inflammation does not have to be initiated by an infection , but can also be caused by tissue injuries .
The release of damaged cellular contents into the site of injury is enough to stimulate the response , even in the absence of breaks in physical barriers that would allow pathogens to enter ( by hitting your thumb with a hammer , for example ) .
The inflammatory reaction brings in phagocytic cells to the damaged area to clear cellular debris and to set the stage for wound repair ( Figure 21.14 ) .
This reaction also brings in the cells of the innate immune system , allowing them to get rid of the sources of a possible infection .
Inflammation is part of a very basic form of immune response .
The process not only brings fluid and cells into the site to destroy the pathogen and remove it and debris from the site , but also helps to isolate the site , limiting the spread of the pathogen .
Acute inflammation is a short-term inflammatory response to an insult to the body .
If the cause of the inflammation is not resolved , however , it can lead to chronic inflammation , which is associated with major tissue destruction and fibrosis .
Chronic inflammation is ongoing inflammation .
It can be caused by foreign bodies , persistent pathogens , and autoimmune diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis .
There are four important parts to the inflammatory response : Tissue Injury .
The released contents of injured cells stimulate the release of mast cell granules and their potent inflammatory mediators such as histamine , leukotrienes , and prostaglandins .
Histamine increases the diameter of local blood vessels ( vasodilation ) , causing an increase in blood flow .
Histamine also increases the permeability of local capillaries , causing plasma to leak out and form interstitial fluid .
This causes the swelling associated with inflammation .
Additionally , injured cells , phagocytes , and basophils are sources of inflammatory mediators , including prostaglandins and leukotrienes .
Leukotrienes attract neutrophils from the blood by chemotaxis and increase vascular permeability .
Prostaglandins cause vasodilation by relaxing vascular smooth muscle and are a major cause of the pain associated with inflammation .
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs such as aspirin and ibuprofen relieve pain by inhibiting prostaglandin production .
Many inflammatory mediators such as histamine are vasodilators that increase the diameters of local capillaries .
This causes increased blood flow and is responsible for the heat and redness of inflamed tissue .
It allows greater access of the blood to the site of inflammation .
Increased Vascular Permeability .
At the same time , inflammatory mediators increase the permeability of the local vasculature , causing leakage of fluid into the interstitial space , resulting in the swelling , or edema , associated with inflammation .
Recruitment of Phagocytes .
Leukotrienes are particularly good at attracting neutrophils from the blood to the site of infection by chemotaxis .
Following an early neutrophil infiltrate stimulated by macrophage cytokines , more macrophages are recruited to clean up the debris left over at the site .
When local infections are severe , neutrophils are attracted to the sites of infections in large numbers , and as they phagocytose the pathogens and subsequently die , their accumulated cellular remains are visible as pus at the infection site .
Overall , inflammation is valuable for many reasons .
Not only are the pathogens killed and debris removed , but the increase in vascular permeability encourages the entry of clotting factors , the first step towards wound repair .
Inflammation also facilitates the transport of antigen to lymph nodes by dendritic cells for the development of the adaptive immune response .
However , they slow pathogen growth and allow time for the adaptive immune response to strengthen and either control or eliminate the pathogen .
The innate immune system also sends signals to the cells of the adaptive immune system , guiding them in how to attack the pathogen .
Thus , these are the two important arms of the immune response .
The specificity of the adaptive immune response—its ability to specifically recognize and make a response against a wide variety of pathogens—is its great strength .
Antigens , the small chemical groups often associated with pathogens , are recognized by receptors on the surface of B and T lymphocytes .
The adaptive immune response to these antigens is so versatile that it can respond to nearly any pathogen .
This increase in specificity comes because the adaptive immune response has a unique way to develop as many as 10 , or 100 trillion , different receptors to recognize nearly every conceivable pathogen .
How could so many different types of antibodies be encoded ?
And what about the many specificities of T cells ?
There is not nearly enough DNA in a cell to have a separate gene for each specificity .
The mechanism was finally worked out in the 1970s and 1980s using the new tools of molecular genetics The immune system ’ s first exposure to a pathogen is called a primary adaptive response .
Symptoms of a first infection , called primary disease , are always relatively severe because it takes time for an initial adaptive immune response to a pathogen to become effective .
Upon re-exposure to the same pathogen , a secondary adaptive immune response is generated , which is stronger and faster that the primary response .
The secondary adaptive response often eliminates a pathogen before it can cause significant tissue damage or any symptoms .
Without symptoms , there is no disease , and the individual is not even aware of the infection .
This secondary response is the basis of immunological memory , which protects us from getting diseases repeatedly from the same pathogen .
By this mechanism , an individual ’ s exposure to pathogens early in life spares the person from these diseases later in life .
A third important feature of the adaptive immune response is its ability to distinguish between self-antigens , those that are normally present in the body , and foreign antigens , those that might be on a potential pathogen .
As T and B cells mature , there are mechanisms in place that prevent them from recognizing self-antigen , preventing a damaging immune response against the body .
These mechanisms are not 100 percent effective , however , and their breakdown leads to autoimmune diseases , which will be discussed later in this chapter .
The primary cells that control the adaptive immune response are the lymphocytes , the T and B cells .
T cells are particularly important , as they not only control a multitude of immune responses directly , but also control B cell immune responses in many cases as well .
Thus , many of the decisions about how to attack a pathogen are made at the T cell level , and knowledge of their functional types is crucial to understanding the functioning and regulation of adaptive immune responses as a whole .
T lymphocytes recognize antigens based on a two-chain protein receptor .
The most common and important of these are the alpha-beta T cell receptors ( Figure 21.15 ) .
There are two chains in the T cell receptor , and each chain consists of two domains .
The variable region domain is furthest away from the T cell membrane and is so named because its amino acid sequence varies between receptors .
In contrast , the constant region domain has less variation .
The differences in the amino acid sequences of the variable domains are the molecular basis of the diversity of antigens the receptor can recognize .
Thus , the antigen-binding site of the receptor consists of the terminal ends of both receptor chains , and the amino acid sequences of those two areas combine to determine its antigenic specificity .
Each T cell produces only one type of receptor and thus is specific for a single particular antigen .
Antigens on pathogens are usually large and complex , and consist of many antigenic determinants .
An antigenic determinant ( epitope ) is one of the small regions within an antigen to which a receptor can bind , and antigenic determinants are limited by the size of the receptor itself .
They usually consist of six or fewer amino acid residues in a protein , or one or two sugar moieties in a carbohydrate antigen .
Antigenic determinants on a carbohydrate antigen are usually less diverse than on a protein antigen .
Carbohydrate antigens are found on bacterial cell walls and on red blood cells ( the ABO blood group antigens ) .
Protein antigens are complex because of the variety of three-dimensional shapes that proteins can assume , and are especially important for the immune responses to viruses and worm parasites .
It is the interaction of the shape of the antigen and the complementary shape of the amino acids of the antigen-binding site that accounts for the chemical basis of specificity ( Figure 21.16 ) .
Although Figure 21.16 shows T cell receptors interacting with antigenic determinants directly , the mechanism that T cells use to recognize antigens is , in reality , much more complex .
T cells do not recognize free-floating or cell-bound antigens as they appear on the surface of the pathogen .
They only recognize antigen on the surface of specialized cells called antigen-presenting cells .
Antigens are internalized by these cells .
Antigen processing is a mechanism that enzymatically cleaves the antigen into smaller pieces .
The antigen fragments are then brought to the cell ’ s surface and associated with a specialized type of antigen-presenting protein known as a major histocompatibility complex ( MHC ) molecule .
The MHC is the cluster of genes that encode these antigen-presenting molecules .
The association of the antigen fragments with an MHC molecule on the surface of a cell is known as antigen presentation and results in the recognition of antigen by a T cell .
This association of antigen and MHC occurs inside the cell , and it is the complex of the two that is brought to the surface .
The peptide-binding cleft is a small indentation at the end of the MHC molecule that is furthest away from the cell membrane ; it is here that the processed fragment of antigen sits .
MHC molecules are capable of presenting a variety of antigens , depending on the amino acid sequence , in their peptide-binding clefts .
It is the combination of the MHC molecule and the fragment of the original peptide or carbohydrate that is actually physically recognized by the T cell receptor ( Figure 21.17 ) .
Two distinct types of MHC molecules , MHC class I and MHC class II , play roles in antigen presentation .
Although produced from different genes , they both have similar functions .
They bring processed antigen to the surface of the cell via a transport vesicle and present the antigen to the T cell and its receptor .
Antigens from different classes of pathogens , however , use different MHC classes and take different routes through the cell to get to the surface for presentation .
The basic mechanism , though , is the same .
Antigens are processed by digestion , are brought into the endomembrane system of the cell , and then are expressed on the surface of the antigen-presenting cell for antigen recognition by a T cell .
Intracellular antigens are typical of viruses , which replicate inside the cell , and certain other intracellular parasites and bacteria .
Extracellular antigens , characteristic of many bacteria , parasites , and fungi that do not replicate inside the cell ’ s cytoplasm , are brought into the endomembrane system of the cell by receptor-mediated endocytosis .
The resulting vesicle fuses with vesicles from the Golgi complex , which contain pre-formed MHC class II molecules .
After fusion of these two vesicles and the association of antigen and MHC , the new vesicle makes its way to the cell surface .
Many cell types express class I molecules for the presentation of intracellular antigens .
These MHC molecules may then stimulate a cytotoxic T cell immune response , eventually destroying the cell and the pathogen within .
This is especially important when it comes to the most common class of intracellular pathogens , the virus .
Viruses infect nearly every tissue of the body , so all these tissues must necessarily be able to express class I MHC or no T cell response can be made .
On the other hand , class II MHC molecules are expressed only on the cells of the immune system , specifically cells that affect other arms of the immune response .
Thus , these cells are called “ professional ” antigen-presenting cells to distinguish them from those that bear class I MHC .
The three types of professional antigen presenters are macrophages , dendritic cells , and B cells ( Table 21.4 ) .
Macrophages stimulate T cells to release cytokines that enhance phagocytosis .
Dendritic cells also kill pathogens by phagocytosis ( see Figure 21.17 ) , but their major function is to bring antigens to regional draining lymph nodes .
The lymph nodes are the locations in which most T cell responses against pathogens of the interstitial tissues are mounted .
Macrophages are found in the skin and in the lining of mucosal surfaces , such as the nasopharynx , stomach , lungs , and intestines .
B cells may also present antigens to T cells , which are necessary for certain types of antibody responses , to be covered later in this chapter .
The process of eliminating T cells that might attack the cells of one ’ s own body is referred to as T cell tolerance .
While thymocytes are in the cortex of the thymus , they are referred to as “ double negatives , ” meaning that they do not bear the CD4 or CD8 molecules that you can use to follow their pathways of differentiation ( Figure 21.18 ) .
In the cortex of the thymus , they are exposed to cortical epithelial cells .
In a process known as positive selection , double-negative thymocytes bind to the MHC molecules they observe on the thymic epithelia , and the MHC molecules of “ self ” are selected .
This mechanism kills many thymocytes during T cell differentiation .
In fact , only two percent of the thymocytes that enter the thymus leave it as mature , functional T cells .
Later , the cells become double positives that express both CD4 and CD8 markers and move from the cortex to the junction between the cortex and medulla .
It is here that negative selection takes place .
In negative selection , self-antigens are brought into the thymus from other parts of the body by professional antigen-presenting cells .
The T cells that bind to these self-antigens are selected for negatively and are killed by apoptosis .
In summary , the only T cells left are those that can bind to MHC molecules of the body with foreign antigens presented on their binding clefts , preventing an attack on one ’ s own body tissues , at least under normal circumstances .
Tolerance can be broken , however , by the development of an autoimmune response , to be discussed later in this chapter .
The cells that leave the thymus become single positives , expressing either CD4 or CD8 , but not both ( see Figure 21.18 ) .
The CD4 T cells will bind to class II MHC and the CD8 cells will bind to class I MHC .
The discussion that follows explains the functions of these molecules and how they can be used to differentiate between the different T cell functional types .
Mature T cells become activated by recognizing processed foreign antigen in association with a self-MHC molecule and begin dividing rapidly by mitosis .
This proliferation of T cells is called clonal expansion and is necessary to make the immune response strong enough to effectively control a pathogen .
How does the body select only those T cells that are needed against a specific pathogen ?
Again , the specificity of a T cell is based on the amino acid sequence and the threedimensional shape of the antigen-binding site formed by the variable regions of the two chains of the T cell receptor ( Figure 21.19 ) .
Clonal selection is the process of antigen binding only to those T cells that have receptors specific to that antigen .
Each T cell that is activated has a specific receptor “ hard-wired ” into its DNA , and all of its progeny will have identical DNA and T cell receptors , forming clones of the original T cell .
The clonal selection theory was proposed by Frank Burnet in the 1950s .
However , the term clonal selection is not a complete description of the theory , as clonal expansion goes hand in glove with the selection process .
The main tenet of the theory is that a typical individual has a multitude ( 10 ) of different types of T cell clones based on their receptors .
In this use , a clone is a group of lymphocytes that share the same antigen receptor .
Each clone is necessarily present in the body in low numbers .
Otherwise , the body would not have room for lymphocytes with so many specificities .
Only those clones of lymphocytes whose receptors are activated by the antigen are stimulated to proliferate .
Keep in mind that most antigens have multiple antigenic determinants , so a T cell response to a typical antigen involves a polyclonal response .
A polyclonal response is the stimulation of multiple T cell clones .
Once activated , the selected clones increase in number and make many copies of each cell type , each clone with its unique receptor .
By the time this process is complete , the body will have large numbers of specific lymphocytes available to fight the infection ( see Figure 21.19 ) .
As already discussed , one of the major features of an adaptive immune response is the development of immunological memory .
During a primary adaptive immune response , both memory T cells and effector T cells are generated .
Memory T cells are long-lived and can even persist for a lifetime .
Memory cells are primed to act rapidly .
Thus , any subsequent exposure to the pathogen will elicit a very rapid T cell response .
This rapid , secondary adaptive response generates large numbers of effector T cells so fast that the pathogen is often overwhelmed before it can cause any symptoms of disease .
This is what is meant by immunity to a disease .
The same pattern of primary and secondary immune responses occurs in B cells and the antibody response , as will be discussed later in the chapter .
In the discussion of T cell development , you saw that mature T cells express either the CD4 marker or the CD8 marker , but not both .
These markers are cell adhesion molecules that keep the T cell in close contact with the antigen-presenting cell by directly binding to the MHC molecule ( to a different part of the molecule than does the antigen ) .
Thus , T cells and antigen-presenting cells are held together in two ways : by CD4 or CD8 attaching to MHC and by the T cell receptor binding to antigen ( Figure 21.20 ) .
Although the correlation is not 100 percent , CD4-bearing T cells are associated with helper functions and CD8-bearing T cells are associated with cytotoxicity .
These functional distinctions based on CD4 and CD8 markers are useful in defining the function of each type .
Helper T cells ( Th ) , bearing the CD4 molecule , function by secreting cytokines that act to enhance other immune responses .
There are two classes of Th cells , and they act on different components of the immune response .
These cells are not distinguished by their surface molecules but by the characteristic set of cytokines they secrete ( Table 21.5 ) .
Th1 cells are a type of helper T cell that secretes cytokines that regulate the immunological activity and development of a variety of cells , including macrophages and other types of T cells .
Th2 cells , on the other hand , are cytokine-secreting cells that act on B cells to drive their differentiation into plasma cells that make antibody .
In fact , T cell help is required for antibody responses to most protein antigens , and these are called T cell-dependent antigens .
Cytotoxic T cells ( Tc ) are T cells that kill target cells by inducing apoptosis using the same mechanism as NK cells .
They either express Fas ligand , which binds to the fas molecule on the target cell , or act by using perforins and granzymes contained in their cytoplasmic granules .
As was discussed earlier with NK cells , killing a virally infected cell before the virus can complete its replication cycle results in the production of no infectious particles .
As more Tc cells are developed during an immune response , they overwhelm the ability of the virus to cause disease .
In addition , each Tc cell can kill more than one target cell , making them especially effective .
Tc cells are so important in the antiviral immune response that some speculate that this was the main reason the adaptive immune response evolved in the first place .
Regulatory T cells ( Treg ) , or suppressor T cells , are the most recently discovered of the types listed here , so less is understood about them .
In addition to CD4 , they bear the molecules CD25 and FOXP3 .
Exactly how they function is still under investigation , but it is known that they suppress other T cell immune responses .
This is an important feature of the immune response , because if clonal expansion during immune responses were allowed to continue uncontrolled , these responses could lead to autoimmune diseases and other medical issues .
It was already known that individuals who survived a bacterial infection were immune to re-infection with the same pathogen .
Early microbiologists took serum from an immune patient and mixed it with a fresh culture of the same type of bacteria , then observed the bacteria under a microscope .
The bacteria became clumped in a process called agglutination .
When a different bacterial species was used , the agglutination did not happen .
Thus , there was something in the serum of immune individuals that could specifically bind to and agglutinate bacteria .
Scientists now know the cause of the agglutination is an antibody molecule , also called an immunoglobulin .
What is an antibody ?
An antibody protein is essentially a secreted form of a B cell receptor .
( In fact , surface immunoglobulin is another name for the B cell receptor . )
Not surprisingly , the same genes encode both the secreted antibodies and the surface immunoglobulins .
One minor difference in the way these proteins are synthesized distinguishes a naïve B cell with antibody on its surface from an antibody-secreting plasma cell with no antibodies on its surface .
The antibodies of the plasma cell have the exact same antigen-binding site and specificity as their B cell precursors .
There are five different classes of antibody found in humans : IgM , IgD , IgG , IgA , and IgE .
Each of these has specific functions in the immune response , so by learning about them , researchers can learn about the great variety of antibody functions critical to many adaptive immune responses .
B cells do not recognize antigen in the complex fashion of T cells .
B cells can recognize native , unprocessed antigen and do not require the participation of MHC molecules and antigen-presenting cells .
B cells differentiate in the bone marrow .
During the process of maturation , up to 100 trillion different clones of B cells are generated , which is similar to the diversity of antigen receptors seen in T cells .
B cell differentiation and the development of tolerance are not quite as well understood as it is in T cells .
Central tolerance is the destruction or inactivation of B cells that recognize self-antigens in the bone marrow , and its role is critical and well established .
In the process of clonal deletion , immature B cells that bind strongly to self-antigens expressed on tissues are signaled to commit suicide by apoptosis , removing them from the population .
In the process of clonal anergy , however , B cells exposed to soluble antigen in the bone marrow are not physically deleted , but become unable to function .
Another mechanism called peripheral tolerance is a direct result of T cell tolerance .
In peripheral tolerance , functional , mature B cells leave the bone marrow but have yet to be exposed to self-antigen .
Most protein antigens require signals from helper T cells ( Th2 ) to proceed to make antibody .
When a B cell binds to a self-antigen but receives no signals from a nearby Th2 cell to produce antibody , the cell is signaled to undergo apoptosis and is destroyed .
This is yet another example of the control that T cells have over the adaptive immune response .
After B cells are activated by their binding to antigen , they differentiate into plasma cells .
Plasma cells often leave the secondary lymphoid organs , where the response is generated , and migrate back to the bone marrow , where the whole differentiation process started .
After secreting antibodies for a specific period , they die , as most of their energy is devoted to making antibodies and not to maintaining themselves .
Thus , plasma cells are said to be terminally differentiated .
The final B cell of interest is the memory B cell , which results from the clonal expansion of an activated B cell .
Memory B cells function in a way similar to memory T cells .
They lead to a stronger and faster secondary response when compared to the primary response , as illustrated below .
Antibodies are glycoproteins consisting of two types of polypeptide chains with attached carbohydrates .
The heavy chain and the light chain are the two polypeptides that form the antibody .
The main differences between the classes of antibodies are in the differences between their heavy chains , but as you shall see , the light chains have an important role , forming part of the antigen-binding site on the antibody molecules .
All antibody molecules have two identical heavy chains and two identical light chains .
( Some antibodies contain multiple units of this four-chain structure . )
The Fc region of the antibody is formed by the two heavy chains coming together , usually linked by disulfide bonds ( Figure 21.21 ) .
The Fc portion of the antibody is important in that many effector cells of the immune system have Fc receptors .
Cells having these receptors can then bind to antibody-coated pathogens , greatly increasing the specificity of the effector cells .
At the other end of the molecule are two identical antigen-binding sites .
In general , antibodies have two basic functions .
They can act as the B cell antigen receptor or they can be secreted , circulate , and bind to a pathogen , often labeling it for identification by other forms of the immune response .
Of the five antibody classes , notice that only two can function as the antigen receptor for naïve B cells : IgM and IgD ( Figure 21.22 ) .
Mature B cells that leave the bone marrow express both IgM and IgD , but both antibodies have the same antigen specificity .
Only IgM is secreted , however , and no other nonreceptor function for IgD has been discovered .
IgM consists of five four-chain structures ( 20 total chains with 10 identical antigen-binding sites ) and is thus the largest of the antibody molecules .
IgM is usually the first antibody made during a primary response .
Its 10 antigen-binding sites and large shape allow it to bind well to many bacterial surfaces .
It is excellent at binding complement proteins and activating the complement cascade , consistent with its role in promoting chemotaxis , opsonization , and cell lysis .
Thus , it is a very effective antibody against bacteria at early stages of a primary antibody response .
As the primary response proceeds , the antibody produced in a B cell can change to IgG , IgA , or IgE by the process known as class switching .
Class switching is the change of one antibody class to another .
While the class of antibody changes , the specificity and the antigen-binding sites do not .
Thus , the antibodies made are still specific to the pathogen that stimulated the initial IgM response .
IgG is a major antibody of late primary responses and the main antibody of secondary responses in the blood .
This is because class switching occurs during primary responses .
IgG is a monomeric antibody that clears pathogens from the blood and can activate complement proteins ( although not as well as IgM ) , taking advantage of its antibacterial activities .
Furthermore , this class of antibody is the one that crosses the placenta to protect the developing fetus from disease exits the blood to the interstitial fluid to fight extracellular pathogens .
IgA exists in two forms , a four-chain monomer in the blood and an eight-chain structure , or dimer , in exocrine gland secretions of the mucous membranes , including mucus , saliva , and tears .
Thus , dimeric IgA is the only antibody to leave the interior of the body to protect body surfaces .
IgA is also of importance to newborns , because this antibody is present in mother ’ s breast milk ( colostrum ) , which serves to protect the infant from disease .
IgE is usually associated with allergies and anaphylaxis .
It is present in the lowest concentration in the blood , because its Fc region binds strongly to an IgE-specific Fc receptor on the surfaces of mast cells .
IgE makes mast cell degranulation very specific , such that if a person is allergic to peanuts , there will be peanut-specific IgE bound to his or her mast cells .
In this person , eating peanuts will cause the mast cells to degranulate , sometimes causing severe allergic reactions , including anaphylaxis , a severe , systemic allergic response that can cause death .
Clonal selection and expansion work much the same way in B cells as in T cells .
Only B cells with appropriate antigen specificity are selected for and expanded ( Figure 21.23 ) .
Eventually , the plasma cells secrete antibodies with antigenic specificity identical to those that were on the surfaces of the selected B cells .
Notice in the figure that both plasma cells and memory B cells are generated simultaneously .
Primary and secondary responses as they relate to T cells were discussed earlier .
This section will look at these responses with B cells and antibody production .
Because antibodies are easily obtained from blood samples , they are easy to follow and graph ( Figure 21.24 ) .
As you will see from the figure , the primary response to an antigen ( representing a pathogen ) is delayed by several days .
This is the time it takes for the B cell clones to expand and differentiate into plasma cells .
The level of antibody produced is low , but it is sufficient for immune protection .
The second time a person encounters the same antigen , there is no time delay , and the amount of antibody made is much higher .
Thus , the secondary antibody response overwhelms the pathogens quickly and , in most situations , no symptoms are felt .
When a different antigen is used , another primary response is made with its low antibody levels and time delay .
Both active and passive immunity have examples in the natural world and as part of medicine .
Active immunity is the resistance to pathogens acquired during an adaptive immune response within an individual ( Table 21.6 ) .
Naturally acquired active immunity , the response to a pathogen , is the focus of this chapter .
Artificially acquired active immunity involves the use of vaccines .
A vaccine is a killed or weakened pathogen or its components that , when administered to a healthy individual , leads to the development of immunological memory ( a weakened primary immune response ) without causing much in the way of symptoms .
Thus , with the use of vaccines , one can avoid the damage from disease that results from the first exposure to the pathogen , yet reap the benefits of protection from immunological memory .
The advent of vaccines was one of the major medical advances of the twentieth century and led to the eradication of smallpox and the control of many infectious diseases , including polio , measles , and whooping cough .
Passive immunity arises from the transfer of antibodies to an individual without requiring them to mount their own active immune response .
Naturally acquired passive immunity is seen during fetal development .
IgG is transferred from the maternal circulation to the fetus via the placenta , protecting the fetus from infection and protecting the newborn for the first few months of its life .
As already stated , a newborn benefits from the IgA antibodies it obtains from milk during breastfeeding .
The fetus and newborn thus benefit from the immunological memory of the mother to the pathogens to which she has been exposed .
In medicine , artificially acquired passive immunity usually involves injections of immunoglobulins , taken from animals previously exposed to a specific pathogen .
This treatment is a fast-acting method of temporarily protecting an individual who was possibly exposed to a pathogen .
The downside to both types of passive immunity is the lack of the development of immunological memory .
Once the antibodies are transferred , they are effective for only a limited time before they degrade .
Immunity can be acquired in an active or passive way , and it can be natural or artificial .
Watch this video ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/immunity ) to see an animated discussion of passive and active immunity .
What is an example of natural immunity acquired passively ?
As discussed previously , Th2 cells secrete cytokines that drive the production of antibodies in a B cell , responding to complex antigens such as those made by proteins .
On the other hand , some antigens are T cell independent .
A T cellindependent antigen usually is in the form of repeated carbohydrate moieties found on the cell walls of bacteria .
Each antibody on the B cell surface has two binding sites , and the repeated nature of T cell-independent antigen leads to crosslinking of the surface antibodies on the B cell .
The crosslinking is enough to activate it in the absence of T cell cytokines .
A T cell-dependent antigen , on the other hand , usually is not repeated to the same degree on the pathogen and thus does not crosslink surface antibody with the same efficiency .
To elicit a response to such antigens , the B and T cells must come close together ( Figure 21.25 ) .
The B cell must receive two signals to become activated .
Its surface immunoglobulin must recognize native antigen .
Some of this antigen is internalized , processed , and presented to the Th2 cells on a class II MHC molecule .
The T cell then binds using its antigen receptor and is activated to secrete cytokines that diffuse to the B cell , finally activating it completely .
Thus , the B cell receives signals from both its surface antibody and the T cell via its cytokines , and acts as a professional antigen-presenting cell in the process .
Ideally , the immune response will rid the body of a pathogen entirely .
The adaptive immune response , with its rapid clonal expansion , is well suited to this purpose .
Think of a primary infection as a race between the pathogen and the immune system .
The pathogen bypasses barrier defenses and starts multiplying in the host ’ s body .
During the first 4 to 5 days , the innate immune response will partially control , but not stop , pathogen growth .
As the adaptive immune response gears up , however , it will begin to clear the pathogen from the body , while at the same time becoming stronger and stronger .
When following antibody responses in patients with a particular disease such as a virus , this clearance is referred to as seroconversion ( sero= “ serum ” ) .
Seroconversion is the reciprocal relationship between virus levels in the blood and antibody levels .
As the antibody levels rise , the virus levels decline , and this is a sign that the immune response is being at least partially effective ( partially , because in many diseases , seroconversion does not necessarily mean a patient is getting well ) .
An excellent example of this is seroconversion during HIV disease ( Figure 21.26 ) .
Notice that antibodies are made early in this disease , and the increase in anti-HIV antibodies correlates with a decrease in detectable virus in the blood .
Although these antibodies are an important marker for diagnosing the disease , they are not sufficient to completely clear the virus .
Several years later , the vast majority of these individuals , if untreated , will lose their entire adaptive immune response , including the ability to make antibodies , during the final stages of AIDS .
“ Wash your hands ! ” Parents have been telling their children this for generations .
Dirty hands can spread disease .
But is it possible to get rid of enough pathogens that children will never get sick ?
Are children who avoid exposure to pathogens better off ?
The answers to both these questions appears to be no .
Antibacterial wipes , soaps , gels , and even toys with antibacterial substances embedded in their plastic are ubiquitous in our society .
Still , these products do not rid the skin and gastrointestinal tract of bacteria , and it would be harmful to our health if they did .
We need these nonpathogenic bacteria on and within our bodies to keep the pathogenic ones from growing .
The urge to keep children perfectly clean is thus probably misguided .
Children will get sick anyway , and the later benefits of immunological memory far outweigh the minor discomforts of most childhood diseases .
In fact , getting diseases such as chickenpox or measles later in life is much harder on the adult and are associated with symptoms significantly worse than those seen in the childhood illnesses .
Of course , vaccinations help children avoid some illnesses , but there are so many pathogens , we will never be immune to them all .
Could over-cleanliness be the reason that allergies are increasing in more developed countries ?
Some scientists think so .
Allergies are based on an IgE antibody response .
Many scientists think the system evolved to help the body rid itself of worm parasites .
The hygiene theory is the idea that the immune system is geared to respond to antigens , and if pathogens are not present , it will respond instead to inappropriate antigens such as allergens and self-antigens .
This is one explanation for the rising incidence of allergies in developed countries , where the response to nonpathogens like pollen , shrimp , and cat dander cause allergic responses while not serving any protective function .
Mucosal tissues are major barriers to the entry of pathogens into the body .
The IgA ( and sometimes IgM ) antibodies in mucus and other secretions can bind to the pathogen , and in the cases of many viruses and bacteria , neutralize them .
Neutralization is the process of coating a pathogen with antibodies , making it physically impossible for the pathogen to bind to receptors .
Neutralization , which occurs in the blood , lymph , and other body fluids and secretions , protects the body constantly .
Neutralizing antibodies are the basis for the disease protection offered by vaccines .
Vaccinations for diseases that commonly enter the body via mucous membranes , such as influenza , are usually formulated to enhance IgA production .
Immune responses in some mucosal tissues such as the Peyer ’ s patches ( see Figure 21.11 ) in the small intestine take up particulate antigens by specialized cells known as microfold or M cells ( Figure 21.27 ) .
These cells allow the body to sample potential pathogens from the intestinal lumen .
Dendritic cells then take the antigen to the regional lymph nodes , where an immune response is mounted .
The body fights bacterial pathogens with a wide variety of immunological mechanisms , essentially trying to find one that is effective .
Bacteria such as Mycobacterium leprae , the cause of leprosy , are resistant to lysosomal enzymes and can persist in macrophage organelles or escape into the cytosol .
In such situations , infected macrophages receiving cytokine signals from Th1 cells turn on special metabolic pathways .
Macrophage oxidative metabolism is hostile to intracellular bacteria , often relying on the production of nitric oxide to kill the bacteria inside the macrophage .
Fungal infections , such as those from Aspergillus , Candida , and Pneumocystis , are largely opportunistic infections that take advantage of suppressed immune responses .
Most of the same immune mechanisms effective against bacteria have similar effects on fungi , both of which have characteristic cell wall structures that protect their cells .
Worm parasites such as helminths are seen as the primary reason why the mucosal immune response , IgE-mediated allergy and asthma , and eosinophils evolved .
These parasites were at one time very common in human society .
When infecting a human , often via contaminated food , some worms take up residence in the gastrointestinal tract .
Eosinophils are attracted to the site by T cell cytokines , which release their granule contents upon their arrival .
Mast cell degranulation also occurs , and the fluid leakage caused by the increase in local vascular permeability is thought to have a flushing action on the parasite , expelling its larvae from the body .
Furthermore , if IgE labels the parasite , the eosinophils can bind to it by its Fc receptor .
The primary mechanisms against viruses are NK cells , interferons , and cytotoxic T cells .
Antibodies are effective against viruses mostly during protection , where an immune individual can neutralize them based on a previous exposure .
Antibodies have no effect on viruses or other intracellular pathogens once they enter the cell , since antibodies are not able to penetrate the plasma membrane of the cell .
Many cells respond to viral infections by downregulating their expression of MHC class I molecules .
This is to the advantage of the virus , because without class I expression , cytotoxic T cells have no activity .
NK cells , however , can recognize virally infected class I-negative cells and destroy them .
Thus , NK and cytotoxic T cells have complementary activities against virally infected cells .
Interferons have activity in slowing viral replication and are used in the treatment of certain viral diseases , such as hepatitis B and C , but their ability to eliminate the virus completely is limited .
The cytotoxic T cell response , though , is key , as it eventually overwhelms the virus and kills infected cells before the virus can complete its replicative cycle .
Clonal expansion and the ability of cytotoxic T cells to kill more than one target cell make these cells especially effective against viruses .
In fact , without cytotoxic T cells , it is likely that humans would all die at some point from a viral infection ( if no vaccine were available ) .
It is important to keep in mind that although the immune system has evolved to be able to control many pathogens , pathogens themselves have evolved ways to evade the immune response .
An example already mentioned is in Mycobactrium tuberculosis , which has evolved a complex cell wall that is resistant to the digestive enzymes of the macrophages that ingest them , and thus persists in the host , causing the chronic disease tuberculosis .
This section briefly summarizes other ways in which pathogens can “ outwit ” immune responses .
But keep in mind , although it seems as if pathogens have a will of their own , they do not .
All of these evasive “ strategies ” arose strictly by evolution , driven by selection .
Bacteria sometimes evade immune responses because they exist in multiple strains , such as different groups of Staphylococcus aureus .
S. aureus is commonly found in minor skin infections , such as boils , and some healthy people harbor it in their nose .
One small group of strains of this bacterium , however , called methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus , has become resistant to multiple antibiotics and is essentially untreatable .
Different bacterial strains differ in the antigens on their surfaces .
The immune response against one strain ( antigen ) does not affect the other ; thus , the species survives .
Another method of immune evasion is mutation .
Because viruses ’ surface molecules mutate continuously , viruses like influenza change enough each year that the flu vaccine for one year may not protect against the flu common to the next .
New vaccine formulations must be derived for each flu season .
Genetic recombination—the combining of gene segments from two different pathogens—is an efficient form of immune evasion .
For example , the influenza virus contains gene segments that can recombine when two different viruses infect the same cell .
Recombination between human and pig influenza viruses led to the 2010 H1N1 swine flu outbreak .
Pathogens can produce immunosuppressive molecules that impair immune function , and there are several different types .
Viruses are especially good at evading the immune response in this way , and many types of viruses have been shown to suppress the host immune response in ways much more subtle than the wholesale destruction caused by HIV .
By the end of this section , you will be able to : Discuss inherited and acquired immunodeficiencies Explain the four types of hypersensitivity and how they differ Give an example of how autoimmune disease breaks tolerance This section is about how the immune system goes wrong .
When it goes haywire , and becomes too weak or too strong , it leads to a state of disease .
The factors that maintain immunological homeostasis are complex and incompletely understood .
As you have seen , the immune system is quite complex .
It has many pathways using many cell types and signals .
Because it is so complex , there are many ways for it to go wrong .
Inherited immunodeficiencies arise from gene mutations that affect specific components of the immune response .
There are also acquired immunodeficiencies with potentially devastating effects on the immune system , such as HIV .
A list of all inherited immunodeficiencies is well beyond the scope of this book .
The list is almost as long as the list of cells , proteins , and signaling molecules of the immune system itself .
Some deficiencies , such as those for complement , cause only a higher susceptibility to some Gram-negative bacteria .
Others are more severe in their consequences .
Certainly , the most serious of the inherited immunodeficiencies is severe combined immunodeficiency disease ( SCID ) .
This disease is complex because it is caused by many different genetic defects .
What groups them together is the fact that both the B cell and T cell arms of the adaptive immune response are affected .
Children with this disease usually die of opportunistic infections within their first year of life unless they receive a bone marrow transplant .
One of the features that make bone marrow transplants work as well as they do is the proliferative capability of hematopoietic stem cells of the bone marrow .
Only a small amount of bone marrow from a healthy donor is given intravenously to the recipient .
It finds its own way to the bone where it populates it , eventually reconstituting the patient ’ s immune system , which is usually destroyed beforehand by treatment with radiation or chemotherapeutic drugs .
New treatments for SCID using gene therapy , inserting nondefective genes into cells taken from the patient and giving them back , have the advantage of not needing the tissue match required for standard transplants .
Although not a standard treatment , this approach holds promise , especially for those in whom standard bone marrow transplantation has failed .
Although many viruses cause suppression of the immune system , only one wipes it out completely , and that is the previously mentioned HIV .
It is worth discussing the biology of this virus , which can lead to the well-known AIDS , so that its full effects on the immune system can be understood .
The virus is transmitted through semen , vaginal fluids , and blood , and can be caught by risky sexual behaviors and the sharing of needles by intravenous drug users .
There are sometimes , but not always , flu-like symptoms in the first 1 to 2 weeks after infection .
This is later followed by seroconversion .
The anti-HIV antibodies formed during seroconversion are the basis for most initial HIV screening done in the United States .
Because seroconversion takes different lengths of time in different individuals , multiple AIDS tests are given months apart to confirm or eliminate the possibility of infection .
After seroconversion , the amount of virus circulating in the blood drops and stays at a low level for several years .
During this time , the levels of CD4 cells , especially helper T cells , decline steadily , until at some point , the immune response is so weak that opportunistic disease and eventually death result .
HIV uses CD4 as the receptor to get inside cells , but it also needs a co-receptor , such as CCR5 or CXCR4 .
These co-receptors , which usually bind to chemokines , present another target for anti-HIV drug development .
Although other antigen-presenting cells are infected with HIV , given that CD4 helper T cells play an important role in T cell immune responses and antibody responses , it should be no surprise that both types of immune responses are eventually seriously compromised .
Treatment for the disease consists of drugs that target virally encoded proteins that are necessary for viral replication but are absent from normal human cells .
By targeting the virus itself and sparing the cells , this approach has been successful in significantly prolonging the lives of HIV-positive individuals .
On the other hand , an HIV vaccine has been 30 years in development and is still years away .
Because the virus mutates rapidly to evade the immune system , scientists have been looking for parts of the virus that do not change and thus would be good targets for a vaccine candidate .
The word “ hypersensitivity ” simply means sensitive beyond normal levels of activation .
Allergies and inflammatory responses to nonpathogenic environmental substances have been observed since the dawn of history .
Hypersensitivity is a medical term describing symptoms that are now known to be caused by unrelated mechanisms of immunity .
Still , it is useful for this discussion to use the four types of hypersensitivities as a guide to understand these mechanisms ( Figure 21.28 ) .
Antigens that cause allergic responses are often referred to as allergens .
The specificity of the immediate hypersensitivity response is predicated on the binding of allergen-specific IgE to the mast cell surface .
The process of producing allergenspecific IgE is called sensitization , and is a necessary prerequisite for the symptoms of immediate hypersensitivity to occur .
Allergies and allergic asthma are mediated by mast cell degranulation that is caused by the crosslinking of the antigen-specific IgE molecules on the mast cell surface .
The mediators released have various vasoactive effects already discussed , but the major symptoms of inhaled allergens are the nasal edema and runny nose caused by the increased vascular permeability and increased blood flow of nasal blood vessels .
As these mediators are released with mast cell degranulation , type I hypersensitivity reactions are usually rapid and occur within just a few minutes , hence the term immediate hypersensitivity .
Most allergens are in themselves nonpathogenic and therefore innocuous .
Some individuals develop mild allergies , which are usually treated with antihistamines .
Others develop severe allergies that may cause anaphylactic shock , which can potentially be fatal within 20 to 30 minutes if untreated .
Because epinephrine raises blood pressure and relaxes bronchial smooth muscle , it is routinely used to counteract the effects of anaphylaxis and can be lifesaving .
Patients with known severe allergies are encouraged to keep automatic epinephrine injectors with them at all times , especially when away from easy access to hospitals .
Allergists use skin testing to identify allergens in type I hypersensitivity .
The soft center is due to fluid leaking from the blood vessels and the redness is caused by the increased blood flow to the area that results from the dilation of local blood vessels at the site .
Type II hypersensitivity , which involves IgG-mediated lysis of cells by complement proteins , occurs during mismatched blood transfusions and blood compatibility diseases such as erythroblastosis fetalis ( see section on transplantation ) .
Type III hypersensitivity occurs with diseases such as systemic lupus erythematosus , where soluble antigens , mostly DNA and other material from the nucleus , and antibodies accumulate in the blood to the point that the antigen and antibody precipitate along blood vessel linings .
These immune complexes often lodge in the kidneys , joints , and other organs where they can activate complement proteins and cause inflammation .
Delayed hypersensitivity , or type IV hypersensitivity , is basically a standard cellular immune response .
In delayed hypersensitivity , the first exposure to an antigen is called sensitization , such that on re-exposure , a secondary cellular response results , secreting cytokines that recruit macrophages and other phagocytes to the site .
These sensitized T cells , of the Th1 class , will also activate cytotoxic T cells .
The time it takes for this reaction to occur accounts for the 24to 72-hour delay in development .
The classical test for delayed hypersensitivity is the tuberculin test for tuberculosis , where bacterial proteins from M. tuberculosis are injected into the skin .
A couple of days later , a positive test is indicated by a raised red area that is hard to the touch , called an induration , which is a consequence of the cellular infiltrate , an accumulation of activated macrophages .
A positive tuberculin test means that the patient has been exposed to the bacteria and exhibits a cellular immune response to it .
Another type of delayed hypersensitivity is contact sensitivity , where substances such as the metal nickel cause a red and swollen area upon contact with the skin .
The individual must have been previously sensitized to the metal .
A much more severe case of contact sensitivity is poison ivy , but many of the harshest symptoms of the reaction are associated with the toxicity of its oils and are not T cell mediated .
The worst cases of the immune system over-reacting are autoimmune diseases .
Somehow , tolerance breaks down and the immune systems in individuals with these diseases begin to attack their own bodies , causing significant damage .
The trigger for these diseases is , more often than not , unknown , and the treatments are usually based on resolving the symptoms using immunosuppressive and anti-inflammatory drugs such as steroids .
These diseases can be localized and crippling , as in rheumatoid arthritis , or diffuse in the body with multiple symptoms that differ in different individuals , as is the case with systemic lupus erythematosus ( Figure 21.29 ) .
Environmental triggers seem to play large roles in autoimmune responses .
One explanation for the breakdown of tolerance is that , after certain bacterial infections , an immune response to a component of the bacterium cross-reacts with a self-antigen .
This mechanism is seen in rheumatic fever , a result of infection with Streptococcus bacteria , which causes strep throat .
The antibodies to this pathogen ’ s M protein cross-react with an antigenic component of heart myosin , a major contractile protein of the heart that is critical to its normal function .
The antibody binds to these molecules and activates complement proteins , causing damage to the heart , especially to the heart valves .
On the other hand , some theories propose that having multiple common infectious diseases actually prevents autoimmune responses .
The fact that autoimmune diseases are rare in countries that have a high incidence of infectious diseases supports this idea , another example of the hygiene hypothesis discussed earlier in this chapter .
There are genetic factors in autoimmune diseases as well .
Some diseases are associated with the MHC genes that an individual expresses .
The reason for this association is likely because if one ’ s MHC molecules are not able to present a certain self-antigen , then that particular autoimmune disease can not occur .
Overall , there are more than 80 different autoimmune diseases , which are a significant health problem in the elderly .
Table 21.7 lists several of the most common autoimmune diseases , the antigens that are targeted , and the segment of the adaptive immune response that causes the damage .
With the use of tissue typing and anti-rejection drugs , transplantation of organs and the control of the anti-transplant immune response have made huge strides in the past 50 years .
Today , these procedures are commonplace .
Tissue typing is the determination of MHC molecules in the tissue to be transplanted to better match the donor to the recipient .
The immune response to cancer , on the other hand , has been more difficult to understand and control .
Although it is clear that the immune system can recognize some cancers and control them , others seem to be resistant to immune mechanisms .
Red blood cells can be typed based on their surface antigens .
ABO blood type , in which individuals are type A , B , AB , or O according to their genetics , is one example .
A separate antigen system seen on red blood cells is the Rh antigen .
When someone is “ A positive ” for example , the positive refers to the presence of the Rh antigen , whereas someone who is “ A negative ” would lack this molecule .
An interesting consequence of Rh factor expression is seen in erythroblastosis fetalis , a hemolytic disease of the newborn ( Figure 21.30 ) .
This disease occurs when mothers negative for Rh antigen have multiple Rh-positive children .
During the birth of a first Rh-positive child , the mother makes a primary anti-Rh antibody response to the fetal blood cells that enter the maternal bloodstream .
If the mother has a second Rh-positive child , IgG antibodies against Rh-positive blood mounted during this secondary response cross the placenta and attack the fetal blood , causing anemia .
This is a consequence of the fact that the fetus is not genetically identical to the mother , and thus the mother is capable of mounting an immune response against it .
This disease is treated with antibodies specific for Rh factor .
These are given to the mother during the first and subsequent births , destroying any fetal blood that might enter her system and preventing the immune response .
Tissue transplantation is more complicated than blood transfusions because of two characteristics of MHC molecules .
These molecules are the major cause of transplant rejection ( hence the name “ histocompatibility ” ) .
MHC polygeny refers to the multiple MHC proteins on cells , and MHC polymorphism refers to the multiple alleles for each individual MHC locus .
Thus , there are many alleles in the human population that can be expressed ( Table 21.8 and Table 21.9 ) .
When a donor organ expresses MHC molecules that are different from the recipient , the latter will often mount a cytotoxic T cell response to the organ and reject it .
Histologically , if a biopsy of a transplanted organ exhibits massive infiltration of T lymphocytes within the first weeks after transplant , it is a sign that the transplant is likely to fail .
The response is a classical , and very specific , primary T cell immune response .
As far as medicine is concerned , the immune response in this scenario does the patient no good at all and causes significant harm .
Immunosuppressive drugs such as cyclosporine A have made transplants more successful , but matching the MHC molecules is still key .
Family members , since they share a similar genetic background , are much more likely to share MHC molecules than unrelated individuals do .
In fact , due to the extensive polymorphisms in these MHC molecules , unrelated donors are found only through a worldwide database .
The system is not foolproof however , as there are not enough individuals in the system to provide the organs necessary to treat all patients needing them .
One disease of transplantation occurs with bone marrow transplants , which are used to treat various diseases , including SCID and leukemia .
Because the bone marrow cells being transplanted contain lymphocytes capable of mounting an immune response , and because the recipient ’ s immune response has been destroyed before receiving the transplant , the donor cells may attack the recipient tissues , causing graft-versus-host disease .
Symptoms of this disease , which usually include a rash and damage to the liver and mucosa , are variable , and attempts have been made to moderate the disease by first removing mature T cells from the donor bone marrow before transplanting it .
It is clear that with some cancers , for example Kaposi ’ s sarcoma , a healthy immune system does a good job at controlling them ( Figure 21.31 ) .
This disease , which is caused by the human herpesvirus , is almost never observed in individuals with strong immune systems , such as the young and immunocompetent .
Other examples of cancers caused by viruses include liver cancer caused by the hepatitis B virus and cervical cancer caused by the human papilloma virus .
As these last two viruses have vaccines available for them , getting vaccinated can help prevent these two types of cancer by stimulating the immune response .
On the other hand , as cancer cells are often able to divide and mutate rapidly , they may escape the immune response , just as certain pathogens such as HIV do .
There are three stages in the immune response to many cancers : elimination , equilibrium , and escape .
Elimination occurs when the immune response first develops toward tumor-specific antigens specific to the cancer and actively kills most cancer cells , followed by a period of controlled equilibrium during which the remaining cancer cells are held in check .
Unfortunately , many cancers mutate , so they no longer express any specific antigens for the immune system to respond to , and a subpopulation of cancer cells escapes the immune response , continuing the disease process .
This fact has led to extensive research in trying to develop ways to enhance the early immune response to completely eliminate the early cancer and thus prevent a later escape .
One method that has shown some success is the use of cancer vaccines , which differ from viral and bacterial vaccines in that they are directed against the cells of one ’ s own body .
Treated cancer cells are injected into cancer patients to enhance their anti-cancer immune response and thereby prolong survival .
The immune system has the capability to detect these cancer cells and proliferate faster than the cancer cells do , overwhelming the cancer in a similar way as they do for viruses .
Cancer vaccines have been developed for malignant melanoma , a highly fatal skin cancer , and renal ( kidney ) cell carcinoma .
These vaccines are still in the development stages , but some positive and encouraging results have been obtained clinically .
It is tempting to focus on the complexity of the immune system and the problems it causes as a negative .
The upside to immunity , however , is so much greater : The benefit of staying alive far outweighs the negatives caused when the system does sometimes go awry .
Working on “ autopilot , ” the immune system helps to maintain your health and kill pathogens .
The only time you really miss the immune response is when it is not being effective and illness results , or , as in the extreme case of HIV disease , the immune system is gone completely .
The immune system can not exist in isolation .
After all , it has to protect the entire body from infection .
Therefore , the immune system is required to interact with other organ systems , sometimes in complex ways .
Thirty years of research focusing on the connections between the immune system , the central nervous system , and the endocrine system have led to a new science with the unwieldy name of called psychoneuroimmunology .
The physical connections between these systems have been known for centuries : All primary and secondary organs are connected to sympathetic nerves .
What is more complex , though , is the interaction of neurotransmitters , hormones , cytokines , and other soluble signaling molecules , and the mechanism of “ crosstalk ” between the systems .
For example , white blood cells , including lymphocytes and phagocytes , have receptors for various neurotransmitters released by associated neurons .
Additionally , hormones such as cortisol ( naturally produced by the adrenal cortex ) and prednisone ( synthetic ) are well known for their abilities to suppress T cell immune mechanisms , hence , their prominent use in medicine as long-term , anti-inflammatory drugs .
One well-established interaction of the immune , nervous , and endocrine systems is the effect of stress on immune health .
In the human vertebrate evolutionary past , stress was associated with the fight-or-flight response , largely mediated by the central nervous system and the adrenal medulla .
This stress was necessary for survival .
The physical action of fighting or running , whichever the animal decides , usually resolves the problem in one way or another .
On the other hand , there are no physical actions to resolve most modern day stresses , including short-term stressors like taking examinations and long-term stressors such as being unemployed or losing a spouse .
The effect of stress can be felt by nearly every organ system , and the immune system is no exception ( Table 21.10 ) .
At one time , it was assumed that all types of stress reduced all aspects of the immune response , but the last few decades of research have painted a different picture .
First , most short-term stress does not impair the immune system in healthy individuals enough to lead to a greater incidence of diseases .
However , older individuals and those with suppressed immune responses due to disease or immunosuppressive drugs may respond even to short-term stressors by getting sicker more often .
The diverting of resources away from the adaptive immune response , however , causes its own share of problems in fighting disease .
Chronic stress , unlike short-term stress , may inhibit immune responses even in otherwise healthy adults .
The suppression of both innate and adaptive immune responses is clearly associated with increases in some diseases , as seen when individuals lose a spouse or have other long-term stresses , such as taking care of a spouse with a fatal disease or dementia .
The new science of psychoneuroimmunology , while still in its relative infancy , has great potential to make exciting advances in our understanding of how the nervous , endocrine , and immune systems have evolved together and communicate with each other .
See how long you can hold your breath as you continue reading…How long can you do it ?
Chances are you are feeling uncomfortable already .
A typical human can not survive without breathing for more than 3 minutes , and even if you wanted to hold your breath longer , your autonomic nervous system would take control .
This is because every cell in the body needs to run the oxidative stages of cellular respiration , the process by which energy is produced in the form of adenosine triphosphate ( ATP ) .
For oxidative phosphorylation to occur , oxygen is used as a reactant and carbon dioxide is released as a waste product .
You may be surprised to learn that although oxygen is a critical need for cells , it is actually the accumulation of carbon dioxide that primarily drives your need to breathe .
Carbon dioxide is exhaled and oxygen is inhaled through the respiratory system , which includes muscles to move air into and out of the lungs , passageways through which air moves , and microscopic gas exchange surfaces covered by capillaries .
The circulatory system transports gases from the lungs to tissues throughout the body and vice versa .
A variety of diseases can affect the respiratory system , such as asthma , emphysema , chronic obstruction pulmonary disorder ( COPD ) , and lung cancer .
All of these conditions affect the gas exchange process and result in labored breathing and other difficulties .
Portions of the respiratory system are also used for non-vital functions , such as sensing odors , speech production , and for straining , such as during childbirth or coughing ( Figure 22.2 ) .
Functionally , the respiratory system can be divided into a conducting zone and a respiratory zone .
The conducting zone of the respiratory system includes the organs and structures not directly involved in gas exchange .
The gas exchange occurs in the respiratory zone .
The major functions of the conducting zone are to provide a route for incoming and outgoing air , remove debris and pathogens from the incoming air , and warm and humidify the incoming air .
Several structures within the conducting zone perform other functions as well .
The epithelium of the nasal passages , for example , is essential to sensing odors , and the bronchial epithelium that lines the lungs can metabolize some airborne carcinogens .
The major entrance and exit for the respiratory system is through the nose .
When discussing the nose , it is helpful to divide it into two major sections : the external nose , and the nasal cavity or internal nose .
The external nose consists of the surface and skeletal structures that result in the outward appearance of the nose and contribute to its numerous functions ( Figure 22.3 ) .
The root is the region of the nose located between the eyebrows .
The bridge is the part of the nose that connects the root to the rest of the nose .
The dorsum nasi is the length of the nose .
The apex is the tip of the nose .
On either side of the apex , the nostrils are formed by the alae ( singular = ala ) .
An ala is a cartilaginous structure that forms the lateral side of each naris ( plural = nares ) , or nostril opening .
The philtrum is the concave surface that connects the apex of the nose to the upper lip .
Underneath the thin skin of the nose are its skeletal features ( see Figure 22.3 , lower illustration ) .
While the root and bridge of the nose consist of bone , the protruding portion of the nose is composed of cartilage .
As a result , when looking at a skull , the nose is missing .
The nasal bone is one of a pair of bones that lies under the root and bridge of the nose .
The nasal bone articulates superiorly with the frontal bone and laterally with the maxillary bones .
Septal cartilage is flexible hyaline cartilage connected to the nasal bone , forming the dorsum nasi .
The alar cartilage consists of the apex of the nose ; it surrounds the naris .
The nares open into the nasal cavity , which is separated into left and right sections by the nasal septum ( Figure 22.4 ) .
Each lateral wall of the nasal cavity has three bony projections , called the superior , middle , and inferior nasal conchae .
The inferior conchae are separate bones , whereas the superior and middle conchae are portions of the ethmoid bone .
Conchae serve to increase the surface area of the nasal cavity and to disrupt the flow of air as it enters the nose , causing air to bounce along the epithelium , where it is cleaned and warmed .
The conchae and meatuses also conserve water and prevent dehydration of the nasal epithelium by trapping water during exhalation .
The floor of the nasal cavity is composed of the palate .
The hard palate at the anterior region of the nasal cavity is composed of bone .
The soft palate at the posterior portion of the nasal cavity consists of muscle tissue .
Air exits the nasal cavities via the internal nares and moves into the pharynx .
Several bones that help form the walls of the nasal cavity have air-containing spaces called the paranasal sinuses , which serve to warm and humidify incoming air .
Sinuses are lined with a mucosa .
Each paranasal sinus is named for its associated bone : frontal sinus , maxillary sinus , sphenoidal sinus , and ethmoidal sinus .
The sinuses produce mucus and lighten the weight of the skull .
The nares and anterior portion of the nasal cavities are lined with mucous membranes , containing sebaceous glands and hair follicles that serve to prevent the passage of large debris , such as dirt , through the nasal cavity .
An olfactory epithelium used to detect odors is found deeper in the nasal cavity .
The conchae , meatuses , and paranasal sinuses are lined by respiratory epithelium composed of pseudostratified ciliated columnar epithelium ( Figure 22.5 ) .
The epithelium contains goblet cells , one of the specialized , columnar epithelial cells that produce mucus to trap debris .
The cilia of the respiratory epithelium help remove the mucus and debris from the nasal cavity with a constant beating motion , sweeping materials towards the throat to be swallowed .
Interestingly , cold air slows the movement of the cilia , resulting in accumulation of mucus that may in turn lead to a runny nose during cold weather .
This moist epithelium functions to warm and humidify incoming air .
Capillaries located just beneath the nasal epithelium warm the air by convection .
Serous and mucus-producing cells also secrete the lysozyme enzyme and proteins called defensins , which have antibacterial properties .
Immune cells that patrol the connective tissue deep to the respiratory epithelium provide additional protection .
View the University Epithelium % 20and % 20CT/040_HISTO_40X.svs/view.apml ?
explore the tissue sample in greater detail .
of Michigan WebScope at http : //141.214.65.171/Histology/Basic % 20Tissues/ to ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/pseudoMG ) The pharynx is a tube formed by skeletal muscle and lined by mucous membrane that is continuous with that of the nasal cavities ( see Figure 22.4 ) .
The pharynx is divided into three major regions : the nasopharynx , the oropharynx , and the laryngopharynx ( Figure 22.6 ) .
The nasopharynx is flanked by the conchae of the nasal cavity , and it serves only as an airway .
At the top of the nasopharynx are the pharyngeal tonsils .
A pharyngeal tonsil , also called an adenoid , is an aggregate of lymphoid reticular tissue similar to a lymph node that lies at the superior portion of the nasopharynx .
The function of the pharyngeal tonsil is not well understood , but it contains a rich supply of lymphocytes and is covered with ciliated epithelium that traps and destroys invading pathogens that enter during inhalation .
The pharyngeal tonsils are large in children , but interestingly , tend to regress with age and may even disappear .
The uvula is a small bulbous , teardrop-shaped structure located at the apex of the soft palate .
Both the uvula and soft palate move like a pendulum during swallowing , swinging upward to close off the nasopharynx to prevent ingested materials from entering the nasal cavity .
In addition , auditory ( Eustachian ) tubes that connect to each middle ear cavity open into the nasopharynx .
This connection is why colds often lead to ear infections .
The oropharynx is a passageway for both air and food .
The oropharynx is bordered superiorly by the nasopharynx and anteriorly by the oral cavity .
The fauces is the opening at the connection between the oral cavity and the oropharynx .
As the nasopharynx becomes the oropharynx , the epithelium changes from pseudostratified ciliated columnar epithelium to stratified squamous epithelium .
The oropharynx contains two distinct sets of tonsils , the palatine and lingual tonsils .
A palatine tonsil is one of a pair of structures located laterally in the oropharynx in the area of the fauces .
The lingual tonsil is located at the base of the tongue .
Similar to the pharyngeal tonsil , the palatine and lingual tonsils are composed of lymphoid tissue , and trap and destroy pathogens entering the body through the oral or nasal cavities .
The laryngopharynx is inferior to the oropharynx and posterior to the larynx .
It continues the route for ingested material and air until its inferior end , where the digestive and respiratory systems diverge .
The stratified squamous epithelium of the oropharynx is continuous with the laryngopharynx .
Anteriorly , the laryngopharynx opens into the larynx , whereas posteriorly , it enters the esophagus .
The larynx is a cartilaginous structure inferior to the laryngopharynx that connects the pharynx to the trachea and helps regulate the volume of air that enters and leaves the lungs ( Figure 22.7 ) .
The structure of the larynx is formed by several pieces of cartilage .
Three large cartilage pieces—the thyroid cartilage ( anterior ) , epiglottis ( superior ) , and cricoid cartilage ( inferior ) —form the major structure of the larynx .
The thyroid cartilage is the largest piece of cartilage that makes up the larynx .
The thyroid cartilage consists of the laryngeal prominence , or “ Adam ’ s apple , ” which tends to be more prominent in males .
The thick cricoid cartilage forms a ring , with a wide posterior region and a thinner anterior region .
Three smaller , paired cartilages—the arytenoids , corniculates , and cuneiforms—attach to the epiglottis and the vocal cords and muscle that help move the vocal cords to produce speech .
The epiglottis , attached to the thyroid cartilage , is a very flexible piece of elastic cartilage that covers the opening of the trachea ( see Figure 22.4 ) .
When in the “ closed ” position , the unattached end of the epiglottis rests on the glottis .
The glottis is composed of the vestibular folds , the true vocal cords , and the space between these folds ( Figure 22.8 ) .
A vestibular fold , or false vocal cord , is one of a pair of folded sections of mucous membrane .
A true vocal cord is one of the white , membranous folds attached by muscle to the thyroid and arytenoid cartilages of the larynx on their outer edges .
The inner edges of the true vocal cords are free , allowing oscillation to produce sound .
The size of the membranous folds of the true vocal cords differs between individuals , producing voices with different pitch ranges .
Folds in males tend to be larger than those in females , which create a deeper voice .
The act of swallowing causes the pharynx and larynx to lift upward , allowing the pharynx to expand and the epiglottis of the larynx to swing downward , closing the opening to the trachea .
These movements produce a larger area for food to pass through , while preventing food and beverages from entering the trachea .
Continuous with the laryngopharynx , the superior portion of the larynx is lined with stratified squamous epithelium , transitioning into pseudostratified ciliated columnar epithelium that contains goblet cells .
Similar to the nasal cavity and nasopharynx , this specialized epithelium produces mucus to trap debris and pathogens as they enter the trachea .
The cilia beat the mucus upward towards the laryngopharynx , where it can be swallowed down the esophagus .
The trachea ( windpipe ) extends from the larynx toward the lungs ( Figure 22.9a ) .
The trachea is formed by 16 to 20 stacked , C-shaped pieces of hyaline cartilage that are connected by dense connective tissue .
The trachealis muscle and elastic connective tissue together form the fibroelastic membrane , a flexible membrane that closes the posterior surface of the trachea , connecting the C-shaped cartilages .
The fibroelastic membrane allows the trachea to stretch and expand slightly during inhalation and exhalation , whereas the rings of cartilage provide structural support and prevent the trachea from collapsing .
In addition , the trachealis muscle can be contracted to force air through the trachea during exhalation .
The trachea is lined with pseudostratified ciliated columnar epithelium , which is continuous with the larynx .
The esophagus borders the trachea posteriorly .
The trachea branches into the right and left primary bronchi at the carina .
These bronchi are also lined by pseudostratified ciliated columnar epithelium containing mucus-producing goblet cells ( Figure 22.9b ) .
The carina is a raised structure that contains specialized nervous tissue that induces violent coughing if a foreign body , such as food , is present .
Rings of cartilage , similar to those of the trachea , support the structure of the bronchi and prevent their collapse .
The primary bronchi enter the lungs at the hilum , a concave region where blood vessels , lymphatic vessels , and nerves also enter the lungs .
The bronchi continue to branch into bronchial a tree .
A bronchial tree ( or respiratory tree ) is the collective term used for these multiple-branched bronchi .
The main function of the bronchi , like other conducting zone structures , is to provide a passageway for air to move into and out of each lung .
In addition , the mucous membrane traps debris and pathogens .
A bronchiole branches from the tertiary bronchi .
Bronchioles , which are about 1 mm in diameter , further branch until they become the tiny terminal bronchioles , which lead to the structures of gas exchange .
There are more than 1000 terminal bronchioles in each lung .
The muscular walls of the bronchioles do not contain cartilage like those of the bronchi .
This muscular wall can change the size of the tubing to increase or decrease airflow through the tube .
In contrast to the conducting zone , the respiratory zone includes structures that are directly involved in gas exchange .
The respiratory zone begins where the terminal bronchioles join a respiratory bronchiole , the smallest type of bronchiole ( Figure 22.10 ) , which then leads to an alveolar duct , opening into a cluster of alveoli .
An alveolar duct is a tube composed of smooth muscle and connective tissue , which opens into a cluster of alveoli .
An alveolus is one of the many small , grape-like sacs that are attached to the alveolar ducts .
An alveolar sac is a cluster of many individual alveoli that are responsible for gas exchange .
An alveolus is approximately 200 μm in diameter with elastic walls that allow the alveolus to stretch during air intake , which greatly increases the surface area available for gas exchange .
Alveoli are connected to their neighbors by alveolar pores , which help maintain equal air pressure throughout the alveoli and lung ( Figure 22.11 ) .
The alveolar wall consists of three major cell types : type I alveolar cells , type II alveolar cells , and alveolar macrophages .
A type I alveolar cell is a squamous epithelial cell of the alveoli , which constitute up to 97 percent of the alveolar surface area .
These cells are about 25 nm thick and are highly permeable to gases .
A type II alveolar cell is interspersed among the type I cells and secretes pulmonary surfactant , a substance composed of phospholipids and proteins that reduces the surface tension of the alveoli .
Roaming around the alveolar wall is the alveolar macrophage , a phagocytic cell of the immune system that removes debris and pathogens that have reached the alveoli .
The simple squamous epithelium formed by type I alveolar cells is attached to a thin , elastic basement membrane .
This epithelium is extremely thin and borders the endothelial membrane of capillaries .
Taken together , the alveoli and capillary membranes form a respiratory membrane that is approximately 0.5 mm thick .
The respiratory membrane allows gases to cross by simple diffusion , allowing oxygen to be picked up by the blood for transport and CO to be released into the air of the alveoli .
Asthma is common condition that affects the lungs in both adults and children .
Approximately 8.2 percent of adults ( 18.7 million ) and 9.4 percent of children ( 7 million ) in the United States suffer from asthma .
In addition , asthma is the most frequent cause of hospitalization in children .
Asthma is a chronic disease characterized by inflammation and edema of the airway , and bronchospasms ( that is , constriction of the bronchioles ) , which can inhibit air from entering the lungs .
In addition , excessive mucus secretion can occur , which further contributes to airway occlusion ( Figure 22.12 ) .
Cells of the immune system , such as eosinophils and mononuclear cells , may also be involved in infiltrating the walls of the bronchi and bronchioles .
Symptoms of an asthma attack involve coughing , shortness of breath , wheezing , and tightness of the chest .
Symptoms of a severe asthma attack that requires immediate medical attention would include difficulty breathing that results in blue ( cyanotic ) lips or face , confusion , drowsiness , a rapid pulse , sweating , and severe anxiety .
The severity of the condition , frequency of attacks , and identified triggers influence the type of medication that an individual may require .
Longer-term treatments are used for those with more severe asthma .
Short-term , fast-acting drugs that are used to treat an asthma attack are typically administered via an inhaler .
For young children or individuals who have difficulty using an inhaler , asthma medications can be administered via a nebulizer .
In many cases , the underlying cause of the condition is unknown .
However , recent research has demonstrated that certain viruses , such as human rhinovirus C ( HRVC ) , and the bacteria Mycoplasma pneumoniae and Chlamydia pneumoniae that are contracted in infancy or early childhood , may contribute to the development of many cases of asthma .
Visit this site ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/asthma ) to learn more about what happens during an asthma attack .
What are the three changes that occur inside the airways during an asthma attack ?
The main function of the lungs is to perform the exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide with air from the atmosphere .
To this end , the lungs exchange respiratory gases across a very large epithelial surface area—about 70 square meters—that is highly permeable to gases .
The lungs are pyramid-shaped , paired organs that are connected to the trachea by the right and left bronchi ; on the inferior surface , the lungs are bordered by the diaphragm .
The diaphragm is the flat , dome-shaped muscle located at the base of the lungs and thoracic cavity .
The lungs are enclosed by the pleurae , which are attached to the mediastinum .
The right lung is shorter and wider than the left lung , and the left lung occupies a smaller volume than the right .
The cardiac notch is an indentation on the surface of the left lung , and it allows space for the heart ( Figure 22.13 ) .
The apex of the lung is the superior region , whereas the base is the opposite region near the diaphragm .
The costal surface of the lung borders the ribs .
The mediastinal surface faces the midline .
Each lung is composed of smaller units called lobes .
Fissures separate these lobes from each other .
The right lung consists of three lobes : the superior , middle , and inferior lobes .
The left lung consists of two lobes : the superior and inferior lobes .
A bronchopulmonary segment is a division of a lobe , and each lobe houses multiple bronchopulmonary segments .
Each segment receives air from its own tertiary bronchus and is supplied with blood by its own artery .
Some diseases of the lungs typically affect one or more bronchopulmonary segments , and in some cases , the diseased segments can be surgically removed with little influence on neighboring segments .
A pulmonary lobule is a subdivision formed as the bronchi branch into bronchioles .
Each lobule receives its own large bronchiole that has multiple branches .
An interlobular septum is a wall , composed of connective tissue , which separates lobules from one another .
The blood supply of the lungs plays an important role in gas exchange and serves as a transport system for gases throughout the body .
In addition , innervation by the both the parasympathetic and sympathetic nervous systems provides an important level of control through dilation and constriction of the airway .
The major function of the lungs is to perform gas exchange , which requires blood from the pulmonary circulation .
This blood supply contains deoxygenated blood and travels to the lungs where erythrocytes , also known as red blood cells , pick up oxygen to be transported to tissues throughout the body .
The pulmonary artery is an artery that arises from the pulmonary trunk and carries deoxygenated , arterial blood to the alveoli .
The pulmonary artery branches multiple times as it follows the bronchi , and each branch becomes progressively smaller in diameter .
One arteriole and an accompanying venule supply and drain one pulmonary lobule .
As they near the alveoli , the pulmonary arteries become the pulmonary capillary network .
The pulmonary capillary network consists of tiny vessels with very thin walls that lack smooth muscle fibers .
The capillaries branch and follow the bronchioles and structure of the alveoli .
It is at this point that the capillary wall meets the alveolar wall , creating the respiratory membrane .
Once the blood is oxygenated , it drains from the alveoli by way of multiple pulmonary veins , which exit the lungs through the hilum .
Dilation and constriction of the airway are achieved through nervous control by the parasympathetic and sympathetic nervous systems .
The parasympathetic system causes bronchoconstriction , whereas the sympathetic nervous system stimulates bronchodilation .
Reflexes such as coughing , and the ability of the lungs to regulate oxygen and carbon dioxide levels , also result from this autonomic nervous system control .
Sensory nerve fibers arise from the vagus nerve , and from the second to fifth thoracic ganglia .
The pulmonary plexus is a region on the lung root formed by the entrance of the nerves at the hilum .
The nerves then follow the bronchi in the lungs and branch to innervate muscle fibers , glands , and blood vessels .
Each lung is enclosed within a cavity that is surrounded by the pleura .
The pleura ( plural = pleurae ) is a serous membrane that surrounds the lung .
The right and left pleurae , which enclose the right and left lungs , respectively , are separated by the mediastinum .
The pleurae consist of two layers .
The visceral pleura is the layer that is superficial to the lungs , and extends into and lines the lung fissures ( Figure 22.14 ) .
In contrast , the parietal pleura is the outer layer that connects to the thoracic wall , the mediastinum , and the diaphragm .
The visceral and parietal pleurae connect to each other at the hilum .
The pleural cavity is the space between the visceral and parietal layers .
The pleurae perform two major functions : They produce pleural fluid and create cavities that separate the major organs .
Pleural fluid is secreted by mesothelial cells from both pleural layers and acts to lubricate their surfaces .
This lubrication reduces friction between the two layers to prevent trauma during breathing , and creates surface tension that helps maintain the position of the lungs against the thoracic wall .
This adhesive characteristic of the pleural fluid causes the lungs to enlarge when the thoracic wall expands during ventilation , allowing the lungs to fill with air .
The pleurae also create a division between major organs that prevents interference due to the movement of the organs , while preventing the spread of infection .
The burning of a tobacco cigarette creates multiple chemical compounds that are released through mainstream smoke , which is inhaled by the smoker , and through sidestream smoke , which is the smoke that is given off by the burning cigarette .
Second-hand smoke , which is a combination of sidestream smoke and the mainstream smoke that is exhaled by the smoker , has been demonstrated by numerous scientific studies to cause disease .
At least 40 chemicals in sidestream smoke have been identified that negatively impact human health , leading to the development of cancer or other conditions , such as immune system dysfunction , liver toxicity , cardiac arrhythmias , pulmonary edema , and neurological dysfunction .
Furthermore , second-hand smoke has been found to harbor at least 250 compounds that are known to be toxic , carcinogenic , or both .
Some major classes of carcinogens in second-hand smoke are polyaromatic hydrocarbons ( PAHs ) , N-nitrosamines , aromatic amines , formaldehyde , and acetaldehyde .
Tobacco and second-hand smoke are considered to be carcinogenic .
Exposure to second-hand smoke can cause lung cancer in individuals who are not tobacco users themselves .
It is estimated that the risk of developing lung cancer is increased by up to 30 percent in nonsmokers who live with an individual who smokes in the house , as compared to nonsmokers who are not regularly exposed to second-hand smoke .
Children are especially affected by secondhand smoke .
Children who live with an individual who smokes inside the home have a larger number of lower respiratory infections , which are associated with hospitalizations , and higher risk of sudden infant death syndrome ( SIDS ) .
Second-hand smoke in the home has also been linked to a greater number of ear infections in children , as well as worsening symptoms of asthma .
The major mechanisms that drive pulmonary ventilation are atmospheric pressure ( P ) ; the air pressure within the alveoli , called intra-alveolar pressure ( P ) ; and the pressure within the pleural cavity , called intrapleural pressure ( P ) .
The intra-alveolar and intrapleural pressures are dependent on certain physical features of the lung .
However , the ability to breathe—to have air enter the lungs during inspiration and air leave the lungs during expiration—is dependent on the air pressure of the atmosphere and the air pressure within the lungs .
Inspiration ( or inhalation ) and expiration ( or exhalation ) are dependent on the differences in pressure between the atmosphere and the lungs .
In a gas , pressure is a force created by the movement of gas molecules that are confined .
For example , a certain number of gas molecules in a two-liter container has more room than the same number of gas molecules in a one-liter container ( Figure 22.15 ) .
In this case , the force exerted by the movement of the gas molecules against the walls of the two-liter container is lower than the force exerted by the gas molecules in the one-liter container .
Therefore , the pressure is lower in the two-liter container and higher in the one-liter container .
At a constant temperature , changing the volume occupied by the gas changes the pressure , as does changing the number of gas molecules .
Boyle ’ s law describes the relationship between volume and pressure in a gas at a constant temperature .
Boyle discovered that the pressure of a gas is inversely proportional to its volume : If volume increases , pressure decreases .
Likewise , if volume decreases , pressure increases .
Pressure and volume are inversely related ( P = k/ V ) .
Therefore , the pressure in the one-liter container ( one-half the volume of the two-liter container ) would be twice the pressure in the two-liter container .
Boyle ’ s law is expressed by the following formula : In this formula , P represents the initial pressure and V represents the initial volume , whereas the final pressure and volume are represented by P and V respectively .
If the twoand one-liter containers were connected by a tube and the volume of one of the containers were changed , then the gases would move from higher pressure ( lower volume ) to lower pressure ( higher volume ) .
Pulmonary ventilation is dependent on three types of pressure : atmospheric , intra-alveolar , and intrapleural .
Atmospheric pressure is the amount of force that is exerted by gases in the air surrounding any given surface , such as the body .
Atmospheric pressure can be expressed in terms of the unit atmosphere , abbreviated atm , or in millimeters of mercury ( mm Hg ) .
One atm is equal to 760 mm Hg , which is the atmospheric pressure at sea level .
Typically , for respiration , other pressure values are discussed in relation to atmospheric pressure .
Therefore , negative pressure is pressure lower than the atmospheric pressure , whereas positive pressure is pressure that it is greater than the atmospheric pressure .
A pressure that is equal to the atmospheric pressure is expressed as zero .
Intra-alveolar pressure ( intrapulmonary pressure ) is the pressure of the air within the alveoli , which changes during the different phases of breathing ( Figure 22.16 ) .
Because the alveoli are connected to the atmosphere via the tubing of the airways ( similar to the twoand one-liter containers in the example above ) , the intrapulmonary pressure of the alveoli always equalizes with the atmospheric pressure .
Intrapleural pressure is the pressure of the air within the pleural cavity , between the visceral and parietal pleurae .
Similar to intra-alveolar pressure , intrapleural pressure also changes during the different phases of breathing .
However , due to certain characteristics of the lungs , the intrapleural pressure is always lower than , or negative to , the intra-alveolar pressure ( and therefore also to atmospheric pressure ) .
Although it fluctuates during inspiration and expiration , intrapleural pressure remains approximately –4 mm Hg throughout the breathing cycle .
Competing forces within the thorax cause the formation of the negative intrapleural pressure .
One of these forces relates to the elasticity of the lungs themselves—elastic tissue pulls the lungs inward , away from the thoracic wall .
Surface tension of alveolar fluid , which is mostly water , also creates an inward pull of the lung tissue .
This inward tension from the lungs is countered by opposing forces from the pleural fluid and thoracic wall .
Surface tension within the pleural cavity pulls the lungs outward .
Too much or too little pleural fluid would hinder the creation of the negative intrapleural pressure ; therefore , the level must be closely monitored by the mesothelial cells and drained by the lymphatic system .
Since the parietal pleura is attached to the thoracic wall , the natural elasticity of the chest wall opposes the inward pull of the lungs .
Ultimately , the outward pull is slightly greater than the inward pull , creating the –4 mm Hg intrapleural pressure relative to the intraalveolar pressure .
Transpulmonary pressure is the difference between the intrapleural and intra-alveolar pressures , and it determines the size of the lungs .
A higher transpulmonary pressure corresponds to a larger lung .
In addition to the differences in pressures , breathing is also dependent upon the contraction and relaxation of muscle fibers of both the diaphragm and thorax .
The lungs themselves are passive during breathing , meaning they are not involved in creating the movement that helps inspiration and expiration .
This is because of the adhesive nature of the pleural fluid , which allows the lungs to be pulled outward when the thoracic wall moves during inspiration .
The recoil of the thoracic wall during expiration causes compression of the lungs .
Contraction and relaxation of the diaphragm and intercostals muscles ( found between the ribs ) cause most of the pressure changes that result in inspiration and expiration .
These muscle movements and subsequent pressure changes cause air to either rush in or be forced out of the lungs .
Other characteristics of the lungs influence the effort that must be expended to ventilate .
Resistance is a force that slows motion , in this case , the flow of gases .
The size of the airway is the primary factor affecting resistance .
A small tubular diameter forces air through a smaller space , causing more collisions of air molecules with the walls of the airways .
The following formula helps to describe the relationship between airway resistance and pressure changes : As noted earlier , there is surface tension within the alveoli caused by water present in the lining of the alveoli .
This surface tension tends to inhibit expansion of the alveoli .
However , pulmonary surfactant secreted by type II alveolar cells mixes with that water and helps reduce this surface tension .
Without pulmonary surfactant , the alveoli would collapse during expiration .
Thoracic wall compliance is the ability of the thoracic wall to stretch while under pressure .
This can also affect the effort expended in the process of breathing .
In order for inspiration to occur , the thoracic cavity must expand .
The expansion of the thoracic cavity directly influences the capacity of the lungs to expand .
If the tissues of the thoracic wall are not very compliant , it will be difficult to expand the thorax to increase the size of the lungs .
The difference in pressures drives pulmonary ventilation because air flows down a pressure gradient , that is , air flows from an area of higher pressure to an area of lower pressure .
Air flows into the lungs largely due to a difference in pressure ; atmospheric pressure is greater than intra-alveolar pressure , and intra-alveolar pressure is greater than intrapleural pressure .
Air flows out of the lungs during expiration based on the same principle ; pressure within the lungs becomes greater than the atmospheric pressure .
Pulmonary ventilation comprises two major steps : inspiration and expiration .
Inspiration is the process that causes air to enter the lungs , and expiration is the process that causes air to leave the lungs ( Figure 22.17 ) .
A respiratory cycle is one sequence of inspiration and expiration .
In general , two muscle groups are used during normal inspiration : the diaphragm and the external intercostal muscles .
Additional muscles can be used if a bigger breath is required .
When the diaphragm contracts , it moves inferiorly toward the abdominal cavity , creating a larger thoracic cavity and more space for the lungs .
Contraction of the external intercostal muscles moves the ribs upward and outward , causing the rib cage to expand , which increases the volume of the thoracic cavity .
Due to the adhesive force of the pleural fluid , the expansion of the thoracic cavity forces the lungs to stretch and expand as well .
This increase in volume leads to a decrease in intra-alveolar pressure , creating a pressure lower than atmospheric pressure .
As a result , a pressure gradient is created that drives air into the lungs .
The process of normal expiration is passive , meaning that energy is not required to push air out of the lungs .
Instead , the elasticity of the lung tissue causes the lung to recoil , as the diaphragm and intercostal muscles relax following inspiration .
In turn , the thoracic cavity and lungs decrease in volume , causing an increase in intrapulmonary pressure .
The intrapulmonary pressure rises above atmospheric pressure , creating a pressure gradient that causes air to leave the lungs .
There are different types , or modes , of breathing that require a slightly different process to allow inspiration and expiration .
Quiet breathing , also known as eupnea , is a mode of breathing that occurs at rest and does not require the cognitive thought of the individual .
During quiet breathing , the diaphragm and external intercostals must contract .
A deep breath , called diaphragmatic breathing , requires the diaphragm to contract .
As the diaphragm relaxes , air passively leaves the lungs .
A shallow breath , called costal breathing , requires contraction of the intercostal muscles .
As the intercostal muscles relax , air passively leaves the lungs .
In contrast , forced breathing , also known as hyperpnea , is a mode of breathing that can occur during exercise or actions that require the active manipulation of breathing , such as singing .
During forced breathing , inspiration and expiration both occur due to muscle contractions .
In addition to the contraction of the diaphragm and intercostal muscles , other accessory muscles must also contract .
During forced inspiration , muscles of the neck , including the scalenes , contract and lift the thoracic wall , increasing lung volume .
During forced expiration , accessory muscles of the abdomen , including the obliques , contract , forcing abdominal organs upward against the diaphragm .
This helps to push the diaphragm further into the thorax , pushing more air out .
In addition , accessory muscles ( primarily the internal intercostals ) help to compress the rib cage , which also reduces the volume of the thoracic cavity .
Respiratory volume is the term used for various volumes of air moved by or associated with the lungs at a given point in the respiratory cycle .
There are four major types of respiratory volumes : tidal , residual , inspiratory reserve , and expiratory reserve ( Figure 22.18 ) .
Tidal volume ( TV ) is the amount of air that normally enters the lungs during quiet breathing , which is about 500 milliliters .
Expiratory reserve volume ( ERV ) is the amount of air you can forcefully exhale past a normal tidal expiration , up to 1200 milliliters for men .
Inspiratory reserve volume ( IRV ) is produced by a deep inhalation , past a tidal inspiration .
This is the extra volume that can be brought into the lungs during a forced inspiration .
Residual volume ( RV ) is the air left in the lungs if you exhale as much air as possible .
The residual volume makes breathing easier by preventing the alveoli from collapsing .
Respiratory volume is dependent on a variety of factors , and measuring the different types of respiratory volumes can provide important clues about a person ’ s respiratory health ( Figure 22.19 ) .
Respiratory capacity is the combination of two or more selected volumes , which further describes the amount of air in the lungs during a given time .
For example , total lung capacity ( TLC ) is the sum of all of the lung volumes ( TV , ERV , IRV , and RV ) , which represents the total amount of air a person can hold in the lungs after a forceful inhalation .
TLC is about 6000 mL air for men , and about 4200 mL for women .
Inspiratory capacity ( IC ) is the maximum amount of air that can be inhaled past a normal tidal expiration , is the sum of the tidal volume and inspiratory reserve volume .
On the other hand , the functional residual capacity ( FRC ) is the amount of air that remains in the lung after a normal tidal expiration ; it is the sum of expiratory reserve volume and residual volume ( see Figure 22.18 ) .
Watch this video ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/spirometers ) to learn more about lung volumes and spirometers .
Explain how spirometry test results can be used to diagnose respiratory diseases or determine the effectiveness of disease treatment .
In addition to the air that creates respiratory volumes , the respiratory system also contains anatomical dead space , which is air that is present in the airway that never reaches the alveoli and therefore never participates in gas exchange .
Alveolar dead space involves air found within alveoli that are unable to function , such as those affected by disease or abnormal blood flow .
Total dead space is the anatomical dead space and alveolar dead space together , and represents all of the air in the respiratory system that is not being used in the gas exchange process .
Breathing usually occurs without thought , although at times you can consciously control it , such as when you swim under water , sing a song , or blow bubbles .
The respiratory rate is the total number of breaths , or respiratory cycles , that occur each minute .
Respiratory rate can be an important indicator of disease , as the rate may increase or decrease during an illness or in a disease condition .
The respiratory rate is controlled by the respiratory center located within the medulla oblongata in the brain , which responds primarily to changes in carbon dioxide , oxygen , and pH levels in the blood .
The normal respiratory rate of a child decreases from birth to adolescence .
A child under 1 year of age has a normal respiratory rate between 30 and 60 breaths per minute , but by the time a child is about 10 years old , the normal rate is closer to 18 to 30 .
By adolescence , the normal respiratory rate is similar to that of adults , 12 to 18 breaths per minute .
The control of ventilation is a complex interplay of multiple regions in the brain that signal the muscles used in pulmonary ventilation to contract ( Table 22.1 ) .
The result is typically a rhythmic , consistent ventilation rate that provides the body with sufficient amounts of oxygen , while adequately removing carbon dioxide .
Neurons that innervate the muscles of the respiratory system are responsible for controlling and regulating pulmonary ventilation .
The major brain centers involved in pulmonary ventilation are the medulla oblongata and the pontine respiratory group ( Figure 22.20 ) .
The medulla oblongata contains the dorsal respiratory group ( DRG ) and the ventral respiratory group ( VRG ) .
The DRG is involved in maintaining a constant breathing rhythm by stimulating the diaphragm and intercostal muscles to contract , resulting in inspiration .
When activity in the DRG ceases , it no longer stimulates the diaphragm and intercostals to contract , allowing them to relax , resulting in expiration .
The VRG is involved in forced breathing , as the neurons in the VRG stimulate the accessory muscles involved in forced breathing to contract , resulting in forced inspiration .
The VRG also stimulates the accessory muscles involved in forced expiration to contract .
The second respiratory center of the brain is located within the pons , called the pontine respiratory group , and consists of the apneustic and pneumotaxic centers .
The apneustic center is a double cluster of neuronal cell bodies that stimulate neurons in the DRG , controlling the depth of inspiration , particularly for deep breathing .
The pneumotaxic center is a network of neurons that inhibits the activity of neurons in the DRG , allowing relaxation after inspiration , and thus controlling the overall rate .
The respiratory rate and the depth of inspiration are regulated by the medulla oblongata and pons ; however , these regions of the brain do so in response to systemic stimuli .
It is a dose-response , negative-feedback relationship in which the greater the stimulus , the greater the response .
Thus , increasing stimuli results in forced breathing .
Multiple systemic factors are involved in stimulating the brain to produce pulmonary ventilation .
The major factor that stimulates the medulla oblongata and pons to produce respiration is surprisingly not oxygen concentration , but rather the concentration of carbon dioxide in the blood .
As you recall , carbon dioxide is a waste product of cellular respiration and can be toxic .
Concentrations of chemicals are sensed by chemoreceptors .
A central chemoreceptor is one of the specialized receptors that are located in the brain and brainstem , whereas a peripheral chemoreceptor is one of the specialized receptors located in the carotid arteries and aortic arch .
Concentration changes in certain substances , such as carbon dioxide or hydrogen ions , stimulate these receptors , which in turn signal the respiration centers of the brain .
In the case of carbon dioxide , as the concentration of CO in the blood increases , it readily diffuses across the blood-brain barrier , where it collects in the extracellular fluid .
As will be explained in more detail later , increased carbon dioxide levels lead to increased levels of hydrogen ions , decreasing pH .
The increase in hydrogen ions in the brain triggers the central chemoreceptors to stimulate the respiratory centers to initiate contraction of the diaphragm and intercostal muscles .
In contrast , low levels of carbon dioxide in the blood cause low levels of hydrogen ions in the brain , leading to a decrease in the rate and depth of pulmonary ventilation , producing shallow , slow breathing .
Another factor involved in influencing the respiratory activity of the brain is systemic arterial concentrations of hydrogen ions .
Increasing carbon dioxide levels can lead to increased H levels , as mentioned above , as well as other metabolic activities , such as lactic acid accumulation after strenuous exercise .
Peripheral chemoreceptors of the aortic arch and carotid arteries sense arterial levels of hydrogen ions .
When peripheral chemoreceptors sense decreasing , or more acidic , pH levels , they stimulate an increase in ventilation to remove carbon dioxide from the blood at a quicker rate .
Removal of carbon dioxide from the blood helps to reduce hydrogen ions , thus increasing systemic pH .
Blood levels of oxygen are also important in influencing respiratory rate .
The peripheral chemoreceptors are responsible for sensing large changes in blood oxygen levels .
If blood oxygen levels become quite low—about 60 mm Hg or less—then peripheral chemoreceptors stimulate an increase in respiratory activity .
The chemoreceptors are only able to sense dissolved oxygen molecules , not the oxygen that is bound to hemoglobin .
As you recall , the majority of oxygen is bound by hemoglobin ; when dissolved levels of oxygen drop , hemoglobin releases oxygen .
Therefore , a large drop in oxygen levels is required to stimulate the chemoreceptors of the aortic arch and carotid arteries .
The hypothalamus and other brain regions associated with the limbic system also play roles in influencing the regulation of breathing by interacting with the respiratory centers .
The hypothalamus and other regions associated with the limbic system are involved in regulating respiration in response to emotions , pain , and temperature .
For example , an increase in body temperature causes an increase in respiratory rate .
Feeling excited or the fight-or-flight response will also result in an increase in respiratory rate .
Sleep apnea is a chronic disorder that can occur in children or adults , and is characterized by the cessation of breathing during sleep .
These episodes may last for several seconds or several minutes , and may differ in the frequency with which they are experienced .
Sleep apnea leads to poor sleep , which is reflected in the symptoms of fatigue , evening napping , irritability , memory problems , and morning headaches .
In addition , many individuals with sleep apnea experience a dry throat in the morning after waking from sleep , which may be due to excessive snoring .
There are two types of sleep apnea : obstructive sleep apnea and central sleep apnea .
Obstructive sleep apnea is caused by an obstruction of the airway during sleep , which can occur at different points in the airway , depending on the underlying cause of the obstruction .
For example , the tongue and throat muscles of some individuals with obstructive sleep apnea may relax excessively , causing the muscles to push into the airway .
Another example is obesity , which is a known risk factor for sleep apnea , as excess adipose tissue in the neck region can push the soft tissues towards the lumen of the airway , causing the trachea to narrow .
In central sleep apnea , the respiratory centers of the brain do not respond properly to rising carbon dioxide levels and therefore do not stimulate the contraction of the diaphragm and intercostal muscles regularly .
As a result , inspiration does not occur and breathing stops for a short period .
In some cases , the cause of central sleep apnea is unknown .
However , some medical conditions , such as stroke and congestive heart failure , may cause damage to the pons or medulla oblongata .
In addition , some pharmacologic agents , such as morphine , can affect the respiratory centers , causing a decrease in the respiratory rate .
The symptoms of central sleep apnea are similar to those of obstructive sleep apnea .
A diagnosis of sleep apnea is usually done during a sleep study , where the patient is monitored in a sleep laboratory for several nights .
The patient ’ s blood oxygen levels , heart rate , respiratory rate , and blood pressure are monitored , as are brain activity and the volume of air that is inhaled and exhaled .
Treatment of sleep apnea commonly includes the use of a device called a continuous positive airway pressure ( CPAP ) machine during sleep .
The CPAP machine has a mask that covers the nose , or the nose and mouth , and forces air into the airway at regular intervals .
This pressurized air can help to gently force the airway to remain open , allowing more normal ventilation to occur .
Other treatments include lifestyle changes to decrease weight , eliminate alcohol and other sleep apnea–promoting drugs , and changes in sleep position .
In addition to these treatments , patients with central sleep apnea may need supplemental oxygen during sleep .
Pulmonary ventilation provides air to the alveoli for this gas exchange process .
At the respiratory membrane , where the alveolar and capillary walls meet , gases move across the membranes , with oxygen entering the bloodstream and carbon dioxide exiting .
It is through this mechanism that blood is oxygenated and carbon dioxide , the waste product of cellular respiration , is removed from the body .
In order to understand the mechanisms of gas exchange in the lung , it is important to understand the underlying principles of gases and their behavior .
In addition to Boyle ’ s law , several other gas laws help to describe the behavior of gases .
Gas molecules exert force on the surfaces with which they are in contact ; this force is called pressure .
In natural systems , gases are normally present as a mixture of different types of molecules .
For example , the atmosphere consists of oxygen , nitrogen , carbon dioxide , and other gaseous molecules , and this gaseous mixture exerts a certain pressure referred to as atmospheric pressure ( Table 22.2 ) .
Partial pressure ( P ) is the pressure of a single type of gas in a mixture of gases .
For example , in the atmosphere , oxygen exerts a partial pressure , and nitrogen exerts another partial pressure , independent of the partial pressure of oxygen ( Figure 22.21 ) .
Total pressure is the sum of all the partial pressures of a gaseous mixture .
Partial pressure is extremely important in predicting the movement of gases .
Recall that gases tend to equalize their pressure in two regions that are connected .
A gas will move from an area where its partial pressure is higher to an area where its partial pressure is lower .
In addition , the greater the partial pressure difference between the two areas , the more rapid is the movement of gases .
Henry ’ s law describes the behavior of gases when they come into contact with a liquid , such as blood .
Henry ’ s law states that the concentration of gas in a liquid is directly proportional to the solubility and partial pressure of that gas .
The greater the partial pressure of the gas , the greater the number of gas molecules that will dissolve in the liquid .
The concentration of the gas in a liquid is also dependent on the solubility of the gas in the liquid .
For example , although nitrogen is present in the atmosphere , very little nitrogen dissolves into the blood , because the solubility of nitrogen in blood is very low .
The exception to this occurs in scuba divers ; the composition of the compressed air that divers breathe causes nitrogen to have a higher partial pressure than normal , causing it to dissolve in the blood in greater amounts than normal .
Too much nitrogen in the bloodstream results in a serious condition that can be fatal if not corrected .
Gas molecules establish an equilibrium between those molecules dissolved in liquid and those in air .
The composition of air in the atmosphere and in the alveoli differs .
In both cases , the relative concentration of gases is nitrogen > oxygen > water vapor > carbon dioxide .
The amount of water vapor present in alveolar air is greater than that in atmospheric air ( Table 22.3 ) .
Recall that the respiratory system works to humidify incoming air , thereby causing the air present in the alveoli to have a greater amount of water vapor than atmospheric air .
In addition , alveolar air contains a greater amount of carbon dioxide and less oxygen than atmospheric air .
This is no surprise , as gas exchange removes oxygen from and adds carbon dioxide to alveolar air .
Both deep and forced breathing cause the alveolar air composition to be changed more rapidly than during quiet breathing .
As a result , the partial pressures of oxygen and carbon dioxide change , affecting the diffusion process that moves these materials across the membrane .
This will cause oxygen to enter and carbon dioxide to leave the blood more quickly .
Two important aspects of gas exchange in the lung are ventilation and perfusion .
Ventilation is the movement of air into and out of the lungs , and perfusion is the flow of blood in the pulmonary capillaries .
For gas exchange to be efficient , the volumes involved in ventilation and perfusion should be compatible .
However , factors such as regional gravity effects on blood , blocked alveolar ducts , or disease can cause ventilation and perfusion to be imbalanced .
The partial pressure of oxygen in alveolar air is about 104 mm Hg , whereas the partial pressure of oxygenated blood in pulmonary veins is about 100 mm Hg .
When ventilation is sufficient , oxygen enters the alveoli at a high rate , and the partial pressure of oxygen in the alveoli remains high .
In contrast , when ventilation is insufficient , the partial pressure of oxygen in the alveoli drops .
Without the large difference in partial pressure between the alveoli and the blood , oxygen does not diffuse efficiently across the respiratory membrane .
The body has mechanisms that counteract this problem .
In cases when ventilation is not sufficient for an alveolus , the body redirects blood flow to alveoli that are receiving sufficient ventilation .
This is achieved by constricting the pulmonary arterioles that serves the dysfunctional alveolus , which redirects blood to other alveoli that have sufficient ventilation .
At the same time , the pulmonary arterioles that serve alveoli receiving sufficient ventilation vasodilate , which brings in greater blood flow .
Factors such as carbon dioxide , oxygen , and pH levels can all serve as stimuli for adjusting blood flow in the capillary networks associated with the alveoli .
Ventilation is regulated by the diameter of the airways , whereas perfusion is regulated by the diameter of the blood vessels .
The diameter of the bronchioles is sensitive to the partial pressure of carbon dioxide in the alveoli .
A greater partial pressure of carbon dioxide in the alveoli causes the bronchioles to increase their diameter as will a decreased level of oxygen in the blood supply , allowing carbon dioxide to be exhaled from the body at a greater rate .
As mentioned above , a greater partial pressure of oxygen in the alveoli causes the pulmonary arterioles to dilate , increasing blood flow .
Gas exchange occurs at two sites in the body : in the lungs , where oxygen is picked up and carbon dioxide is released at the respiratory membrane , and at the tissues , where oxygen is released and carbon dioxide is picked up .
External respiration is the exchange of gases with the external environment , and occurs in the alveoli of the lungs .
Internal respiration is the exchange of gases with the internal environment , and occurs in the tissues .
The actual exchange of gases occurs due to simple diffusion .
Energy is not required to move oxygen or carbon dioxide across membranes .
Instead , these gases follow pressure gradients that allow them to diffuse .
The anatomy of the lung maximizes the diffusion of gases : The respiratory membrane is highly permeable to gases ; the respiratory and blood capillary membranes are very thin ; and there is a large surface area throughout the lungs .
The pulmonary artery carries deoxygenated blood into the lungs from the heart , where it branches and eventually becomes the capillary network composed of pulmonary capillaries .
These pulmonary capillaries create the respiratory membrane with the alveoli ( Figure 22.22 ) .
As the blood is pumped through this capillary network , gas exchange occurs .
Although a small amount of the oxygen is able to dissolve directly into plasma from the alveoli , most of the oxygen is picked up by erythrocytes ( red blood cells ) and binds to a protein called hemoglobin , a process described later in this chapter .
Oxygenated hemoglobin is red , causing the overall appearance of bright red oxygenated blood , which returns to the heart through the pulmonary veins .
Carbon dioxide is released in the opposite direction of oxygen , from the blood to the alveoli .
Some of the carbon dioxide is returned on hemoglobin , but can also be dissolved in plasma or is present as a converted form , also explained in greater detail later in this chapter .
External respiration occurs as a function of partial pressure differences in oxygen and carbon dioxide between the alveoli and the blood in the pulmonary capillaries .
Although the solubility of oxygen in blood is not high , there is a drastic difference in the partial pressure of oxygen in the alveoli versus in the blood of the pulmonary capillaries .
This difference is about 64 mm Hg : The partial pressure of oxygen in the alveoli is about 104 mm Hg , whereas its partial pressure in the blood of the capillary is about 40 mm Hg .
This large difference in partial pressure creates a very strong pressure gradient that causes oxygen to rapidly cross the respiratory membrane from the alveoli into the blood .
The partial pressure of carbon dioxide is also different between the alveolar air and the blood of the capillary .
However , the partial pressure difference is less than that of oxygen , about 5 mm Hg .
The partial pressure of carbon dioxide in the blood of the capillary is about 45 mm Hg , whereas its partial pressure in the alveoli is about 40 mm Hg .
However , the solubility of carbon dioxide is much greater than that of oxygen—by a factor of about 20—in both blood and alveolar fluids .
As a result , the relative concentrations of oxygen and carbon dioxide that diffuse across the respiratory membrane are similar .
Internal respiration is gas exchange that occurs at the level of body tissues ( Figure 22.23 ) .
Similar to external respiration , internal respiration also occurs as simple diffusion due to a partial pressure gradient .
However , the partial pressure gradients are opposite of those present at the respiratory membrane .
The partial pressure of oxygen in tissues is low , about 40 mm Hg , because oxygen is continuously used for cellular respiration .
In contrast , the partial pressure of oxygen in the blood is about 100 mm Hg .
This creates a pressure gradient that causes oxygen to dissociate from hemoglobin , diffuse out of the blood , cross the interstitial space , and enter the tissue .
Hemoglobin that has little oxygen bound to it loses much of its brightness , so that blood returning to the heart is more burgundy in color .
Considering that cellular respiration continuously produces carbon dioxide , the partial pressure of carbon dioxide is lower in the blood than it is in the tissue , causing carbon dioxide to diffuse out of the tissue , cross the interstitial fluid , and enter the blood .
It is then carried back to the lungs either bound to hemoglobin , dissolved in plasma , or in a converted form .
By the time blood returns to the heart , the partial pressure of oxygen has returned to about 40 mm Hg , and the partial pressure of carbon dioxide has returned to about 45 mm Hg .
The blood is then pumped back to the lungs to be oxygenated once again during external respiration .
A type of device used in some areas of medicine that exploits the behavior of gases is hyperbaric chamber treatment .
A hyperbaric chamber is a unit that can be sealed and expose a patient to either 100 percent oxygen with increased pressure or a mixture of gases that includes a higher concentration of oxygen than normal atmospheric air , also at a higher partial pressure than the atmosphere .
There are two major types of chambers : monoplace and multiplace .
Monoplace chambers are typically for one patient , and the staff tending to the patient observes the patient from outside of the chamber ( Figure 22.24 ) .
Some facilities have special monoplace hyperbaric chambers that allow multiple patients to be treated at once , usually in a sitting or reclining position , to help ease feelings of isolation or claustrophobia .
Multiplace chambers are large enough for multiple patients to be treated at one time , and the staff attending these patients is present inside the chamber .
In a multiplace chamber , patients are often treated with air via a mask or hood , and the chamber is pressurized .
Hyperbaric chamber treatment is based on the behavior of gases .
As you recall , gases move from a region of higher partial pressure to a region of lower partial pressure .
In a hyperbaric chamber , the atmospheric pressure is increased , causing a greater amount of oxygen than normal to diffuse into the bloodstream of the patient .
Hyperbaric chamber therapy is used to treat a variety of medical problems , such as wound and graft healing , anaerobic bacterial infections , and carbon monoxide poisoning .
Exposure to and poisoning by carbon monoxide is difficult to reverse , because hemoglobin ’ s affinity for carbon monoxide is much stronger than its affinity for oxygen , causing carbon monoxide to replace oxygen in the blood .
Hyperbaric chamber therapy can treat carbon monoxide poisoning , because the increased atmospheric pressure causes more oxygen to diffuse into the bloodstream .
At this increased pressure and increased concentration of oxygen , carbon monoxide is displaced from hemoglobin .
Another example is the treatment of anaerobic bacterial infections , which are created by bacteria that can not or prefer not to live in the presence of oxygen .
An increase in blood and tissue levels of oxygen helps to kill the anaerobic bacteria that are responsible for the infection , as oxygen is toxic to anaerobic bacteria .
For wounds and grafts , the chamber stimulates the healing process by increasing energy production needed for repair .
Increasing oxygen transport allows cells to ramp up cellular respiration and thus ATP production , the energy needed to build new structures .
The function of respiration is to provide oxygen for use by body cells during cellular respiration and to eliminate carbon dioxide , a waste product of cellular respiration , from the body .
In order for the exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide to occur , both gases must be transported between the external and internal respiration sites .
Although carbon dioxide is more soluble than oxygen in blood , both gases require a specialized transport system for the majority of the gas molecules to be moved between the lungs and other tissues .
Even though oxygen is transported via the blood , you may recall that oxygen is not very soluble in liquids .
A small amount of oxygen does dissolve in the blood and is transported in the bloodstream , but it is only about 1.5 % of the total amount .
The majority of oxygen molecules are carried from the lungs to the body ’ s tissues by a specialized transport system , which relies on the erythrocyte—the red blood cell .
Erythrocytes contain a metalloprotein , hemoglobin , which serves to bind oxygen molecules to the erythrocyte ( Figure 22.25 ) .
Heme is the portion of hemoglobin that contains iron , and it is heme that binds oxygen .
One hemoglobin molecule contains iron-containing Heme molecules , and because of this , each hemoglobin molecule is capable of carrying up to four molecules of oxygen .
As oxygen diffuses across the respiratory membrane from the alveolus to the capillary , it also diffuses into the red blood cell and is bound by hemoglobin .
The following reversible chemical reaction describes the production of the final product , oxyhemoglobin ( Hb–O ) , which is formed when oxygen binds to hemoglobin .
Oxyhemoglobin is a bright red-colored molecule that contributes to the bright red color of oxygenated blood .
In this formula , Hb represents reduced hemoglobin , that is , hemoglobin that does not have oxygen bound to it .
There are multiple factors involved in how readily heme binds to and dissociates from oxygen , which will be discussed in the subsequent sections .
Hemoglobin is composed of subunits , a protein structure that is referred to as a quaternary structure .
Each of the four subunits that make up hemoglobin is arranged in a ring-like fashion , with an iron atom covalently bound to the heme in the center of each subunit .
Binding of the first oxygen molecule causes a conformational change in hemoglobin that allows the second molecule of oxygen to bind more readily .
As each molecule of oxygen is bound , it further facilitates the binding of the next molecule , until all four heme sites are occupied by oxygen .
The opposite occurs as well : After the first oxygen molecule dissociates and is “ dropped off ” at the tissues , the next oxygen molecule dissociates more readily .
When all four heme sites are occupied , the hemoglobin is said to be saturated .
When one to three heme sites are occupied , the hemoglobin is said to be partially saturated .
Therefore , when considering the blood as a whole , the percent of the available heme units that are bound to oxygen at a given time is called hemoglobin saturation .
Hemoglobin saturation of 100 percent means that every heme unit in all of the erythrocytes of the body is bound to oxygen .
In a healthy individual with normal hemoglobin levels , hemoglobin saturation generally ranges from 95 percent to 99 percent .
Partial pressure is an important aspect of the binding of oxygen to and disassociation from heme .
An oxygen–hemoglobin dissociation curve is a graph that describes the relationship of partial pressure to the binding of oxygen to heme and its subsequent dissociation from heme ( Figure 22.26 ) .
Remember that gases travel from an area of higher partial pressure to an area of lower partial pressure .
In addition , the affinity of an oxygen molecule for heme increases as more oxygen molecules are bound .
Therefore , in the oxygen–hemoglobin saturation curve , as the partial pressure of oxygen increases , a proportionately greater number of oxygen molecules are bound by heme .
Not surprisingly , the oxygen–hemoglobin saturation/dissociation curve also shows that the lower the partial pressure of oxygen , the fewer oxygen molecules are bound to heme .
As a result , the partial pressure of oxygen plays a major role in determining the degree of binding of oxygen to heme at the site of the respiratory membrane , as well as the degree of dissociation of oxygen from heme at the site of body tissues .
The mechanisms behind the oxygen–hemoglobin saturation/dissociation curve also serve as automatic control mechanisms that regulate how much oxygen is delivered to different tissues throughout the body .
This is important because some tissues have a higher metabolic rate than others .
Highly active tissues , such as muscle , rapidly use oxygen to produce ATP , lowering the partial pressure of oxygen in the tissue to about 20 mm Hg .
The partial pressure of oxygen inside capillaries is about 100 mm Hg , so the difference between the two becomes quite high , about 80 mm Hg .
As a result , a greater number of oxygen molecules dissociate from hemoglobin and enter the tissues .
The reverse is true of tissues , such as adipose ( body fat ) , which have lower metabolic rates .
Because less oxygen is used by these cells , the partial pressure of oxygen within such tissues remains relatively high , resulting in fewer oxygen molecules dissociating from hemoglobin and entering the tissue interstitial fluid .
Although venous blood is said to be deoxygenated , some oxygen is still bound to hemoglobin in its red blood cells .
This provides an oxygen reserve that can be used when tissues suddenly demand more oxygen .
Factors other than partial pressure also affect the oxygen–hemoglobin saturation/dissociation curve .
For example , a higher temperature promotes hemoglobin and oxygen to dissociate faster , whereas a lower temperature inhibits dissociation ( see Figure 22.26 , middle ) .
However , the human body tightly regulates temperature , so this factor may not affect gas exchange throughout the body .
The exception to this is in highly active tissues , which may release a larger amount of energy than is given off as heat .
As a result , oxygen readily dissociates from hemoglobin , which is a mechanism that helps to provide active tissues with more oxygen .
the Certain hormones , oxygen–hemoglobin called 2,3-bisphosphoglycerate ( BPG ) by erythrocytes .
BPG is a byproduct of glycolysis .
Because erythrocytes do not contain mitochondria , glycolysis is the sole method by which these cells produce ATP .
BPG promotes the disassociation of oxygen from hemoglobin .
Therefore , the greater the concentration of BPG , the more readily oxygen dissociates from hemoglobin , despite its partial pressure .
The pH of the blood is another factor that influences the oxygen–hemoglobin saturation/dissociation curve ( see Figure 22.26 ) .
The Bohr effect is a phenomenon that arises from the relationship between pH and oxygen ’ s affinity for hemoglobin : A lower , more acidic pH promotes oxygen dissociation from hemoglobin .
In contrast , a higher , or more basic , pH inhibits oxygen dissociation from hemoglobin .
The greater the amount of carbon dioxide in the blood , the more molecules that must be converted , which in turn generates hydrogen ions and thus lowers blood pH .
Furthermore , blood pH may become more acidic when certain byproducts of cell metabolism , such as lactic acid , carbonic acid , and carbon dioxide , are released into the bloodstream .
The fetus has its own circulation with its own erythrocytes ; however , it is dependent on the mother for oxygen .
The mechanism of gas exchange at the chorion is similar to gas exchange at the respiratory membrane .
However , the partial pressure of oxygen is lower in the maternal blood in the placenta , at about 35 to 50 mm Hg , than it is in maternal arterial blood .
The difference in partial pressures between maternal and fetal blood is not large , as the partial pressure of oxygen in fetal blood at the placenta is about 20 mm Hg .
Therefore , there is not as much diffusion of oxygen into the fetal blood supply .
The fetus ’ hemoglobin overcomes this problem by having a greater affinity for oxygen than maternal hemoglobin ( Figure 22.27 ) .
Both fetal and adult hemoglobin have four subunits , but two of the subunits of fetal hemoglobin have a different structure that causes fetal hemoglobin to have a greater affinity for oxygen than does adult hemoglobin .
Carbon dioxide is transported by three major mechanisms .
The first mechanism of carbon dioxide transport is by blood plasma , as some carbon dioxide molecules dissolve in the blood .
The second mechanism is transport in the form of ) , which also dissolves in plasma .
The third mechanism of carbon dioxide transport is similar to the bicarbonate ( HCO transport of oxygen by erythrocytes ( Figure 22.28 ) .
Although carbon dioxide is not considered to be highly soluble in blood , a small fraction—about 7 to 10 percent—of the carbon dioxide that diffuses into the blood from the tissues dissolves in plasma .
The dissolved carbon dioxide then travels in the bloodstream and when the blood reaches the pulmonary capillaries , the dissolved carbon dioxide diffuses across the respiratory membrane into the alveoli , where it is then exhaled during pulmonary ventilation .
A large fraction—about 70 percent—of the carbon dioxide molecules that diffuse into the blood is transported to the lungs as bicarbonate .
Most bicarbonate is produced in erythrocytes after carbon dioxide diffuses into the capillaries , and subsequently into red blood cells .
Carbonic anhydrase ( CA ) causes carbon dioxide and water to form carbonic acid ) and hydrogen ( H ) .
The following formula depicts this ( H CO ) , which dissociates into two ions : bicarbonate ( HCO reaction : Bicarbonate tends to build up in the erythrocytes , so that there is a greater concentration of bicarbonate in the erythrocytes than in the surrounding blood plasma .
As a result , some of the bicarbonate will leave the erythrocytes and move down its concentration gradient into the plasma in exchange for chloride ( Cl ) ions .
This phenomenon is referred to as the chloride shift and occurs because by exchanging one negative ion for another negative ion , neither the electrical charge of the erythrocytes nor that of the blood is altered .
At the pulmonary capillaries , the chemical reaction that produced bicarbonate ( shown above ) is reversed , and carbon dioxide and water are the products .
Much of the bicarbonate in the plasma re-enters the erythrocytes in exchange for chloride ions .
Hydrogen ions and bicarbonate ions join to form carbonic acid , which is converted into carbon dioxide and water by carbonic anhydrase .
Carbon dioxide diffuses out of the erythrocytes and into the plasma , where it can further diffuse across the respiratory membrane into the alveoli to be exhaled during pulmonary ventilation .
About 20 percent of carbon dioxide is bound by hemoglobin and is transported to the lungs .
Carbon dioxide does not bind to iron as oxygen does ; instead , carbon dioxide binds amino acid moieties on the globin portions of hemoglobin to form carbaminohemoglobin , which forms when hemoglobin and carbon dioxide bind .
When hemoglobin is not transporting oxygen , it tends to have a bluish-purple tone to it , creating the darker maroon color typical of deoxygenated blood .
The following formula depicts this reversible reaction : Similar to the transport of oxygen by heme , the binding and dissociation of carbon dioxide to and from hemoglobin is dependent on the partial pressure of carbon dioxide .
Because carbon dioxide is released from the lungs , blood that leaves the lungs and reaches body tissues has a lower partial pressure of carbon dioxide than is found in the tissues .
As a result , carbon dioxide leaves the tissues because of its higher partial pressure , enters the blood , and then moves into red blood cells , binding to hemoglobin .
In contrast , in the pulmonary capillaries , the partial pressure of carbon dioxide is high compared to within the alveoli .
As a result , carbon dioxide dissociates readily from hemoglobin and diffuses across the respiratory membrane into the air .
In addition to the partial pressure of carbon dioxide , the oxygen saturation of hemoglobin and the partial pressure of oxygen in the blood also influence the affinity of hemoglobin for carbon dioxide .
The Haldane effect is a phenomenon that arises from the relationship between the partial pressure of oxygen and the affinity of hemoglobin for carbon dioxide .
Hemoglobin that is saturated with oxygen does not readily bind carbon dioxide .
However , when oxygen is not bound to heme and the partial pressure of oxygen is low , hemoglobin readily binds to carbon dioxide .
Watch this video ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/oxyblood ) to see the transport of oxygen from the lungs to the tissues .
Why is oxygenated blood bright red , whereas deoxygenated blood tends to be more of a purple color ?
At this pace , ventilation provides sufficient oxygen to all the tissues of the body .
However , there are times that the respiratory system must alter the pace of its functions in order to accommodate the oxygen demands of the body .
Hyperpnea is an increased depth and rate of ventilation to meet an increase in oxygen demand as might be seen in exercise or disease , particularly diseases that target the respiratory or digestive tracts .
This does not significantly alter blood oxygen or carbon dioxide levels , but merely increases the depth and rate of ventilation to meet the demand of the cells .
In contrast , hyperventilation is an increased ventilation rate that is independent of the cellular oxygen needs and leads to abnormally low blood carbon dioxide levels and high ( alkaline ) blood pH .
Interestingly , exercise does not cause hyperpnea as one might think .
Muscles that perform work during exercise do increase their demand for oxygen , stimulating an increase in ventilation .
However , hyperpnea during exercise appears to occur before a drop in oxygen levels within the muscles can occur .
Therefore , hyperpnea must be driven by other mechanisms , either instead of or in addition to a drop in oxygen levels .
The exact mechanisms behind exercise hyperpnea are not well understood , and some hypotheses are somewhat controversial .
However , in addition to low oxygen , high carbon dioxide , and low pH levels , there appears to be a complex interplay of factors related to the nervous system and the respiratory centers of the brain .
First , a conscious decision to partake in exercise , or another form of physical exertion , results in a psychological stimulus that may trigger the respiratory centers of the brain to increase ventilation .
In addition , the respiratory centers of the brain may be stimulated through the activation of motor neurons that innervate muscle groups that are involved in the physical activity .
Finally , physical exertion stimulates proprioceptors , which are receptors located within the muscles , joints , and tendons , which sense movement and stretching ; proprioceptors thus create a stimulus that may also trigger the respiratory centers of the brain .
These neural factors are consistent with the sudden increase in ventilation that is observed immediately as exercise begins .
An increase in altitude results in a decrease in atmospheric pressure .
Although the proportion of oxygen relative to gases in the atmosphere remains at 21 percent , its partial pressure decreases ( Table 22.4 ) .
As a result , it is more difficult for a body to achieve the same level of oxygen saturation at high altitude than at low altitude , due to lower atmospheric pressure .
In fact , hemoglobin saturation is lower at high altitudes compared to hemoglobin saturation at sea level .
For example , hemoglobin saturation is about 67 percent at 19,000 feet above sea level , whereas it reaches about 98 percent at sea level .
As you recall , partial pressure is extremely important in determining how much gas can cross the respiratory membrane and enter the blood of the pulmonary capillaries .
A lower partial pressure of oxygen means that there is a smaller difference in partial pressures between the alveoli and the blood , so less oxygen crosses the respiratory membrane .
As a result , fewer oxygen molecules are bound by hemoglobin .
Despite this , the tissues of the body still receive a sufficient amount of oxygen during rest at high altitudes .
This is due to two major mechanisms .
First , the number of oxygen molecules that enter the tissue from the blood is nearly equal between sea level and high altitudes .
At sea level , hemoglobin saturation is higher , but only a quarter of the oxygen molecules are actually released into the tissue .
At high altitudes , a greater proportion of molecules of oxygen are released into the tissues .
Secondly , at high altitudes , a greater amount of BPG is produced by erythrocytes , which enhances the dissociation of oxygen from hemoglobin .
Physical exertion , such as skiing or hiking , can lead to altitude sickness due to the low amount of oxygen reserves in the blood at high altitudes .
At sea level , there is a large amount of oxygen reserve in venous blood ( even though venous blood is thought of as “ deoxygenated ” ) from which the muscles can draw during physical exertion .
Because the oxygen saturation is much lower at higher altitudes , this venous reserve is small , resulting in pathological symptoms of low blood oxygen levels .
You may have heard that it is important to drink more water when traveling at higher altitudes than you are accustomed to .
This is because your body will increase micturition ( urination ) at high altitudes to counteract the effects of lower oxygen levels .
By removing fluids , blood plasma levels drop but not the total number of erythrocytes .
In this way , the overall concentration of erythrocytes in the blood increases , which helps tissues obtain the oxygen they need .
Acute mountain sickness ( AMS ) , or altitude sickness , is a condition that results from acute exposure to high altitudes due to a low partial pressure of oxygen at high altitudes .
AMS typically can occur at 2400 meters ( 8000 feet ) above sea level .
AMS is a result of low blood oxygen levels , as the body has acute difficulty adjusting to the low partial pressure of oxygen .
In serious cases , AMS can cause pulmonary or cerebral edema .
Symptoms of AMS include nausea , vomiting , fatigue , lightheadedness , drowsiness , feeling disoriented , increased pulse , and nosebleeds .
The only treatment for AMS is descending to a lower altitude ; however , pharmacologic treatments and supplemental oxygen can improve symptoms .
AMS can be prevented by slowly ascending to the desired altitude , allowing the body to acclimate , as well as maintaining proper hydration .
Especially in situations where the ascent occurs too quickly , traveling to areas of high altitude can cause AMS .
Acclimatization is the process of adjustment that the respiratory system makes due to chronic exposure to a high altitude .
Over a period of time , the body adjusts to accommodate the lower partial pressure of oxygen .
The low partial pressure of oxygen at high altitudes results in a lower oxygen saturation level of hemoglobin in the blood .
In turn , the tissue levels of oxygen are also lower .
As a result , the kidneys are stimulated to produce the hormone erythropoietin ( EPO ) , which stimulates the production of erythrocytes , resulting in a greater number of circulating erythrocytes in an individual at a high altitude over a long period .
With more red blood cells , there is more hemoglobin to help transport the available oxygen .
Even though there is low saturation of each hemoglobin molecule , there will be more hemoglobin present , and therefore more oxygen in the blood .
Over time , this allows the person to partake in physical exertion without developing AMS .
It is a complex process that includes many structures , most of which arise from the endoderm .
Towards the end of development , the fetus can be observed making breathing movements .
Until birth , however , the mother provides all of the oxygen to the fetus as well as removes all of the fetal carbon dioxide via the placenta .
The development of the respiratory system begins at about week 4 of gestation .
By week 28 , enough alveoli have matured that a baby born prematurely at this time can usually breathe on its own .
The respiratory system , however , is not fully developed until early childhood , when a full complement of mature alveoli is present .
Respiratory development in the embryo begins around week 4 .
Ectodermal tissue from the anterior head region invaginates posteriorly to form olfactory pits , which fuse with endodermal tissue of the developing pharynx .
An olfactory pit is one of a pair of structures that will enlarge to become the nasal cavity .
At about this same time , the lung bud forms .
The lung bud is a dome-shaped structure composed of tissue that bulges from the foregut .
The foregut is endoderm just inferior to the pharyngeal pouches .
The laryngotracheal bud is a structure that forms from the longitudinal extension of the lung bud as development progresses .
The portion of this structure nearest the pharynx becomes the trachea , whereas the distal end becomes more bulbous , forming bronchial buds .
A bronchial bud is one of a pair of structures that will eventually become the bronchi and all other lower respiratory structures ( Figure 22.29 ) .
Bronchial buds continue to branch as development progresses until all of the segmental bronchi have been formed .
Beginning around week 13 , the lumens of the bronchi begin to expand in diameter .
By week 16 , respiratory bronchioles form .
The fetus now has all major lung structures involved in the airway .
Once the respiratory bronchioles form , further development includes extensive vascularization , or the development of the blood vessels , as well as the formation of alveolar ducts and alveolar precursors .
At about week 19 , the respiratory bronchioles have formed .
In addition , cells lining the respiratory structures begin to differentiate to form type I and type II pneumocytes .
Once type II cells have differentiated , they begin to secrete small amounts of pulmonary surfactant .
Around week 20 , fetal breathing movements may begin .
Major growth and maturation of the respiratory system occurs from week 24 until term .
More alveolar precursors develop , and larger amounts of pulmonary surfactant are produced .
Surfactant levels are not generally adequate to create effective lung compliance until about the eighth month of pregnancy .
The respiratory system continues to expand , and the surfaces that will form the respiratory membrane develop further .
At this point , pulmonary capillaries have formed and continue to expand , creating a large surface area for gas exchange .
The major milestone of respiratory development occurs at around week 28 , when sufficient alveolar precursors have matured so that a baby born prematurely at this time can usually breathe on its own .
However , alveoli continue to develop and mature into childhood .
A full complement of functional alveoli does not appear until around 8 years of age .
Although the function of fetal breathing movements is not entirely clear , they can be observed starting at 20–21 weeks of development .
Fetal breathing movements involve muscle contractions that cause the inhalation of amniotic fluid and exhalation of the same fluid , with pulmonary surfactant and mucus .
Fetal breathing movements are not continuous and may include periods of frequent movements and periods of no movements .
Maternal factors can influence the frequency of breathing movements .
For example , high blood glucose levels , called hyperglycemia , can boost the number of breathing movements .
Conversely , low blood glucose levels , called hypoglycemia , can reduce the number of fetal breathing movements .
Tobacco use is also known to lower fetal breathing rates .
Fetal breathing may help tone the muscles in preparation for breathing movements once the fetus is born .
It may also help the alveoli to form and mature .
Fetal breathing movements are considered a sign of robust health .
Prior to birth , the lungs are filled with amniotic fluid , mucus , and surfactant .
As the fetus is squeezed through the birth canal , the fetal thoracic cavity is compressed , expelling much of this fluid .
Some fluid remains , however , but is rapidly absorbed by the body shortly after birth .
The first inhalation occurs within 10 seconds after birth and not only serves as the first inspiration , but also acts to inflate the lungs .
Pulmonary surfactant is critical for inflation to occur , as it reduces the surface tension of the alveoli .
Preterm birth around 26 weeks frequently results in severe respiratory distress , although with current medical advancements , some babies may survive .
Prior to 26 weeks , sufficient pulmonary surfactant is not produced , and the surfaces for gas exchange have not formed adequately ; therefore , survival is low .
Respiratory distress syndrome ( RDS ) primarily occurs in infants born prematurely .
Up to 50 percent of infants born between 26 and 28 weeks and fewer than 30 percent of infants born between 30 and 31 weeks develop RDS .
RDS results from insufficient production of pulmonary surfactant , thereby preventing the lungs from properly inflating at birth .
A small amount of pulmonary surfactant is produced beginning at around 20 weeks ; however , this is not sufficient for inflation of the lungs .
As a result , dyspnea occurs and gas exchange can not be performed properly .
Blood oxygen levels are low , whereas blood carbon dioxide levels and pH are high .
The primary cause of RDS is premature birth , which may be due to a variety of known or unknown causes .
Other risk factors include gestational diabetes , cesarean delivery , second-born twins , and family history of RDS .
The presence of RDS can lead to other serious disorders , such as septicemia ( infection of the blood ) or pulmonary hemorrhage .
Therefore , it is important that RDS is immediately recognized and treated to prevent death and reduce the risk of developing other disorders .
Medical advances have resulted in an improved ability to treat RDS and support the infant until proper lung development can occur .
At the time of delivery , treatment may include resuscitation and intubation if the infant does not breathe on his or her own .
These infants would need to be placed on a ventilator to mechanically assist with the breathing process .
If spontaneous breathing occurs , application of nasal continuous positive airway pressure ( CPAP ) may be required .
In addition , pulmonary surfactant is typically administered .
Death due to RDS has been reduced by 50 percent due to the introduction of pulmonary surfactant therapy .
Other therapies may include corticosteroids , supplemental oxygen , and assisted ventilation .
Supportive therapies , such as temperature regulation , nutritional support , and antibiotics , may be administered to the premature infant as well .
Consider what happens when you eat an apple .
Of course , you enjoy the apple ’ s taste as you chew it , but in the hours that follow , unless something goes amiss and you get a stomachache , you don ’ t notice that your digestive system is working .
You may be taking a walk or studying or sleeping , having forgotten all about the apple , but your stomach and intestines are busy digesting it and absorbing its vitamins and other nutrients .
By the time any waste material is excreted , the body has appropriated all it can use from the apple .
In short , whether you pay attention or not , the organs of the digestive system perform their specific functions , allowing you to use the food you eat to keep you going .
This chapter examines the structure and functions of these organs , and explores the mechanics and chemistry of the digestive processes .
As is the case with all body systems , the digestive system does not work in isolation ; it functions cooperatively with the other systems of the body .
Consider for example , the interrelationship between the digestive and cardiovascular systems .
Arteries supply the digestive organs with oxygen and processed nutrients , and veins drain the digestive tract .
These intestinal veins , constituting the hepatic portal system , are unique ; they do not return blood directly to the heart .
Rather , this blood is diverted to the liver where its nutrients are off-loaded for processing before blood completes its circuit back to the heart .
At the same time , the digestive system provides nutrients to the heart muscle and vascular tissue to support their functioning .
The interrelationship of the digestive and endocrine systems is also critical .
Hormones secreted by several endocrine glands , as well as endocrine cells of the pancreas , the stomach , and the small intestine , contribute to the control of digestion and nutrient metabolism .
In turn , the digestive system provides the nutrients to fuel endocrine function .
Table 23.1 gives a quick glimpse at how these other systems contribute to the functioning of the digestive system .
The easiest way to understand the digestive system is to divide its organs into two main categories .
The first group is the organs that make up the alimentary canal .
Accessory digestive organs comprise the second group and are critical for orchestrating the breakdown of food and the assimilation of its nutrients into the body .
Accessory digestive organs , despite their name , are critical to the function of the digestive system .
The main function of the organs of the alimentary canal is to nourish the body .
This tube begins at the mouth and terminates at the anus .
Between those two points , the canal is modified as the pharynx , esophagus , stomach , and small and large intestines to fit the functional needs of the body .
Both the mouth and anus are open to the external environment ; thus , food and wastes within the alimentary canal are technically considered to be outside the body .
Only through the process of absorption do the nutrients in food enter into and nourish the body ’ s “ inner space. ” Each accessory digestive organ aids in the breakdown of food ( Figure 23.3 ) .
Within the mouth , the teeth and tongue begin mechanical digestion , whereas the salivary glands begin chemical digestion .
Once food products enter the small intestine , the gallbladder , liver , and pancreas release secretions—such as bile and enzymes—essential for digestion to continue .
Together , these are called accessory organs because they sprout from the lining cells of the developing gut ( mucosa ) and augment its function ; indeed , you could not live without their vital contributions , and many significant diseases result from their malfunction .
Even after development is complete , they maintain a connection to the gut by way of ducts .
Throughout its length , the alimentary tract is composed of the same four tissue layers ; the details of their structural arrangements vary to fit their specific functions .
Starting from the lumen and moving outwards , these layers are the mucosa , submucosa , muscularis , and serosa , which is continuous with the mesentery ( see Figure 23.3 ) .
The mucosa is referred to as a mucous membrane , because mucus production is a characteristic feature of gut epithelium .
The membrane consists of epithelium , which is in direct contact with ingested food , and the lamina propria , a layer of connective tissue analogous to the dermis .
In addition , the mucosa has a thin , smooth muscle layer , called the muscularis mucosa ( not to be confused with the muscularis layer , described below ) .
Epithelium —In the mouth , pharynx , esophagus , and anal canal , the epithelium is primarily a non-keratinized , stratified squamous epithelium .
In the stomach and intestines , it is a simple columnar epithelium .
Notice that the epithelium is in direct contact with the lumen , the space inside the alimentary canal .
Interspersed among its epithelial cells are goblet cells , which secrete mucus and fluid into the lumen , and enteroendocrine cells , which secrete hormones into the interstitial spaces between cells .
Epithelial cells have a very brief lifespan , averaging from only a couple of days ( in the mouth ) to about a week ( in the gut ) .
This process of rapid renewal helps preserve the health of the alimentary canal , despite the wear and tear resulting from continued contact with foodstuffs .
Lamina propria —In addition to loose connective tissue , the lamina propria contains numerous blood and lymphatic vessels that transport nutrients absorbed through the alimentary canal to other parts of the body .
The lamina propria also serves an immune function by housing clusters of lymphocytes , making up the mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue ( MALT ) .
These lymphocyte clusters are particularly substantial in the distal ileum where they are known as Peyer ’ s patches .
When you consider that the alimentary canal is exposed to foodborne bacteria and other foreign matter , it is not hard to appreciate why the immune system has evolved a means of defending against the pathogens encountered within it .
Muscularis mucosa —This thin layer of smooth muscle is in a constant state of tension , pulling the mucosa of the stomach and small intestine into undulating folds .
These folds dramatically increase the surface area available for digestion and absorption .
As its name implies , the submucosa lies immediately beneath the mucosa .
A broad layer of dense connective tissue , it connects the overlying mucosa to the underlying muscularis .
It includes blood and lymphatic vessels ( which transport absorbed nutrients ) , and a scattering of submucosal glands that release digestive secretions .
Additionally , it serves as a conduit for a dense branching network of nerves , the submucosal plexus , which functions as described below .
The third layer of the alimentary canal is the muscalaris ( also called the muscularis externa ) .
The muscularis in the small intestine is made up of a double layer of smooth muscle : an inner circular layer and an outer longitudinal layer .
The contractions of these layers promote mechanical digestion , expose more of the food to digestive chemicals , and move the food along the canal .
In the most proximal and distal regions of the alimentary canal , including the mouth , pharynx , anterior part of the esophagus , and external anal sphincter , the muscularis is made up of skeletal muscle , which gives you voluntary control over swallowing and defecation .
The basic two-layer structure found in the small intestine is modified in the organs proximal and distal to it .
The stomach is equipped for its churning function by the addition of a third layer , the oblique muscle .
While the colon has two layers like the small intestine , its longitudinal layer is segregated into three narrow parallel bands , the tenia coli , which make it look like a series of pouches rather than a simple tube .
The serosa is the portion of the alimentary canal superficial to the muscularis .
Present only in the region of the alimentary canal within the abdominal cavity , it consists of a layer of visceral peritoneum overlying a layer of loose connective tissue .
Instead of serosa , the mouth , pharynx , and esophagus have a dense sheath of collagen fibers called the adventitia .
These tissues serve to hold the alimentary canal in place near the ventral surface of the vertebral column .
As soon as food enters the mouth , it is detected by receptors that send impulses along the sensory neurons of cranial nerves .
These enteric neurons are grouped into two plexuses .
The myenteric plexus ( plexus of Auerbach ) lies in the muscularis layer of the alimentary canal and is responsible for motility , especially the rhythm and force of the contractions of the muscularis .
The submucosal plexus ( plexus of Meissner ) lies in the submucosal layer and is responsible for regulating digestive secretions and reacting to the presence of food ( see Figure 23.3 ) .
Extrinsic innervations of the alimentary canal are provided by the autonomic nervous system , which includes both sympathetic and parasympathetic nerves .
In general , sympathetic activation ( the fight-or-flight response ) restricts the activity of enteric neurons , thereby decreasing GI secretion and motility .
In contrast , parasympathetic activation ( the restand-digest response ) increases GI secretion and motility by stimulating neurons of the enteric nervous system .
The blood vessels serving the digestive system have two functions .
They transport the protein and carbohydrate nutrients absorbed by mucosal cells after food is digested in the lumen .
Lipids are absorbed via lacteals , tiny structures of the lymphatic system .
The blood vessels ’ second function is to supply the organs of the alimentary canal with the nutrients and oxygen needed to drive their cellular processes .
Specifically , the more anterior parts of the alimentary canal are supplied with blood by arteries branching off the aortic arch and thoracic aorta .
Below this point , the alimentary canal is supplied with blood by arteries branching from the abdominal aorta .
The celiac trunk services the liver , stomach , and duodenum , whereas the superior and inferior mesenteric arteries supply blood to the remaining small and large intestines .
The veins that collect nutrient-rich blood from the small intestine ( where most absorption occurs ) empty into the hepatic portal system .
This venous network takes the blood into the liver where the nutrients are either processed or stored for later use .
Only then does the blood drained from the alimentary canal viscera circulate back to the heart .
To appreciate just how demanding the digestive process is on the cardiovascular system , consider that while you are “ resting and digesting , ” about one-fourth of the blood pumped with each heartbeat enters arteries serving the intestines .
The digestive organs within the abdominal cavity are held in place by the peritoneum , a broad serous membranous sac made up of squamous epithelial tissue surrounded by connective tissue .
It is composed of two different regions : the parietal peritoneum , which lines the abdominal wall , and the visceral peritoneum , which envelopes the abdominal organs ( Figure 23.4 ) .
The peritoneal cavity is the space bounded by the visceral and parietal peritoneal surfaces .
A few milliliters of watery fluid act as a lubricant to minimize friction between the serosal surfaces of the peritoneum .
Inflammation of the peritoneum is called peritonitis .
Chemical peritonitis can develop any time the wall of the alimentary canal is breached , allowing the contents of the lumen entry into the peritoneal cavity .
For example , when an ulcer perforates the stomach wall , gastric juices spill into the peritoneal cavity .
Hemorrhagic peritonitis occurs after a ruptured tubal pregnancy or traumatic injury to the liver or spleen fills the peritoneal cavity with blood .
Even more severe peritonitis is associated with bacterial infections seen with appendicitis , colonic diverticulitis , and pelvic inflammatory disease ( infection of uterine tubes , usually by sexually transmitted bacteria ) .
Peritonitis is life threatening and often results in emergency surgery to correct the underlying problem and intensive antibiotic therapy .
When your great grandparents and even your parents were young , the mortality from peritonitis was high .
Aggressive surgery , improvements in anesthesia safety , the advance of critical care expertise , and antibiotics have greatly improved the mortality rate from this condition .
Even so , the mortality rate still ranges from 30 to 40 percent .
The visceral peritoneum includes multiple large folds that envelope various abdominal organs , holding them to the dorsal surface of the body wall .
Within these folds are blood vessels , lymphatic vessels , and nerves that innervate the organs with which they are in contact , supplying their adjacent organs .
The five major peritoneal folds are described in Table 23.2 .
Thus , the location of these organs is described as retroperitoneal .
By clicking on this link ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/fooddigestion ) you can watch a short video of what happens to the food you eat , as it passes from your mouth to your intestine .
Along the way , note how the food changes consistency and form .
How does this change in consistency facilitate your gaining nutrients from food ?
Table 23.3 provides an overview of the basic functions of the digestive organs .
Visit this site ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/fooddigestion2 ) for an overview of digestion of food in different regions of the digestive tract .
Note the route of non-fat nutrients from the small intestine to their release as nutrients to the body .
The processes of digestion include six activities : ingestion , propulsion , mechanical or physical digestion , chemical digestion , absorption , and defecation .
The first of these processes , ingestion , refers to the entry of food into the alimentary canal through the mouth .
There , the food is chewed and mixed with saliva , which contains enzymes that begin breaking down the carbohydrates in the food plus some lipid digestion via lingual lipase .
Chewing increases the surface area of the food and allows an appropriately sized bolus to be produced .
Food leaves the mouth when the tongue and pharyngeal muscles propel it into the esophagus .
This act of swallowing , the last voluntary act until defecation , is an example of propulsion , which refers to the movement of food through the digestive tract .
It includes both the voluntary process of swallowing and the involuntary process of peristalsis .
Peristalsis consists of sequential , alternating waves of contraction and relaxation of alimentary wall smooth muscles , which act to propel food along ( Figure 23.5 ) .
These waves also play a role in mixing food with digestive juices .
Peristalsis is so powerful that foods and liquids you swallow enter your stomach even if you are standing on your head .
Digestion includes both mechanical and chemical processes .
Mechanical digestion is a purely physical process that does not change the chemical nature of the food .
Instead , it makes the food smaller to increase both surface area and mobility .
It includes mastication , or chewing , as well as tongue movements that help break food into smaller bits and mix food with saliva .
Although there may be a tendency to think that mechanical digestion is limited to the first steps of the digestive process , it occurs after the food leaves the mouth , as well .
The mechanical churning of food in the stomach serves to further break it apart and expose more of its surface area to digestive juices , creating an acidic “ soup ” called chyme .
Segmentation , which occurs mainly in the small intestine , consists of localized contractions of circular muscle of the muscularis layer of the alimentary canal .
These contractions isolate small sections of the intestine , moving their contents back and forth while continuously subdividing , breaking up , and mixing the contents .
By moving food back and forth in the intestinal lumen , segmentation mixes food with digestive juices and facilitates absorption .
In chemical digestion , starting in the mouth , digestive secretions break down complex food molecules into their chemical building blocks ( for example , proteins into separate amino acids ) .
These secretions vary in composition , but typically contain water , various enzymes , acids , and salts .
The process is completed in the small intestine .
Food that has been broken down is of no value to the body unless it enters the bloodstream and its nutrients are put to work .
This occurs through the process of absorption , which takes place primarily within the small intestine .
There , most nutrients are absorbed from the lumen of the alimentary canal into the bloodstream through the epithelial cells that make up the mucosa .
Lipids are absorbed into lacteals and are transported via the lymphatic vessels to the bloodstream ( the subclavian veins near the heart ) .
The details of these processes will be discussed later .
In defecation , the final step in digestion , undigested materials are removed from the body as feces .
Age-related changes in the digestive system begin in the mouth and can affect virtually every aspect of the digestive system .
Taste buds become less sensitive , so food isn ’ t as appetizing as it once was .
A slice of pizza is a challenge , not a treat , when you have lost teeth , your gums are diseased , and your salivary glands aren ’ t producing enough saliva .
Swallowing can be difficult , and ingested food moves slowly through the alimentary canal because of reduced strength and tone of muscular tissue .
Neurosensory feedback is also dampened , slowing the transmission of messages that stimulate the release of enzymes and hormones .
Pathologies that affect the digestive organs—such as hiatal hernia , gastritis , and peptic ulcer disease—can occur at greater frequencies as you age .
Problems in the small intestine may include duodenal ulcers , maldigestion , and malabsorption .
Problems in the large intestine include hemorrhoids , diverticular disease , and constipation .
Conditions that affect the function of accessory organs—and their abilities to deliver pancreatic enzymes and bile to the small intestine—include jaundice , acute pancreatitis , cirrhosis , and gallstones .
In some cases , a single organ is in charge of a digestive process .
For example , ingestion occurs only in the mouth and defecation only in the anus .
However , most digestive processes involve the interaction of several organs and occur gradually as food moves through the alimentary canal ( Figure 23.6 ) .
Some chemical digestion occurs in the mouth .
Some absorption can occur in the mouth and stomach , for example , alcohol and aspirin .
Neural and endocrine regulatory mechanisms work to maintain the optimal conditions in the lumen needed for digestion and absorption .
These regulatory mechanisms , which stimulate digestive activity through mechanical and chemical activity , are controlled both extrinsically and intrinsically .
The walls of the alimentary canal contain a variety of sensors that help regulate digestive functions .
These include mechanoreceptors , chemoreceptors , and osmoreceptors , which are capable of detecting mechanical , chemical , and osmotic stimuli , respectively .
Stimulation of these receptors provokes an appropriate reflex that furthers the process of digestion .
This may entail sending a message that activates the glands that secrete digestive juices into the lumen , or it may mean the stimulation of muscles within the alimentary canal , thereby activating peristalsis and segmentation that move food along the intestinal tract .
The walls of the entire alimentary canal are embedded with nerve plexuses that interact with the central nervous system and other nerve plexuses—either within the same digestive organ or in different ones .
These interactions prompt several types of reflexes .
Extrinsic nerve plexuses orchestrate long reflexes , which involve the central and autonomic nervous systems and work in response to stimuli from outside the digestive system .
Short reflexes , on the other hand , are orchestrated by intrinsic nerve plexuses within the alimentary canal wall .
These two plexuses and their connections were introduced earlier as the enteric nervous system .
Short reflexes regulate activities in one area of the digestive tract and may coordinate local peristaltic movements and stimulate digestive secretions .
For example , the sight , smell , and taste of food initiate long reflexes that begin with a sensory neuron delivering a signal to the medulla oblongata .
The response to the signal is to stimulate cells in the stomach to begin secreting digestive juices in preparation for incoming food .
In contrast , food that distends the stomach initiates short reflexes that cause cells in the stomach wall to increase their secretion of digestive juices .
A variety of hormones are involved in the digestive process .
The main digestive hormone of the stomach is gastrin , which is secreted in response to the presence of food .
Gastrin stimulates the secretion of gastric acid by the parietal cells of the stomach mucosa .
Other GI hormones are produced and act upon the gut and its accessory organs .
These GI hormones are secreted by specialized epithelial cells , called endocrinocytes , located in the mucosal epithelium of the stomach and small intestine .
These hormones then enter the bloodstream , through which they can reach their target organs .
The cheeks , tongue , and palate frame the mouth , which is also called the oral cavity ( or buccal cavity ) .
The structures of the mouth are illustrated in Figure 23.7 .
At the entrance to the mouth are the lips , or labia ( singular = labium ) .
Their outer covering is skin , which transitions to a mucous membrane in the mouth proper .
Lips are very vascular with a thin layer of keratin ; hence , the reason they are `` red . ''
They have a huge representation on the cerebral cortex , which probably explains the human fascination with kissing !
The lips cover the orbicularis oris muscle , which regulates what comes in and goes out of the mouth .
The labial frenulum is a midline fold of mucous membrane that attaches the inner surface of each lip to the gum .
The cheeks make up the oral cavity ’ s sidewalls .
While their outer covering is skin , their inner covering is mucous membrane .
This membrane is made up of non-keratinized , stratified squamous epithelium .
Between the skin and mucous membranes are connective tissue and buccinator muscles .
The next time you eat some food , notice how the buccinator muscles in your cheeks and the orbicularis oris muscle in your lips contract , helping you keep the food from falling out of your mouth .
Additionally , notice how these muscles work when you are speaking .
The pocket-like part of the mouth that is framed on the inside by the gums and teeth , and on the outside by the cheeks and lips is called the oral vestibule .
Moving farther into the mouth , the opening between the oral cavity and throat ( oropharynx ) is called the fauces ( like the kitchen `` faucet '' ) .
The main open area of the mouth , or oral cavity proper , runs from the gums and teeth to the fauces .
When you are chewing , you do not find it difficult to breathe simultaneously .
The next time you have food in your mouth , notice how the arched shape of the roof of your mouth allows you to handle both digestion and respiration at the same time .
This arch is called the palate .
The anterior region of the palate serves as a wall ( or septum ) between the oral and nasal cavities as well as a rigid shelf against which the tongue can push food .
It is created by the maxillary and palatine bones of the skull and , given its bony structure , is known as the hard palate .
If you run your tongue along the roof of your mouth , you ’ ll notice that the hard palate ends in the posterior oral cavity , and the tissue becomes fleshier .
This part of the palate , known as the soft palate , is composed mainly of skeletal muscle .
You can therefore manipulate , subconsciously , the soft palate—for instance , to yawn , swallow , or sing ( see Figure 23.7 ) .
A fleshy bead of tissue called the uvula drops down from the center of the posterior edge of the soft palate .
Although some have suggested that the uvula is a vestigial organ , it serves an important purpose .
When you swallow , the soft palate and uvula move upward , helping to keep foods and liquid from entering the nasal cavity .
Unfortunately , it can also contribute to the sound produced by snoring .
Two muscular folds extend downward from the soft palate , on either side of the uvula .
Toward the front , the palatoglossal arch lies next to the base of the tongue ; behind it , the palatopharyngeal arch forms the superior and lateral margins of the fauces .
Between these two arches are the palatine tonsils , clusters of lymphoid tissue that protect the pharynx .
The lingual tonsils are located at the base of the tongue .
Perhaps you have heard it said that the tongue is the strongest muscle in the body .
Those who stake this claim cite its strength proportionate to its size .
The tongue is attached to the mandible , the styloid processes of the temporal bones , and the hyoid bone .
The hyoid is unique in that it only distantly/indirectly articulates with other bones .
The tongue is positioned over the floor of the oral cavity .
A medial septum extends the entire length of the tongue , dividing it into symmetrical halves .
Beneath its mucous membrane covering , each half of the tongue is composed of the same number and type of intrinsic and extrinsic skeletal muscles .
The intrinsic muscles ( those within the tongue ) are the longitudinalis inferior , longitudinalis superior , transversus linguae , and verticalis linguae muscles .
These allow you to change the size and shape of your tongue , as well as to stick it out , if you wish .
Having such a flexible tongue facilitates both swallowing and speech .
As you learned in your study of the muscular system , the extrinsic muscles of the tongue are the mylohyoid , hyoglossus , styloglossus , and genioglossus muscles .
These muscles originate outside the tongue and insert into connective tissues within the tongue .
The mylohyoid is responsible for raising the tongue , the hyoglossus pulls it down and back , the styloglossus pulls it up and back , and the genioglossus pulls it forward .
Working in concert , these muscles perform three important digestive functions in the mouth : ( 1 ) position food for optimal chewing , ( 2 ) gather food into a bolus ( rounded mass ) , and ( 3 ) position food so it can be swallowed .
The top and sides of the tongue are studded with papillae , extensions of lamina propria of the mucosa , which are covered in stratified squamous epithelium ( Figure 23.8 ) .
Fungiform papillae , which are mushroom shaped , cover a large area of the tongue ; they tend to be larger toward the rear of the tongue and smaller on the tip and sides .
In contrast , filiform papillae are long and thin .
Fungiform papillae contain taste buds , and filiform papillae have touch receptors that help the tongue move food around in the mouth .
The filiform papillae create an abrasive surface that performs mechanically , much like a cat ’ s rough tongue that is used for grooming .
Lingual glands in the lamina propria of the tongue secrete mucus and a watery serous fluid that contains the enzyme lingual lipase , which plays a minor role in breaking down triglycerides but does not begin working until it is activated in the stomach .
A fold of mucous membrane on the underside of the tongue , the lingual frenulum , tethers the tongue to the floor of the mouth .
People with the congenital anomaly ankyloglossia , also known by the non-medical term “ tongue tie , ” have a lingual frenulum that is too short or otherwise malformed .
Severe ankyloglossia can impair speech and must be corrected with surgery .
Many small salivary glands are housed within the mucous membranes of the mouth and tongue .
These minor exocrine glands are constantly secreting saliva , either directly into the oral cavity or indirectly through ducts , even while you sleep .
In fact , an average of 1 to 1.5 liters of saliva is secreted each day .
Usually just enough saliva is present to moisten the mouth and teeth .
Secretion increases when you eat , because saliva is essential to moisten food and initiate the chemical breakdown of carbohydrates .
Small amounts of saliva are also secreted by the labial glands in the lips .
In addition , the buccal glands in the cheeks , palatal glands in the palate , and lingual glands in the tongue help ensure that all areas of the mouth are supplied with adequate saliva .
Outside the oral mucosa are three pairs of major salivary glands , which secrete the majority of saliva into ducts that open into the mouth : The submandibular glands , which are in the floor of the mouth , secrete saliva into the mouth through the submandibular ducts .
The sublingual glands , which lie below the tongue , use the lesser sublingual ducts to secrete saliva into the oral cavity .
The parotid glands lie between the skin and the masseter muscle , near the ears .
They secrete saliva into the mouth through the parotid duct , which is located near the second upper molar tooth ( Figure 23.9 ) .
Saliva is essentially ( 95.5 percent ) water .
The remaining 4.5 percent is a complex mixture of ions , glycoproteins , enzymes , growth factors , and waste products .
Perhaps the most important ingredient in saliva from the perspective of digestion is the enzyme salivary amylase , which initiates the breakdown of carbohydrates .
Food does not spend enough time in the mouth to allow all the carbohydrates to break down , but salivary amylase continues acting until it is inactivated by stomach acids .
Bicarbonate and phosphate ions function as chemical buffers , maintaining saliva at a pH between 6.35 and 6.85 .
Salivary mucus helps lubricate food , facilitating movement in the mouth , bolus formation , and swallowing .
Saliva contains immunoglobulin A , which prevents microbes from penetrating the epithelium , and lysozyme , which makes saliva antimicrobial .
Saliva also contains epidermal growth factor , which might have given rise to the adage “ a mother ’ s kiss can heal a wound. ” Each of the major salivary glands secretes a unique formulation of saliva according to its cellular makeup .
For example , the parotid glands secrete a watery solution that contains salivary amylase .
The submandibular glands have cells similar to those of the parotid glands , as well as mucus-secreting cells .
Therefore , saliva secreted by the submandibular glands also contains amylase but in a liquid thickened with mucus .
The sublingual glands contain mostly mucous cells , and they secrete the thickest saliva with the least amount of salivary amylase .
Infections of the nasal passages and pharynx can attack any salivary gland .
The parotid glands are the usual site of infection with the virus that causes mumps ( paramyxovirus ) .
Mumps manifests by enlargement and inflammation of the parotid glands , causing a characteristic swelling between the ears and the jaw .
Symptoms include fever and throat pain , which can be severe when swallowing acidic substances such as orange juice .
In about one-third of men who are past puberty , mumps also causes testicular inflammation , typically affecting only one testis and rarely resulting in sterility .
With the increasing use and effectiveness of mumps vaccines , the incidence of mumps has decreased dramatically .
According to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ( CDC ) , the number of mumps cases dropped from more than 150,000 in 1968 to fewer than 1700 in 1993 to only 11 reported cases in 2011 .
The autonomic nervous system regulates salivation ( the secretion of saliva ) .
In the absence of food , parasympathetic stimulation keeps saliva flowing at just the right level for comfort as you speak , swallow , sleep , and generally go about life .
Over-salivation can occur , for example , if you are stimulated by the smell of food , but that food is not available for you to eat .
Drooling is an extreme instance of the overproduction of saliva .
During times of stress , such as before speaking in public , sympathetic stimulation takes over , reducing salivation and producing the symptom of dry mouth often associated with anxiety .
When you are dehydrated , salivation is reduced , causing the mouth to feel dry and prompting you to take action to quench your thirst .
Salivation can be stimulated by the sight , smell , and taste of food .
It can even be stimulated by thinking about food .
You might notice whether reading about food and salivation right now has had any effect on your production of saliva .
How does the salivation process work while you are eating ?
Food contains chemicals that stimulate taste receptors on the tongue , which send impulses to the superior and inferior salivatory nuclei in the brain stem .
These two nuclei then send back parasympathetic impulses through fibers in the glossopharyngeal and facial nerves , which stimulate salivation .
Even after you swallow food , salivation is increased to cleanse the mouth and to water down and neutralize any irritating chemical remnants , such as that hot sauce in your burrito .
Most saliva is swallowed along with food and is reabsorbed , so that fluid is not lost .
The teeth , or dentes ( singular = dens ) , are organs similar to bones that you use to tear , grind , and otherwise mechanically break down food .
During the course of your lifetime , you have two sets of teeth ( one set of teeth is a dentition ) .
Your 20 deciduous teeth , or baby teeth , first begin to appear at about 6 months of age .
Between approximately age 6 and 12 , these teeth are replaced by 32 permanent teeth .
Moving from the center of the mouth toward the side , these are as follows ( Figure 23.10 ) : The eight incisors , four top and four bottom , are the sharp front teeth you use for biting into food .
The four cuspids ( or canines ) flank the incisors and have a pointed edge ( cusp ) to tear up food .
These fang-like teeth are superb for piercing tough or fleshy foods .
Posterior to the cuspids are the eight premolars ( or bicuspids ) , which have an overall flatter shape with two rounded cusps useful for mashing foods .
The most posterior and largest are the 12 molars , which have several pointed cusps used to crush food so it is ready for swallowing .
The third members of each set of three molars , top and bottom , are commonly referred to as the wisdom teeth , because their eruption is commonly delayed until early adulthood .
It is not uncommon for wisdom teeth to fail to erupt ; that is , they remain impacted .
In these cases , the teeth are typically removed by orthodontic surgery .
The teeth are secured in the alveolar processes ( sockets ) of the maxilla and the mandible .
Gingivae ( commonly called the gums ) are soft tissues that line the alveolar processes and surround the necks of the teeth .
Teeth are also held in their sockets by a connective tissue called the periodontal ligament .
The two main parts of a tooth are the crown , which is the portion projecting above the gum line , and the root , which is embedded within the maxilla and mandible .
Both parts contain an inner pulp cavity , containing loose connective tissue through which run nerves and blood vessels .
The region of the pulp cavity that runs through the root of the tooth is called the root canal .
Surrounding the pulp cavity is dentin , a bone-like tissue .
In the root of each tooth , the dentin is covered by an even harder bone-like layer called cementum .
In the crown of each tooth , the dentin is covered by an outer layer of enamel , the hardest substance in the body ( Figure 23.11 ) .
Although enamel protects the underlying dentin and pulp cavity , it is still nonetheless susceptible to mechanical and chemical erosion , or what is known as tooth decay .
The most common form , dental caries ( cavities ) develops when colonies of bacteria feeding on sugars in the mouth release acids that cause soft tissue inflammation and degradation of the calcium crystals of the enamel .
The digestive functions of the mouth are summarized in Table 23.4 .
The pharynx ( throat ) is involved in both digestion and respiration .
It receives food and air from the mouth , and air from the nasal cavities .
When food enters the pharynx , involuntary muscle contractions close off the air passageways .
A short tube of skeletal muscle lined with a mucous membrane , the pharynx runs from the posterior oral and nasal cavities to the opening of the esophagus and larynx .
It has three subdivisions .
The most superior , the nasopharynx , is involved only in breathing and speech .
The other two subdivisions , the oropharynx and the laryngopharynx , are used for both breathing and digestion .
The oropharynx begins inferior to the nasopharynx and is continuous below with the laryngopharynx ( Figure 23.12 ) .
The inferior border of the laryngopharynx connects to the esophagus , whereas the anterior portion connects to the larynx , allowing air to flow into the bronchial tree .
Histologically , the wall of the oropharynx is similar to that of the oral cavity .
The mucosa includes a stratified squamous epithelium that is endowed with mucus-producing glands .
During swallowing , the elevator skeletal muscles of the pharynx contract , raising and expanding the pharynx to receive the bolus of food .
Once received , these muscles relax and the constrictor muscles of the pharynx contract , forcing the bolus into the esophagus and initiating peristalsis .
Usually during swallowing , the soft palate and uvula rise reflexively to close off the entrance to the nasopharynx .
At the same time , the larynx is pulled superiorly and the cartilaginous epiglottis , its most superior structure , folds inferiorly , covering the glottis ( the opening to the larynx ) ; this process effectively blocks access to the trachea and bronchi .
When the food “ goes down the wrong way , ” it goes into the trachea .
When food enters the trachea , the reaction is to cough , which usually forces the food up and out of the trachea , and back into the pharynx .
The esophagus is a muscular tube that connects the pharynx to the stomach .
It is approximately 25.4 cm ( 10 in ) in length , located posterior to the trachea , and remains in a collapsed form when not engaged in swallowing .
As you can see in Figure 23.13 , the esophagus runs a mainly straight route through the mediastinum of the thorax .
To enter the abdomen , the esophagus penetrates the diaphragm through an opening called the esophageal hiatus .
The upper esophageal sphincter , which is continuous with the inferior pharyngeal constrictor , controls the movement of food from the pharynx into the esophagus .
The upper two-thirds of the esophagus consists of both smooth and skeletal muscle fibers , with the latter fading out in the bottom third of the esophagus .
Rhythmic waves of peristalsis , which begin in the upper esophagus , propel the bolus of food toward the stomach .
Meanwhile , secretions from the esophageal mucosa lubricate the esophagus and food .
Food passes from the esophagus into the stomach at the lower esophageal sphincter ( also called the gastroesophageal or cardiac sphincter ) .
Recall that sphincters are muscles that surround tubes and serve as valves , closing the tube when the sphincters contract and opening it when they relax .
The lower esophageal sphincter relaxes to let food pass into the stomach , and then contracts to prevent stomach acids from backing up into the esophagus .
Surrounding this sphincter is the muscular diaphragm , which helps close off the sphincter when no food is being swallowed .
When the lower esophageal sphincter does not completely close , the stomach ’ s contents can reflux ( that is , back up into the esophagus ) , causing heartburn or gastroesophageal reflux disease ( GERD ) .
The mucosa of the esophagus is made up of an epithelial lining that contains non-keratinized , stratified squamous epithelium , with a layer of basal and parabasal cells .
This epithelium protects against erosion from food particles .
The mucosa ’ s lamina propria contains mucus-secreting glands .
The muscularis layer changes according to location : In the upper third of the esophagus , the muscularis is skeletal muscle .
In the middle third , it is both skeletal and smooth muscle .
In the lower third , it is smooth muscle .
As mentioned previously , the most superficial layer of the esophagus is called the adventitia , not the serosa .
In contrast to the stomach and intestines , the loose connective tissue of the adventitia is not covered by a fold of visceral peritoneum .
The digestive functions of the esophagus are identified in Table 23.5 .
Deglutition is another word for swallowing—the movement of food from the mouth to the stomach .
The entire process takes about 4 to 8 seconds for solid or semisolid food , and about 1 second for very soft food and liquids .
Although this sounds quick and effortless , deglutition is , in fact , a complex process that involves both the skeletal muscle of the tongue and the muscles of the pharynx and esophagus .
It is aided by the presence of mucus and saliva .
There are three stages in deglutition : the voluntary phase , the pharyngeal phase , and the esophageal phase ( Figure 23.14 ) .
The autonomic nervous system controls the latter two phases .
The voluntary phase of deglutition ( also known as the oral or buccal phase ) is so called because you can control when you swallow food .
In this phase , chewing has been completed and swallowing is set in motion .
The tongue moves upward and backward against the palate , pushing the bolus to the back of the oral cavity and into the oropharynx .
Other muscles keep the mouth closed and prevent food from falling out .
At this point , the two involuntary phases of swallowing begin .
In the pharyngeal phase , stimulation of receptors in the oropharynx sends impulses to the deglutition center ( a collection of neurons that controls swallowing ) in the medulla oblongata .
Impulses are then sent back to the uvula and soft palate , causing them to move upward and close off the nasopharynx .
The laryngeal muscles also constrict to prevent aspiration of food into the trachea .
At this point , deglutition apnea takes place , which means that breathing ceases for a very brief time .
Contractions of the pharyngeal constrictor muscles move the bolus through the oropharynx and laryngopharynx .
Relaxation of the upper esophageal sphincter then allows food to enter the esophagus .
The entry of food into the esophagus marks the beginning of the esophageal phase of deglutition and the initiation of peristalsis .
As in the previous phase , the complex neuromuscular actions are controlled by the medulla oblongata .
Peristalsis propels the bolus through the esophagus and toward the stomach .
The circular muscle layer of the muscularis contracts , pinching the esophageal wall and forcing the bolus forward .
At the same time , the longitudinal muscle layer of the muscularis also contracts , shortening this area and pushing out its walls to receive the bolus .
In this way , a series of contractions keeps moving food toward the stomach .
When the bolus nears the stomach , distention of the esophagus initiates a short reflex relaxation of the lower esophageal sphincter that allows the bolus to pass into the stomach .
During the esophageal phase , esophageal glands secrete mucus that lubricates the bolus and minimizes friction .
Watch this animation ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/swallowing ) to see how swallowing is a complex process that involves the nervous system to coordinate the actions of upper respiratory and digestive activities .
During which stage of swallowing is there a risk of food entering respiratory pathways and how is this risk blocked ?
An expansion of the alimentary canal that lies immediately inferior to the esophagus , the stomach links the esophagus to the first part of the small intestine ( the duodenum ) and is relatively fixed in place at its esophageal and duodenal ends .
In between , however , it can be a highly active structure , contracting and continually changing position and size .
These contractions provide mechanical assistance to digestion .
The empty stomach is only about the size of your fist , but can stretch to hold as much as 4 liters of food and fluid , or more than 75 times its empty volume , and then return to its resting size when empty .
Although you might think that the size of a person ’ s stomach is related to how much food that individual consumes , body weight does not correlate with stomach size .
Rather , when you eat greater quantities of food—such as at holiday dinner—you stretch the stomach more than when you eat less .
Popular culture tends to refer to the stomach as the location where all digestion takes place .
Of course , this is not true .
An important function of the stomach is to serve as a temporary holding chamber .
You can ingest a meal far more quickly than it can be digested and absorbed by the small intestine .
Thus , the stomach holds food and parses only small amounts into the small intestine at a time .
Foods are not processed in the order they are eaten ; rather , they are mixed together with digestive juices in the stomach until they are converted into chyme , which is released into the small intestine .
As you will see in the sections that follow , the stomach plays several important roles in chemical digestion , including the continued digestion of carbohydrates and the initial digestion of proteins and triglycerides .
Little if any nutrient absorption occurs in the stomach , with the exception of the negligible amount of nutrients in alcohol .
There are four main regions in the stomach : the cardia , fundus , body , and pylorus ( Figure 23.15 ) .
The cardia ( or cardiac region ) is the point where the esophagus connects to the stomach and through which food passes into the stomach .
Located inferior to the diaphragm , above and to the left of the cardia , is the dome-shaped fundus .
Below the fundus is the body , the main part of the stomach .
The funnel-shaped pylorus connects the stomach to the duodenum .
The wider end of the funnel , the pyloric antrum , connects to the body of the stomach .
The narrower end is called the pyloric canal , which connects to the duodenum .
The smooth muscle pyloric sphincter is located at this latter point of connection and controls stomach emptying .
In the absence of food , the stomach deflates inward , and its mucosa and submucosa fall into a large fold called a ruga .
The convex lateral surface of the stomach is called the greater curvature ; the concave medial border is the lesser curvature .
The stomach is held in place by the lesser omentum , which extends from the liver to the lesser curvature , and the greater omentum , which runs from the greater curvature to the posterior abdominal wall .
The wall of the stomach is made of the same four layers as most of the rest of the alimentary canal , but with adaptations to the mucosa and muscularis for the unique functions of this organ .
In addition to the typical circular and longitudinal smooth muscle layers , the muscularis has an inner oblique smooth muscle layer ( Figure 23.16 ) .
As a result , in addition to moving food through the canal , the stomach can vigorously churn food , mechanically breaking it down into smaller particles .
The stomach mucosa ’ s epithelial lining consists only of surface mucus cells , which secrete a protective coat of alkaline mucus .
A vast number of gastric pits dot the surface of the epithelium , giving it the appearance of a well-used pincushion , and mark the entry to each gastric gland , which secretes a complex digestive fluid referred to as gastric juice .
Although the walls of the gastric pits are made up primarily of mucus cells , the gastric glands are made up of different types of cells .
The glands of the cardia and pylorus are composed primarily of mucus-secreting cells .
Cells that make up the pyloric antrum secrete mucus and a number of hormones , including the majority of the stimulatory hormone , gastrin .
The much larger glands of the fundus and body of the stomach , the site of most chemical digestion , produce most of the gastric secretions .
These glands are made up of a variety of secretory cells .
These include parietal cells , chief cells , mucous neck cells , and enteroendocrine cells .
Parietal cells —Located primarily in the middle region of the gastric glands are parietal cells , which are among the most highly differentiated of the body ’ s epithelial cells .
These relatively large cells produce both hydrochloric acid ( HCl ) and intrinsic factor .
HCl is responsible for the high acidity ( pH 1.5 to 3.5 ) of the stomach contents and is needed to activate the protein-digesting enzyme , pepsin .
The acidity also kills much of the bacteria you ingest with food and helps to denature proteins , making them more available for enzymatic digestion .
Intrinsic factor is a glycoprotein necessary for the absorption of vitamin B in the small intestine .
Chief cells —Located primarily in the basal regions of gastric glands are chief cells , which secrete pepsinogen , the inactive proenzyme form of pepsin .
HCl is necessary for the conversion of pepsinogen to pepsin .
Mucous neck cells —Gastric glands in the upper part of the stomach contain mucous neck cells that secrete thin , acidic mucus that is much different from the mucus secreted by the goblet cells of the surface epithelium .
The role of this mucus is not currently known .
Enteroendocrine cells —Finally , enteroendocrine cells found in the gastric glands secrete various hormones into the interstitial fluid of the lamina propria .
These include gastrin , which is released mainly by enteroendocrine G cells .
Table 23.6 describes the digestive functions of important hormones secreted by the stomach .
Watch this animation ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/stomach1 ) that depicts the structure of the stomach and how this structure functions in the initiation of protein digestion .
This view of the stomach shows the characteristic rugae .
What is the function of these rugae ?
The secretion of gastric juice is controlled by both nerves and hormones .
Stimuli in the brain , stomach , and small intestine activate or inhibit gastric juice production .
This is why the three phases of gastric secretion are called the cephalic , gastric , and intestinal phases ( Figure 23.17 ) .
However , once gastric secretion begins , all three phases can occur simultaneously .
The cephalic phase ( reflex phase ) of gastric secretion , which is relatively brief , takes place before food enters the stomach .
The smell , taste , sight , or thought of food triggers this phase .
For example , when you bring a piece of sushi to your lips , impulses from receptors in your taste buds or the nose are relayed to your brain , which returns signals that increase gastric secretion to prepare your stomach for digestion .
This enhanced secretion is a conditioned reflex , meaning it occurs only if you like or want a particular food .
Depression and loss of appetite can suppress the cephalic reflex .
The gastric phase of secretion lasts 3 to 4 hours , and is set in motion by local neural and hormonal mechanisms triggered by the entry of food into the stomach .
For example , when your sushi reaches the stomach , it creates distention that activates the stretch receptors .
This stimulates parasympathetic neurons to release acetylcholine , which then provokes increased secretion of gastric juice .
Additionally , the release of gastrin activates vigorous smooth muscle contractions .
However , it should be noted that the stomach does have a natural means of avoiding excessive acid secretion and potential heartburn .
Whenever pH levels drop too low , cells in the stomach react by suspending HCl secretion and increasing mucous secretions .
The intestinal phase of gastric secretion has both excitatory and inhibitory elements .
The duodenum has a major role in regulating the stomach and its emptying .
When partially digested food fills the duodenum , intestinal mucosal cells release a hormone called intestinal ( enteric ) gastrin , which further excites gastric juice secretion .
This stimulatory activity is brief , however , because when the intestine distends with chyme , the enterogastric reflex inhibits secretion .
One of the effects of this reflex is to close the pyloric sphincter , which blocks additional chyme from entering the duodenum .
The mucosa of the stomach is exposed to the highly corrosive acidity of gastric juice .
Gastric enzymes that can digest protein can also digest the stomach itself .
The stomach is protected from self-digestion by the mucosal barrier .
This barrier has several components .
First , the stomach wall is covered by a thick coating of bicarbonate-rich mucus .
This mucus forms a physical barrier , and its bicarbonate ions neutralize acid .
Second , the epithelial cells of the stomach 's mucosa meet at tight junctions , which block gastric juice from penetrating the underlying tissue layers .
Finally , stem cells located where gastric glands join the gastric pits quickly replace damaged epithelial mucosal cells , when the epithelial cells are shed .
In fact , the surface epithelium of the stomach is completely replaced every 3 to 6 days .
As effective as the mucosal barrier is , it is not a “ fail-safe ” mechanism .
Sometimes , gastric juice eats away at the superficial lining of the stomach mucosa , creating erosions , which mostly heal on their own .
Deeper and larger erosions are called ulcers .
Why does the mucosal barrier break down ?
A number of factors can interfere with its ability to protect the stomach lining .
The majority of all ulcers are caused by either excessive intake of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs ( NSAIDs ) , including aspirin , or Helicobacter pylori infection .
Antacids help relieve symptoms of ulcers such as “ burning ” pain and indigestion .
When ulcers are caused by NSAID use , switching to other classes of pain relievers allows healing .
When caused by H. pylori infection , antibiotics are effective .
A potential complication of ulcers is perforation : Perforated ulcers create a hole in the stomach wall , resulting in peritonitis ( inflammation of the peritoneum ) .
These ulcers must be repaired surgically .
The stomach participates in virtually all the digestive activities with the exception of ingestion and defecation .
Although almost all absorption takes place in the small intestine , the stomach does absorb some nonpolar substances , such as alcohol and aspirin .
Within a few moments after food after enters your stomach , mixing waves begin to occur at intervals of approximately 20 seconds .
A mixing wave is a unique type of peristalsis that mixes and softens the food with gastric juices to create chyme .
The initial mixing waves are relatively gentle , but these are followed by more intense waves , starting at the body of the stomach and increasing in force as they reach the pylorus .
It is fair to say that long before your sushi exits through the pyloric sphincter , it bears little resemblance to the sushi you ate .
The pylorus , which holds around 30 mL ( 1 fluid ounce ) of chyme , acts as a filter , permitting only liquids and small food particles to pass through the mostly , but not fully , closed pyloric sphincter .
In a process called gastric emptying , rhythmic mixing waves force about 3 mL of chyme at a time through the pyloric sphincter and into the duodenum .
Release of a greater amount of chyme at one time would overwhelm the capacity of the small intestine to handle it .
The rest of the chyme is pushed back into the body of the stomach , where it continues mixing .
This process is repeated when the next mixing waves force more chyme into the duodenum .
Gastric emptying is regulated by both the stomach and the duodenum .
The presence of chyme in the duodenum activates receptors that inhibit gastric secretion .
This prevents additional chyme from being released by the stomach before the duodenum is ready to process it .
The fundus plays an important role , because it stores both undigested food and gases that are released during the process of chemical digestion .
Food may sit in the fundus of the stomach for a while before being mixed with the chyme .
While the food is in the fundus , the digestive activities of salivary amylase continue until the food begins mixing with the acidic chyme .
Ultimately , mixing waves incorporate this food with the chyme , the acidity of which inactivates salivary amylase and activates lingual lipase .
Lingual lipase then begins breaking down triglycerides into free fatty acids , and monoand diglycerides .
The breakdown of protein begins in the stomach through the actions of HCl and the enzyme pepsin .
During infancy , gastric glands also produce rennin , an enzyme that helps digest milk protein .
Its numerous digestive functions notwithstanding , there is only one stomach function necessary to life : the production of intrinsic factor .
The intestinal absorption of vitamin B , which is necessary for both the production of mature red blood cells and normal neurological functioning , can not occur without intrinsic factor .
People who undergo total gastrectomy ( stomach removal ) —for life-threatening stomach cancer , for example—can survive with minimal digestive dysfunction if they receive vitamin B injections .
The contents of the stomach are completely emptied into the duodenum within 2 to 4 hours after you eat a meal .
Different types of food take different amounts of time to process .
Foods heavy in carbohydrates empty fastest , followed by highprotein foods .
Meals with a high triglyceride content remain in the stomach the longest .
Since enzymes in the small intestine digest fats slowly , food can stay in the stomach for 6 hours or longer when the duodenum is processing fatty chyme .
However , note that this is still a fraction of the 24 to 72 hours that full digestion typically takes from start to finish .
In addition , called the small and large bowel , or colloquially the “ guts , ” they constitute the greatest mass and length of the alimentary canal and , with the exception of ingestion , perform all digestive system functions .
Chyme released from the stomach enters the small intestine , which is the primary digestive organ in the body .
Not only is this where most digestion occurs , it is also where practically all absorption occurs .
The longest part of the alimentary canal , the small intestine is about 3.05 meters ( 10 feet ) long in a living person ( but about twice as long in a cadaver due to the loss of muscle tone ) .
This large surface area is necessary for complex processes of digestion and absorption that occur within it .
The coiled tube of the small intestine is subdivided into three regions .
From proximal ( at the stomach ) to distal , these are the duodenum , jejunum , and ileum ( Figure 23.18 ) .
The shortest region is the 25.4-cm ( 10-in ) duodenum , which begins at the pyloric sphincter .
Just past the pyloric sphincter , it bends posteriorly behind the peritoneum , becoming retroperitoneal , and then makes a C-shaped curve around the head of the pancreas before ascending anteriorly again to return to the peritoneal cavity and join the jejunum .
The duodenum can therefore be subdivided into four segments : the superior , descending , horizontal , and ascending duodenum .
Of particular interest is the hepatopancreatic ampulla ( ampulla of Vater ) .
This ampulla opens into the duodenum at a tiny volcano-shaped structure called the major duodenal papilla .
The hepatopancreatic sphincter ( sphincter of Oddi ) regulates the flow of both bile and pancreatic juice from the ampulla into the duodenum .
The jejunum is about 0.9 meters ( 3 feet ) long ( in life ) and runs from the duodenum to the ileum .
Jejunum means “ empty ” in Latin and supposedly was so named by the ancient Greeks who noticed it was always empty at death .
No clear demarcation exists between the jejunum and the final segment of the small intestine , the ileum .
The ileum is the longest part of the small intestine , measuring about 1.8 meters ( 6 feet ) in length .
It is thicker , more vascular , and has more developed mucosal folds than the jejunum .
The ileum joins the cecum , the first portion of the large intestine , at the ileocecal sphincter ( or valve ) .
The jejunum and ileum are tethered to the posterior abdominal wall by the mesentery .
The large intestine frames these three parts of the small intestine .
Parasympathetic nerve fibers from the vagus nerve and sympathetic nerve fibers from the thoracic splanchnic nerve provide extrinsic innervation to the small intestine .
The superior mesenteric artery is its main arterial supply .
Veins run parallel to the arteries and drain into the superior mesenteric vein .
Nutrient-rich blood from the small intestine is then carried to the liver via the hepatic portal vein .
The wall of the small intestine is composed of the same four layers typically present in the alimentary system .
However , three features of the mucosa and submucosa are unique .
These features , which increase the absorptive surface area of the small intestine more than 600-fold , include circular folds , villi , and microvilli ( Figure 23.19 ) .
These adaptations are most abundant in the proximal two-thirds of the small intestine , where the majority of absorption occurs .
Also called a plica circulare , a circular fold is a deep ridge in the mucosa and submucosa .
Beginning near the proximal part of the duodenum and ending near the middle of the ileum , these folds facilitate absorption .
Their shape causes the chyme to spiral , rather than move in a straight line , through the small intestine .
Spiraling slows the movement of chyme and provides the time needed for nutrients to be fully absorbed .
Within the circular folds are small ( 0.5–1 mm long ) hairlike vascularized projections called villi ( singular = villus ) that give the mucosa a furry texture .
There are about 20 to 40 villi per square millimeter , increasing the surface area of the epithelium tremendously .
The mucosal epithelium , primarily composed of absorptive cells , covers the villi .
In addition to muscle and connective tissue to support its structure , each villus contains a capillary bed composed of one arteriole and one venule , as well as a lymphatic capillary called a lacteal .
The breakdown products of carbohydrates and proteins ( sugars and amino acids ) can enter the bloodstream directly , but lipid breakdown products are absorbed by the lacteals and transported to the bloodstream via the lymphatic system .
As their name suggests , microvilli ( singular = microvillus ) are much smaller ( 1 µ m ) than villi .
They are cylindrical apical surface extensions of the plasma membrane of the mucosa ’ s epithelial cells , and are supported by microfilaments within those cells .
Although their small size makes it difficult to see each microvillus , their combined microscopic appearance suggests a mass of bristles , which is termed the brush border .
Fixed to the surface of the microvilli membranes are enzymes that finish digesting carbohydrates and proteins .
There are an estimated 200 million microvilli per square millimeter of small intestine , greatly expanding the surface area of the plasma membrane and thus greatly enhancing absorption .
These produce intestinal juice , a slightly alkaline ( pH 7.4 to 7.8 ) mixture of water and mucus .
Each day , about 0.95 to 1.9 liters ( 1 to 2 quarts ) are secreted in response to the distention of the small intestine or the irritating effects of chyme on the intestinal mucosa .
The submucosa of the duodenum is the only site of the complex mucus-secreting duodenal glands ( Brunner ’ s glands ) , which produce a bicarbonate-rich alkaline mucus that buffers the acidic chyme as it enters from the stomach .
The roles of the cells in the small intestinal mucosa are detailed in Table 23.7 .
The lamina propria of the small intestine mucosa is studded with quite a bit of MALT .
In addition to solitary lymphatic nodules , aggregations of intestinal MALT , which are typically referred to as Peyer ’ s patches , are concentrated in the distal ileum , and serve to keep bacteria from entering the bloodstream .
Peyer ’ s patches are most prominent in young people and become less distinct as you age , which coincides with the general activity of our immune system .
Watch this animation ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/sintestine ) that depicts the structure of the small intestine , and , in particular , the villi .
Epithelial cells continue the digestion and absorption of nutrients and transport these nutrients to the lymphatic and circulatory systems .
In the small intestine , the products of food digestion are absorbed by different structures in the villi .
Which structure absorbs and transports fats ?
The movement of intestinal smooth muscles includes both segmentation and a form of peristalsis called migrating motility complexes .
The kind of peristaltic mixing waves seen in the stomach are not observed here .
If you could see into the small intestine when it was going through segmentation , it would look as if the contents were being shoved incrementally back and forth , as the rings of smooth muscle repeatedly contract and then relax .
Segmentation in the small intestine does not force chyme through the tract .
Instead , it combines the chyme with digestive juices and pushes food particles against the mucosa to be absorbed .
The duodenum is where the most rapid segmentation occurs , at a rate of about 12 times per minute .
In the ileum , segmentations are only about eight times per minute ( Figure 23.20 ) .
When most of the chyme has been absorbed , the small intestinal wall becomes less distended .
At this point , the localized segmentation process is replaced by transport movements .
The duodenal mucosa secretes the hormone motilin , which initiates peristalsis in the form of a migrating motility complex .
These complexes , which begin in the duodenum , force chyme through a short section of the small intestine and then stop .
The next contraction begins a little bit farther down than the first , forces chyme a bit farther through the small intestine , then stops .
These complexes move slowly down the small intestine , forcing chyme on the way , taking around 90 to 120 minutes to finally reach the end of the ileum .
At this point , the process is repeated , starting in the duodenum .
The ileocecal valve , a sphincter , is usually in a constricted state , but when motility in the ileum increases , this sphincter relaxes , allowing food residue to enter the first portion of the large intestine , the cecum .
Relaxation of the ileocecal sphincter is controlled by both nerves and hormones .
First , digestive activity in the stomach provokes the gastroileal reflex , which increases the force of ileal segmentation .
Second , the stomach releases the hormone gastrin , which enhances ileal motility , thus relaxing the ileocecal sphincter .
After chyme passes through , backward pressure helps close the sphincter , preventing backflow into the ileum .
Because of this reflex , your lunch is completely emptied from your stomach and small intestine by the time you eat your dinner .
It takes about 3 to 5 hours for all chyme to leave the small intestine .
The digestion of proteins and carbohydrates , which partially occurs in the stomach , is completed in the small intestine with the aid of intestinal and pancreatic juices .
Lipids arrive in the intestine largely undigested , so much of the focus here is on lipid digestion , which is facilitated by bile and the enzyme pancreatic lipase .
Moreover , intestinal juice combines with pancreatic juice to provide a liquid medium that facilitates absorption .
The intestine is also where most water is absorbed , via osmosis .
The small intestine ’ s absorptive cells also synthesize digestive enzymes and then place them in the plasma membranes of the microvilli .
This distinguishes the small intestine from the stomach ; that is , enzymatic digestion occurs not only in the lumen , but also on the luminal surfaces of the mucosal cells .
For optimal chemical digestion , chyme must be delivered from the stomach slowly and in small amounts .
This is because chyme from the stomach is typically hypertonic , and if large quantities were forced all at once into the small intestine , the resulting osmotic water loss from the blood into the intestinal lumen would result in potentially life-threatening low blood volume .
In addition , continued digestion requires an upward adjustment of the low pH of stomach chyme , along with rigorous mixing of the chyme with bile and pancreatic juices .
Both processes take time , so the pumping action of the pylorus must be carefully controlled to prevent the duodenum from being overwhelmed with chyme .
Lactose intolerance is a condition characterized by indigestion caused by dairy products .
It occurs when the absorptive cells of the small intestine do not produce enough lactase , the enzyme that digests the milk sugar lactose .
In most mammals , lactose intolerance increases with age .
In contrast , some human populations , most notably Caucasians , are able to maintain the ability to produce lactase as adults .
In people with lactose intolerance , the lactose in chyme is not digested .
Bacteria in the large intestine ferment the undigested lactose , a process that produces gas .
In addition to gas , symptoms include abdominal cramps , bloating , and diarrhea .
Symptom severity ranges from mild discomfort to severe pain ; however , symptoms resolve once the lactose is eliminated in feces .
The hydrogen breath test is used to help diagnose lactose intolerance .
Lactose-tolerant people have very little hydrogen in their breath .
Those with lactose intolerance exhale hydrogen , which is one of the gases produced by the bacterial fermentation of lactose in the colon .
After the hydrogen is absorbed from the intestine , it is transported through blood vessels into the lungs .
There are a number of lactose-free dairy products available in grocery stores .
In addition , dietary supplements are available .
Taken with food , they provide lactase to help digest lactose .
The large intestine is the terminal part of the alimentary canal .
The primary function of this organ is to finish absorption of nutrients and water , synthesize certain vitamins , form feces , and eliminate feces from the body .
The large intestine runs from the appendix to the anus .
It frames the small intestine on three sides .
Despite its being about one-half as long as the small intestine , it is called large because it is more than twice the diameter of the small intestine , about 3 inches .
The large intestine is subdivided into four main regions : the cecum , the colon , the rectum , and the anus .
The ileocecal valve , located at the opening between the ileum and the large intestine , controls the flow of chyme from the small intestine to the large intestine .
The first part of the large intestine is the cecum , a sac-like structure that is suspended inferior to the ileocecal valve .
It is about 6 cm ( 2.4 in ) long , receives the contents of the ileum , and continues the absorption of water and salts .
The appendix ( or vermiform appendix ) is a winding tube that attaches to the cecum .
Although the 7.6-cm ( 3-in ) long appendix contains lymphoid tissue , suggesting an immunologic function , this organ is generally considered vestigial .
However , at least one recent report postulates a survival advantage conferred by the appendix : In diarrheal illness , the appendix may serve as a bacterial reservoir to repopulate the enteric bacteria for those surviving the initial phases of the illness .
Moreover , its twisted anatomy provides a haven for the accumulation and multiplication of enteric bacteria .
The mesoappendix , the mesentery of the appendix , tethers it to the mesentery of the ileum .
The cecum blends seamlessly with the colon .
Upon entering the colon , the food residue first travels up the ascending colon on the right side of the abdomen .
At the inferior surface of the liver , the colon bends to form the right colic flexure ( hepatic flexure ) and becomes the transverse colon .
The region defined as hindgut begins with the last third of the transverse colon and continues on .
Food residue passing through the transverse colon travels across to the left side of the abdomen , where the colon angles sharply immediately inferior to the spleen , at the left colic flexure ( splenic flexure ) .
From there , food residue passes through the descending colon , which runs down the left side of the posterior abdominal wall .
After entering the pelvis inferiorly , it becomes the s-shaped sigmoid colon , which extends medially to the midline ( Figure 23.21 ) .
The ascending and descending colon , and the rectum ( discussed next ) are located in the retroperitoneum .
The transverse and sigmoid colon are tethered to the posterior abdominal wall by the mesocolon .
Each year , approximately 140,000 Americans are diagnosed with colorectal cancer , and another 49,000 die from it , making it one of the most deadly malignancies .
People with a family history of colorectal cancer are at increased risk .
Smoking , excessive alcohol consumption , and a diet high in animal fat and protein also increase the risk .
Despite popular opinion to the contrary , studies support the conclusion that dietary fiber and calcium do not reduce the risk of colorectal cancer .
Colorectal cancer may be signaled by constipation or diarrhea , cramping , abdominal pain , and rectal bleeding .
Bleeding from the rectum may be either obvious or occult ( hidden in feces ) .
Since most colon cancers arise from benign mucosal growths called polyps , cancer prevention is focused on identifying these polyps .
The colonoscopy is both diagnostic and therapeutic .
Colonoscopy not only allows identification of precancerous polyps , the procedure also enables them to be removed before they become malignant .
Screening for fecal occult blood tests and colonoscopy is recommended for those over 50 years of age .
Food residue leaving the sigmoid colon enters the rectum in the pelvis , near the third sacral vertebra .
The final 20.3 cm ( 8 in ) of the alimentary canal , the rectum extends anterior to the sacrum and coccyx .
Even though rectum is Latin for “ straight , ” this structure follows the curved contour of the sacrum and has three lateral bends that create a trio of internal transverse folds called the rectal valves .
These valves help separate the feces from gas to prevent the simultaneous passage of feces and gas .
Finally , food residue reaches the last part of the large intestine , the anal canal , which is located in the perineum , completely outside of the abdominopelvic cavity .
This 3.8–5 cm ( 1.5–2 in ) long structure opens to the exterior of the body at the anus .
The anal canal includes two sphincters .
The internal anal sphincter is made of smooth muscle , and its contractions are involuntary .
The external anal sphincter is made of skeletal muscle , which is under voluntary control .
Except when defecating , both usually remain closed .
There are several notable differences between the walls of the large and small intestines ( Figure 23.22 ) .
For example , few enzyme-secreting cells are found in the wall of the large intestine , and there are no circular folds or villi .
Other than in the anal canal , the mucosa of the colon is simple columnar epithelium made mostly of enterocytes ( absorptive cells ) and goblet cells .
In addition , the wall of the large intestine has far more intestinal glands , which contain a vast population of enterocytes and goblet cells .
These goblet cells secrete mucus that eases the movement of feces and protects the intestine from the effects of the acids and gases produced by enteric bacteria .
The enterocytes absorb water and salts as well as vitamins produced by your intestinal bacteria .
Three features are unique to the large intestine : teniae coli , haustra , and epiploic appendages ( Figure 23.23 ) .
The teniae coli are three bands of smooth muscle that make up the longitudinal muscle layer of the muscularis of the large intestine , except at its terminal end .
Tonic contractions of the teniae coli bunch up the colon into a succession of pouches called haustra ( singular = haustrum ) , which are responsible for the wrinkled appearance of the colon .
Attached to the teniae coli are small , fat-filled sacs of visceral peritoneum called epiploic appendages .
The purpose of these is unknown .
Although the rectum and anal canal have neither teniae coli nor haustra , they do have well-developed layers of muscularis that create the strong contractions needed for defecation .
The stratified squamous epithelial mucosa of the anal canal connects to the skin on the outside of the anus .
This mucosa varies considerably from that of the rest of the colon to accommodate the high level of abrasion as feces pass through .
The anal canal ’ s mucous membrane is organized into longitudinal folds , each called an anal column , which house a grid of arteries and veins .
Two superficial venous plexuses are found in the anal canal : one within the anal columns and one at the anus .
Depressions between the anal columns , each called an anal sinus , secrete mucus that facilitates defecation .
The pectinate line ( or dentate line ) is a horizontal , jagged band that runs circumferentially just below the level of the anal sinuses , and represents the junction between the hindgut and external skin .
The mucosa above this line is fairly insensitive , whereas the area below is very sensitive .
The resulting difference in pain threshold is due to the fact that the upper region is innervated by visceral sensory fibers , and the lower region is innervated by somatic sensory fibers .
Most bacteria that enter the alimentary canal are killed by lysozyme , defensins , HCl , or protein-digesting enzymes .
However , trillions of bacteria live within the large intestine and are referred to as the bacterial flora .
Most of the more than 700 species of these bacteria are nonpathogenic commensal organisms that cause no harm as long as they stay in the gut lumen .
In fact , many facilitate chemical digestion and absorption , and some synthesize certain vitamins , mainly biotin , pantothenic acid , and vitamin K. Some are linked to increased immune response .
A refined system prevents these bacteria from crossing the mucosal barrier .
First , peptidoglycan , a component of bacterial cell walls , activates the release of chemicals by the mucosa ’ s epithelial cells , which draft immune cells , especially dendritic cells , into the mucosa .
Dendritic cells open the tight junctions between epithelial cells and extend probes into the lumen to evaluate the microbial antigens .
The dendritic cells with antigens then travel to neighboring lymphoid follicles in the mucosa where T cells inspect for antigens .
This process triggers an IgA-mediated response , if warranted , in the lumen that blocks the commensal organisms from infiltrating the mucosa and setting off a far greater , widespread systematic reaction .
The residue of chyme that enters the large intestine contains few nutrients except water , which is reabsorbed as the residue lingers in the large intestine , typically for 12 to 24 hours .
Thus , it may not surprise you that the large intestine can be completely removed without significantly affecting digestive functioning .
For example , in severe cases of inflammatory bowel disease , the large intestine can be removed by a procedure known as a colectomy .
In the large intestine , mechanical digestion begins when chyme moves from the ileum into the cecum , an activity regulated by the ileocecal sphincter .
Right after you eat , peristalsis in the ileum forces chyme into the cecum .
When the cecum is distended with chyme , contractions of the ileocecal sphincter strengthen .
Once chyme enters the cecum , colon movements begin .
Mechanical digestion in the large intestine includes a combination of three types of movements .
The presence of food residues in the colon stimulates a slow-moving haustral contraction .
This type of movement involves sluggish segmentation , primarily in the transverse and descending colons .
When a haustrum is distended with chyme , its muscle contracts , pushing the residue into the next haustrum .
These contractions occur about every 30 minutes , and each last about 1 minute .
These movements also mix the food residue , which helps the large intestine absorb water .
The second type of movement is peristalsis , which , in the large intestine , is slower than in the more proximal portions of the alimentary canal .
The third type is a mass movement .
These strong waves start midway through the transverse colon and quickly force the contents toward the rectum .
Mass movements usually occur three or four times per day , either while you eat or immediately afterward .
Distension in the stomach and the breakdown products of digestion in the small intestine provoke the gastrocolic reflex , which increases motility , including mass movements , in the colon .
Fiber in the diet both softens the stool and increases the power of colonic contractions , optimizing the activities of the colon .
Although the glands of the large intestine secrete mucus , they do not secrete digestive enzymes .
Therefore , chemical digestion in the large intestine occurs exclusively because of bacteria in the lumen of the colon .
Through the process of saccharolytic fermentation , bacteria break down some of the remaining carbohydrates .
This results in the discharge of hydrogen , carbon dioxide , and methane gases that create flatus ( gas ) in the colon ; flatulence is excessive flatus .
Each day , up to 1500 mL of flatus is produced in the colon .
More is produced when you eat foods such as beans , which are rich in otherwise indigestible sugars and complex carbohydrates like soluble dietary fiber .
The small intestine absorbs about 90 percent of the water you ingest ( either as liquid or within solid food ) .
The large intestine absorbs most of the remaining water , a process that converts the liquid chyme residue into semisolid feces ( “ stool ” ) .
Feces is composed of undigested food residues , unabsorbed digested substances , millions of bacteria , old epithelial cells from the GI mucosa , inorganic salts , and enough water to let it pass smoothly out of the body .
Of every 500 mL ( 17 ounces ) of food residue that enters the cecum each day , about 150 mL ( 5 ounces ) become feces .
Feces are eliminated through contractions of the rectal muscles .
You help this process by a voluntary procedure called Valsalva ’ s maneuver , in which you increase intra-abdominal pressure by contracting your diaphragm and abdominal wall muscles , and closing your glottis .
The process of defecation begins when mass movements force feces from the colon into the rectum , stretching the rectal wall and provoking the defecation reflex , which eliminates feces from the rectum .
This parasympathetic reflex is mediated by the spinal cord .
It contracts the sigmoid colon and rectum , relaxes the internal anal sphincter , and initially contracts the external anal sphincter .
The presence of feces in the anal canal sends a signal to the brain , which gives you the choice of voluntarily opening the external anal sphincter ( defecating ) or keeping it temporarily closed .
If you decide to delay defecation , it takes a few seconds for the reflex contractions to stop and the rectal walls to relax .
The next mass movement will trigger additional defecation reflexes until you defecate .
If defecation is delayed for an extended time , additional water is absorbed , making the feces firmer and potentially leading to constipation .
On the other hand , if the waste matter moves too quickly through the intestines , not enough water is absorbed , and diarrhea can result .
This can be caused by the ingestion of foodborne pathogens .
In general , diet , health , and stress determine the frequency of bowel movements .
The number of bowel movements varies greatly between individuals , ranging from two or three per day to three or four per week .
By watching this animation ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/foodgroups ) you will see that for the various food groups—proteins , fats , and carbohydrates—digestion begins in different parts of the digestion system , though all end in the same place .
Of the three major food classes ( carbohydrates , fats , and proteins ) , which is digested in the mouth , the stomach , and the small intestine ?
The digestive role of the liver is to produce bile and export it to the duodenum .
The gallbladder primarily stores , concentrates , and releases bile .
The pancreas produces pancreatic juice , which contains digestive enzymes and bicarbonate ions , and delivers it to the duodenum .
The liver is the largest gland in the body , weighing about three pounds in an adult .
It is also one of the most important organs .
In addition to being an accessory digestive organ , it plays a number of roles in metabolism and regulation .
The liver lies inferior to the diaphragm in the right upper quadrant of the abdominal cavity and receives protection from the surrounding ribs .
The liver is divided into two primary lobes : a large right lobe and a much smaller left lobe .
In the right lobe , some anatomists also identify an inferior quadrate lobe and a posterior caudate lobe , which are defined by internal features .
The liver is connected to the abdominal wall and diaphragm by five peritoneal folds referred to as ligaments .
These are the falciform ligament , the coronary ligament , two lateral ligaments , and the ligamentum teres hepatis .
The falciform ligament and ligamentum teres hepatis are actually remnants of the umbilical vein , and separate the right and left lobes anteriorly .
The lesser omentum tethers the liver to the lesser curvature of the stomach .
The porta hepatis ( “ gate to the liver ” ) is where the hepatic artery and hepatic portal vein enter the liver .
These two vessels , along with the common hepatic duct , run behind the lateral border of the lesser omentum on the way to their destinations .
As shown in Figure 23.25 , the hepatic artery delivers oxygenated blood from the heart to the liver .
The hepatic portal vein delivers partially deoxygenated blood containing nutrients absorbed from the small intestine and actually supplies more oxygen to the liver than do the much smaller hepatic arteries .
In addition to nutrients , drugs and toxins are also absorbed .
After processing the bloodborne nutrients and toxins , the liver releases nutrients needed by other cells back into the blood , which drains into the central vein and then through the hepatic vein to the inferior vena cava .
With this hepatic portal circulation , all blood from the alimentary canal passes through the liver .
This largely explains why the liver is the most common site for the metastasis of cancers that originate in the alimentary canal .
The liver has three main components : hepatocytes , bile canaliculi , and hepatic sinusoids .
A hepatocyte is the liver ’ s main cell type , accounting for around 80 percent of the liver 's volume .
These cells play a role in a wide variety of secretory , metabolic , and endocrine functions .
Plates of hepatocytes called hepatic laminae radiate outward from the portal vein in each hepatic lobule .
Between adjacent hepatocytes , grooves in the cell membranes provide room for each bile canaliculus ( plural = canaliculi ) .
These small ducts accumulate the bile produced by hepatocytes .
From here , bile flows first into bile ductules and then into bile ducts .
The bile ducts unite to form the larger right and left hepatic ducts , which themselves merge and exit the liver as the common hepatic duct .
This duct then joins with the cystic duct from the gallbladder , forming the common bile duct through which bile flows into the small intestine .
A hepatic sinusoid is an open , porous blood space formed by fenestrated capillaries from nutrient-rich hepatic portal veins and oxygen-rich hepatic arteries .
Hepatocytes are tightly packed around the fenestrated endothelium of these spaces , giving them easy access to the blood .
From their central position , hepatocytes process the nutrients , toxins , and waste materials carried by the blood .
Materials such as bilirubin are processed and excreted into the bile canaliculi .
Other materials including proteins , lipids , and carbohydrates are processed and secreted into the sinusoids or just stored in the cells until called upon .
The hepatic sinusoids combine and send blood to a central vein .
Blood then flows through a hepatic vein into the inferior vena cava .
This means that blood and bile flow in opposite directions .
The hepatic sinusoids also contain star-shaped reticuloendothelial cells ( Kupffer cells ) , phagocytes that remove dead red and white blood cells , bacteria , and other foreign material that enter the sinusoids .
The portal triad is a distinctive arrangement around the perimeter of hepatic lobules , consisting of three basic structures : a bile duct , a hepatic artery branch , and a hepatic portal vein branch .
Recall that lipids are hydrophobic , that is , they do not dissolve in water .
Thus , before they can be digested in the watery environment of the small intestine , large lipid globules must be broken down into smaller lipid globules , a process called emulsification .
Bile is a mixture secreted by the liver to accomplish the emulsification of lipids in the small intestine .
Hepatocytes secrete about one liter of bile each day .
A yellow-brown or yellow-green alkaline solution ( pH 7.6 to 8.6 ) , bile is a mixture of water , bile salts , bile pigments , phospholipids ( such as lecithin ) , electrolytes , cholesterol , and triglycerides .
The components most critical to emulsification are bile salts and phospholipids , which have a nonpolar ( hydrophobic ) region as well as a polar ( hydrophilic ) region .
The hydrophobic region interacts with the large lipid molecules , whereas the hydrophilic region interacts with the watery chyme in the intestine .
This results in the large lipid globules being pulled apart into many tiny lipid fragments of about 1 µ m in diameter .
This change dramatically increases the surface area available for lipid-digesting enzyme activity .
This is the same way dish soap works on fats mixed with water .
Bile salts act as emulsifying agents , so they are also important for the absorption of digested lipids .
While most constituents of bile are eliminated in feces , bile salts are reclaimed by the enterohepatic circulation .
Once bile salts reach the ileum , they are absorbed and returned to the liver in the hepatic portal blood .
The hepatocytes then excrete the bile salts into newly formed bile .
Thus , this precious resource is recycled .
Bilirubin , the main bile pigment , is a waste product produced when the spleen removes old or damaged red blood cells from the circulation .
These breakdown products , including proteins , iron , and toxic bilirubin , are transported to the liver via the splenic vein of the hepatic portal system .
In the liver , proteins and iron are recycled , whereas bilirubin is excreted in the bile .
It accounts for the green color of bile .
Bilirubin is eventually transformed by intestinal bacteria into stercobilin , a brown pigment that gives your stool its characteristic color !
In some disease states , bile does not enter the intestine , resulting in white ( ‘ acholic ’ ) stool with a high fat content , since virtually no fats are broken down or absorbed .
Hepatocytes work non-stop , but bile production increases when fatty chyme enters the duodenum and stimulates the secretion of the gut hormone secretin .
Between meals , bile is produced but conserved .
The valve-like hepatopancreatic ampulla closes , allowing bile to divert to the gallbladder , where it is concentrated and stored until the next meal .
Watch this video ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/liver ) to see the structure of the liver and how this structure supports the functions of the liver , including the processing of nutrients , toxins , and wastes .
At rest , about 1500 mL of blood per minute flow through the liver .
What percentage of this blood flow comes from the hepatic portal system ?
The soft , oblong , glandular pancreas lies transversely in the retroperitoneum behind the stomach .
Its head is nestled into the “ c-shaped ” curvature of the duodenum with the body extending to the left about 15.2 cm ( 6 in ) and ending as a tapering tail in the hilum of the spleen .
It is a curious mix of exocrine ( secreting digestive enzymes ) and endocrine ( releasing hormones into the blood ) functions ( Figure 23.26 ) .
The exocrine part of the pancreas arises as little grape-like cell clusters , each called an acinus ( plural = acini ) , located at the terminal ends of pancreatic ducts .
These acinar cells secrete enzyme-rich pancreatic juice into tiny merging ducts that form two dominant ducts .
The larger duct fuses with the common bile duct ( carrying bile from the liver and gallbladder ) just before entering the duodenum via a common opening ( the hepatopancreatic ampulla ) .
The smooth muscle sphincter of the hepatopancreatic ampulla controls the release of pancreatic juice and bile into the small intestine .
The second and smaller pancreatic duct , the accessory duct ( duct of Santorini ) , runs from the pancreas directly into the duodenum , approximately 1 inch above the hepatopancreatic ampulla .
When present , it is a persistent remnant of pancreatic development .
Scattered through the sea of exocrine acini are small islands of endocrine cells , the islets of Langerhans .
These vital cells produce the hormones pancreatic polypeptide , insulin , glucagon , and somatostatin .
The pancreas produces over a liter of pancreatic juice each day .
Unlike bile , it is clear and composed mostly of water along with some salts , sodium bicarbonate , and several digestive enzymes .
Pancreatic enzymes are active in the digestion of sugars , proteins , and fats .
The pancreas produces protein-digesting enzymes in their inactive forms .
These enzymes are activated in the duodenum .
If produced in an active form , they would digest the pancreas ( which is exactly what occurs in the disease , pancreatitis ) .
The intestinal brush border enzyme enteropeptidase stimulates the activation of trypsin from trypsinogen of the pancreas , which in turn changes the pancreatic enzymes procarboxypeptidase and chymotrypsinogen into their active forms , carboxypeptidase and chymotrypsin .
The enzymes that digest starch ( amylase ) , fat ( lipase ) , and nucleic acids ( nuclease ) are secreted in their active forms , since they do not attack the pancreas as do the protein-digesting enzymes .
Regulation of pancreatic secretion is the job of hormones and the parasympathetic nervous system .
The entry of acidic chyme into the duodenum stimulates the release of secretin , which in turn causes the duct cells to release bicarbonaterich pancreatic juice .
The presence of proteins and fats in the duodenum stimulates the secretion of CCK , which then stimulates the acini to secrete enzyme-rich pancreatic juice and enhances the activity of secretin .
Parasympathetic regulation occurs mainly during the cephalic and gastric phases of gastric secretion , when vagal stimulation prompts the secretion of pancreatic juice .
Usually , the pancreas secretes just enough bicarbonate to counterbalance the amount of HCl produced in the stomach .
Hydrogen ions enter the blood when bicarbonate is secreted by the pancreas .
Thus , the acidic blood draining from the pancreas neutralizes the alkaline blood draining from the stomach , maintaining the pH of the venous blood that flows to the liver .
The gallbladder is 8–10 cm ( ~3–4 in ) long and is nested in a shallow area on the posterior aspect of the right lobe of the liver .
This muscular sac stores , concentrates , and , when stimulated , propels the bile into the duodenum via the common bile duct .
It is divided into three regions .
The fundus is the widest portion and tapers medially into the body , which in turn narrows to become the neck .
The neck angles slightly superiorly as it approaches the hepatic duct .
The cystic duct is 1–2 cm ( less than 1 in ) long and turns inferiorly as it bridges the neck and hepatic duct .
The simple columnar epithelium of the gallbladder mucosa is organized in rugae , similar to those of the stomach .
There is no submucosa in the gallbladder wall .
The wall ’ s middle , muscular coat is made of smooth muscle fibers .
When these fibers contract , the gallbladder ’ s contents are ejected through the cystic duct and into the bile duct ( Figure 23.27 ) .
Visceral peritoneum reflected from the liver capsule holds the gallbladder against the liver and forms the outer coat of the gallbladder .
The gallbladder 's mucosa absorbs water and ions from bile , concentrating it by up to 10-fold .
It involves the physical breakdown of food but does not alter its chemical makeup .
Chemical digestion , on the other hand , is a complex process that reduces food into its chemical building blocks , which are then absorbed to nourish the cells of the body ( Figure 23.28 ) .
In this section , you will look more closely at the processes of chemical digestion and absorption .
Large food molecules ( for example , proteins , lipids , nucleic acids , and starches ) must be broken down into subunits that are small enough to be absorbed by the lining of the alimentary canal .
This is accomplished by enzymes through hydrolysis .
The many enzymes involved in chemical digestion are summarized in Table 23.8 .
The average American diet is about 50 percent carbohydrates , which may be classified according to the number of monomers they contain of simple sugars ( monosaccharides and disaccharides ) and/or complex sugars ( polysaccharides ) .
Glucose , galactose , and fructose are the three monosaccharides that are commonly consumed and are readily absorbed .
Your bodies do not produce enzymes that can break down most fibrous polysaccharides , such as cellulose .
While indigestible polysaccharides do not provide any nutritional value , they do provide dietary fiber , which helps propel food through the alimentary canal .
The chemical digestion of starches begins in the mouth and has been reviewed above .
In the small intestine , pancreatic amylase does the ‘ heavy lifting ’ for starch and carbohydrate digestion ( Figure 23.29 ) .
After amylases break down starch into smaller fragments , the brush border enzyme α-dextrinase starts working on αdextrin , breaking off one glucose unit at a time .
Three brush border enzymes hydrolyze sucrose , lactose , and maltose into monosaccharides .
Sucrase splits sucrose into one molecule of fructose and one molecule of glucose ; maltase breaks down maltose and maltotriose into two and three glucose molecules , respectively ; and lactase breaks down lactose into one molecule of glucose and one molecule of galactose .
Insufficient lactase can lead to lactose intolerance .
Proteins are polymers composed of amino acids linked by peptide bonds to form long chains .
Digestion reduces them to their constituent amino acids .
You usually consume about 15 to 20 percent of your total calorie intake as protein .
The digestion of protein starts in the stomach , where HCl and pepsin break proteins into smaller polypeptides , which then travel to the small intestine ( Figure 23.30 ) .
Chemical digestion in the small intestine is continued by pancreatic enzymes , including chymotrypsin and trypsin , each of which act on specific bonds in amino acid sequences .
At the same time , the cells of the brush border secrete enzymes such as aminopeptidase and dipeptidase , which further break down peptide chains .
This results in molecules small enough to enter the bloodstream ( Figure 23.31 ) .
A healthy diet limits lipid intake to 35 percent of total calorie intake .
The most common dietary lipids are triglycerides , which are made up of a glycerol molecule bound to three fatty acid chains .
Small amounts of dietary cholesterol and phospholipids are also consumed .
The three lipases responsible for lipid digestion are lingual lipase , gastric lipase , and pancreatic lipase .
However , because the pancreas is the only consequential source of lipase , virtually all lipid digestion occurs in the small intestine .
Pancreatic lipase breaks down each triglyceride into two free fatty acids and a monoglyceride .
The fatty acids include both short-chain ( less than 10 to 12 carbons ) and long-chain fatty acids .
The nucleic acids DNA and RNA are found in most of the foods you eat .
Two types of pancreatic nuclease are responsible for their digestion : deoxyribonuclease , which digests DNA , and ribonuclease , which digests RNA .
The nucleotides produced by this digestion are further broken down by two intestinal brush border enzymes ( nucleosidase and phosphatase ) into pentoses , phosphates , and nitrogenous bases , which can be absorbed through the alimentary canal wall .
The large food molecules that must be broken down into subunits are summarized Table 23.9 The mechanical and digestive processes have one goal : to convert food into molecules small enough to be absorbed by the epithelial cells of the intestinal villi .
The absorptive capacity of the alimentary canal is almost endless .
Each day , the alimentary canal processes up to 10 liters of food , liquids , and GI secretions , yet less than one liter enters the large intestine .
Almost all ingested food , 80 percent of electrolytes , and 90 percent of water are absorbed in the small intestine .
Although the entire small intestine is involved in the absorption of water and lipids , most absorption of carbohydrates and proteins occurs in the jejunum .
Notably , bile salts and vitamin B are absorbed in the terminal ileum .
By the time chyme passes from the ileum into the large intestine , it is essentially indigestible food residue ( mainly plant fibers like cellulose ) , some water , and millions of bacteria ( Figure 23.32 ) .
Absorption can occur through five mechanisms : ( 1 ) active transport , ( 2 ) passive diffusion , ( 3 ) facilitated diffusion , ( 4 ) cotransport ( or secondary active transport ) , and ( 5 ) endocytosis .
As you will recall from Chapter 3 , active transport refers to the movement of a substance across a cell membrane going from an area of lower concentration to an area of higher concentration ( up the concentration gradient ) .
In this type of transport , proteins within the cell membrane act as “ pumps , ” using cellular energy ( ATP ) to move the substance .
Co-transport uses the movement of one molecule through the membrane from higher to lower concentration to power the movement of another from lower to higher .
Finally , endocytosis is a transportation process in which the cell membrane engulfs material .
It requires energy , generally in the form of ATP .
Because the cell ’ s plasma membrane is made up of hydrophobic phospholipids , water-soluble nutrients must use transport molecules embedded in the membrane to enter cells .
Moreover , substances can not pass between the epithelial cells of the intestinal mucosa because these cells are bound together by tight junctions .
Thus , substances can only enter blood capillaries by passing through the apical surfaces of epithelial cells and into the interstitial fluid .
Water-soluble nutrients enter the capillary blood in the villi and travel to the liver via the hepatic portal vein .
In contrast to the water-soluble nutrients , lipid-soluble nutrients can diffuse through the plasma membrane .
Once inside the cell , they are packaged for transport via the base of the cell and then enter the lacteals of the villi to be transported by lymphatic vessels to the systemic circulation via the thoracic duct .
The absorption of most nutrients through the mucosa of the intestinal villi requires active transport fueled by ATP .
The routes of absorption for each food category are summarized in Table 23.10 .
All carbohydrates are absorbed in the form of monosaccharides .
The small intestine is highly efficient at this , absorbing monosaccharides at an estimated rate of 120 grams per hour .
All normally digested dietary carbohydrates are absorbed ; indigestible fibers are eliminated in the feces .
The monosaccharides glucose and galactose are transported into the epithelial cells by common protein carriers via secondary active transport ( that is , co-transport with sodium ions ) .
The monosaccharides leave these cells via facilitated diffusion and enter the capillaries through intercellular clefts .
The monosaccharide fructose ( which is in fruit ) is absorbed and transported by facilitated diffusion alone .
The monosaccharides combine with the transport proteins immediately after the disaccharides are broken down .
Active transport mechanisms , primarily in the duodenum and jejunum , absorb most proteins as their breakdown products , amino acids .
Almost all ( 95 to 98 percent ) protein is digested and absorbed in the small intestine .
The type of carrier that transports an amino acid varies .
Most carriers are linked to the active transport of sodium .
Short chains of two amino acids ( dipeptides ) or three amino acids ( tripeptides ) are also transported actively .
However , after they enter the absorptive epithelial cells , they are broken down into their amino acids before leaving the cell and entering the capillary blood via diffusion .
About 95 percent of lipids are absorbed in the small intestine .
Bile salts not only speed up lipid digestion , they are also essential to the absorption of the end products of lipid digestion .
Short-chain fatty acids are relatively water soluble and can enter the absorptive cells ( enterocytes ) directly .
The small size of short-chain fatty acids enables them to be absorbed by enterocytes via simple diffusion , and then take the same path as monosaccharides and amino acids into the blood capillary of a villus .
The large and hydrophobic long-chain fatty acids and monoacylglycerides are not so easily suspended in the watery intestinal chyme .
However , bile salts and lecithin resolve this issue by enclosing them in a micelle , which is a tiny sphere with polar ( hydrophilic ) ends facing the watery environment and hydrophobic tails turned to the interior , creating a receptive environment for the long-chain fatty acids .
The core also includes cholesterol and fat-soluble vitamins .
Without micelles , lipids would sit on the surface of chyme and never come in contact with the absorptive surfaces of the epithelial cells .
Micelles can easily squeeze between microvilli and get very near the luminal cell surface .
At this point , lipid substances exit the micelle and are absorbed via simple diffusion .
The free fatty acids and monoacylglycerides that enter the epithelial cells are reincorporated into triglycerides .
The triglycerides are mixed with phospholipids and cholesterol , and surrounded with a protein coat .
This new complex , called a chylomicron , is a water-soluble lipoprotein .
After being processed by the Golgi apparatus , chylomicrons are released from the cell ( Figure 23.33 ) .
Too big to pass through the basement membranes of blood capillaries , chylomicrons instead enter the large pores of lacteals .
The lacteals come together to form the lymphatic vessels .
The chylomicrons are transported in the lymphatic vessels and empty through the thoracic duct into the subclavian vein of the circulatory system .
Once in the bloodstream , the enzyme lipoprotein lipase breaks down the triglycerides of the chylomicrons into free fatty acids and glycerol .
These breakdown products then pass through capillary walls to be used for energy by cells or stored in adipose tissue as fat .
Liver cells combine the remaining chylomicron remnants with proteins , forming lipoproteins that transport cholesterol in the blood .
The products of nucleic acid digestion—pentose sugars , nitrogenous bases , and phosphate ions—are transported by carriers across the villus epithelium via active transport .
These products then enter the bloodstream .
The electrolytes absorbed by the small intestine are from both GI secretions and ingested foods .
Since electrolytes dissociate into ions in water , most are absorbed via active transport throughout the entire small intestine .
During absorption , cotransport mechanisms result in the accumulation of sodium ions inside the cells , whereas anti-port mechanisms reduce the potassium ion concentration inside the cells .
To restore the sodium-potassium gradient across the cell membrane , a sodiumpotassium pump requiring ATP pumps sodium out and potassium in .
In general , all minerals that enter the intestine are absorbed , whether you need them or not .
Iron and calcium are exceptions ; they are absorbed in the duodenum in amounts that meet the body ’ s current requirements , as follows : Iron —The ionic iron needed for the production of hemoglobin is absorbed into mucosal cells via active transport .
Once inside mucosal cells , ionic iron binds to the protein ferritin , creating iron-ferritin complexes that store iron until needed .
When the body has enough iron , most of the stored iron is lost when worn-out epithelial cells slough off .
When the body needs iron because , for example , it is lost during acute or chronic bleeding , there is increased uptake of iron from the intestine and accelerated release of iron into the bloodstream .
Since women experience significant iron loss during menstruation , they have around four times as many iron transport proteins in their intestinal epithelial cells as do men .
Calcium —Blood levels of ionic calcium determine the absorption of dietary calcium .
When blood levels of ionic calcium drop , parathyroid hormone ( PTH ) secreted by the parathyroid glands stimulates the release of calcium ions from bone matrices and increases the reabsorption of calcium by the kidneys .
PTH also upregulates the activation of vitamin D in the kidney , which then facilitates intestinal calcium ion absorption .
The small intestine absorbs the vitamins that occur naturally in food and supplements .
Fat-soluble vitamins ( A , D , E , and K ) are absorbed along with dietary lipids in micelles via simple diffusion .
This is why you are advised to eat some fatty foods when you take fat-soluble vitamin supplements .
Most water-soluble vitamins ( including most B vitamins and vitamin C ) also are absorbed by simple diffusion .
An exception is vitamin B , which is a very large molecule .
Intrinsic factor secreted in the stomach binds to vitamin B , preventing its digestion and creating a complex that binds to mucosal receptors in the terminal ileum , where it is taken up by endocytosis .
Each day , about nine liters of fluid enter the small intestine .
About 2.3 liters are ingested in foods and beverages , and the rest is from GI secretions .
About 90 percent of this water is absorbed in the small intestine .
Water absorption is driven by the concentration gradient of the water : The concentration of water is higher in chyme than it is in epithelial cells .
Thus , water moves down its concentration gradient from the chyme into cells .
As noted earlier , much of the remaining water is then absorbed in the colon .
Many of us look to eating as not only a necessity , but also a pleasure .
You may have been told since childhood to start the day with a good breakfast to give you the energy to get through most of the day .
You most likely have heard about the importance of a balanced diet , with plenty of fruits and vegetables .
But what does this all mean to your body and the physiological processes it carries out each day ?
This chapter will take you through some of the chemical reactions essential to life , the sum of which is referred to as metabolism .
The focus of these discussions will be anabolic reactions and catabolic reactions .
You will examine the various chemical reactions that are important to sustain life , including why you must have oxygen , how mitochondria transfer energy , and the importance of certain “ metabolic ” hormones and vitamins .
Metabolism varies , depending on age , gender , activity level , fuel consumption , and lean body mass .
Your own metabolic rate fluctuates throughout life .
By modifying your diet and exercise regimen , you can increase both lean body mass and metabolic rate .
Factors affecting metabolism also play important roles in controlling muscle mass .
Aging is known to decrease the metabolic rate by as much as 5 percent per year .
Additionally , because men tend have more lean muscle mass then women , their basal metabolic rate ( metabolic rate at rest ) is higher ; therefore , men tend to burn more calories than women do .
Lastly , an individual ’ s inherent metabolic rate is a function of the proteins and enzymes derived from their genetic background .
Thus , your genes play a big role in your metabolism .
Nonetheless , each person ’ s body engages in the same overall metabolic processes .
Metabolism is the sum of all of the chemical reactions that are involved in catabolism and anabolism .
The reactions governing the breakdown of food to obtain energy are called catabolic reactions .
Conversely , anabolic reactions use the energy produced by catabolic reactions to synthesize larger molecules from smaller ones , such as when the body forms proteins by stringing together amino acids .
Both sets of reactions are critical to maintaining life .
Because catabolic reactions produce energy and anabolic reactions use energy , ideally , energy usage would balance the energy produced .
If the net energy change is positive ( catabolic reactions release more energy than the anabolic reactions use ) , then the body stores the excess energy by building fat molecules for long-term storage .
On the other hand , if the net energy change is negative ( catabolic reactions release less energy than anabolic reactions use ) , the body uses stored energy to compensate for the deficiency of energy released by catabolism .
Catabolic reactions break down large organic molecules into smaller molecules , releasing the energy contained in the chemical bonds .
These energy releases ( conversions ) are not 100 percent efficient .
The amount of energy released is less than the total amount contained in the molecule .
Approximately 40 percent of energy yielded from catabolic reactions is directly transferred to the high-energy molecule adenosine triphosphate ( ATP ) .
ATP , the energy currency of cells , can be used immediately to power molecular machines that support cell , tissue , and organ function .
This includes building new tissue and repairing damaged tissue .
ATP can also be stored to fulfill future energy demands .
The remaining 60 percent of the energy released from catabolic reactions is given off as heat , which tissues and body fluids absorb .
Structurally , ATP molecules consist of an adenine , a ribose , and three phosphate groups ( Figure 24.2 ) .
The chemical bond between the second and third phosphate groups , termed a high-energy bond , represents the greatest source of energy in a cell .
It is the first bond that catabolic enzymes break when cells require energy to do work .
The products of this reaction are a molecule of adenosine diphosphate ( ADP ) and a lone phosphate group ( P ) .
ATP , ADP , and P are constantly being cycled through reactions that build ATP and store energy , and reactions that break down ATP and release energy .
The energy from ATP drives all bodily functions , such as contracting muscles , maintaining the electrical potential of nerve cells , and absorbing food in the gastrointestinal tract .
The metabolic reactions that produce ATP come from various sources ( Figure 24.3 ) .
Of the four major macromolecular groups ( carbohydrates , lipids , proteins , and nucleic acids ) that are processed by digestion , carbohydrates are considered the most common source of energy to fuel the body .
They take the form of either complex carbohydrates , polysaccharides like starch and glycogen , or simple sugars ( monosaccharides ) like glucose and fructose .
Sugar catabolism breaks polysaccharides down into their individual monosaccharides .
Among the monosaccharides , glucose is the most common fuel for ATP production in cells , and as such , there are a number of endocrine control mechanisms to regulate glucose concentration in the bloodstream .
Excess glucose is either stored as an energy reserve in the liver and skeletal muscles as the complex polymer glycogen , or it is converted into fat ( triglyceride ) in adipose cells ( adipocytes ) .
Among the lipids ( fats ) , triglycerides are most often used for energy via a metabolic process called β-oxidation .
About onehalf of excess fat is stored in adipocytes that accumulate in the subcutaneous tissue under the skin , whereas the rest is stored in adipocytes in other tissues and organs .
Proteins , which are polymers , can be broken down into their monomers , individual amino acids .
Amino acids can be used as building blocks of new proteins or broken down further for the production of ATP .
When one is chronically starving , this use of amino acids for energy production can lead to a wasting away of the body , as more and more proteins are broken down .
Nucleic acids are present in most of the foods you eat .
During digestion , nucleic acids including DNA and various RNAs are broken down into their constituent nucleotides .
These nucleotides are readily absorbed and transported throughout the body to be used by individual cells during nucleic acid metabolism .
In contrast to catabolic reactions , anabolic reactions involve the joining of smaller molecules into larger ones .
Anabolic reactions combine monosaccharides to form polysaccharides , fatty acids to form triglycerides , amino acids to form proteins , and nucleotides to form nucleic acids .
These processes require energy in the form of ATP molecules generated by catabolic reactions .
Anabolic reactions , also called biosynthesis reactions , create new molecules that form new cells and tissues , and revitalize organs .
Catabolic and anabolic hormones in the body help regulate metabolic processes .
Catabolic hormones stimulate the breakdown of molecules and the production of energy .
These include cortisol , glucagon , adrenaline/epinephrine , and cytokines .
All of these hormones are mobilized at specific times to meet the needs of the body .
Anabolic hormones are required for the synthesis of molecules and include growth hormone , insulin-like growth factor , insulin , testosterone , and estrogen .
Table 24.1 summarizes the function of each of the catabolic hormones and Table 24.2 summarizes the functions of the anabolic hormones .
As might be expected for a fundamental physiological process like metabolism , errors or malfunctions in metabolic processing lead to a pathophysiology or—if uncorrected—a disease state .
Metabolic diseases are most commonly the result of malfunctioning proteins or enzymes that are critical to one or more metabolic pathways .
Protein or enzyme malfunction can be the consequence of a genetic alteration or mutation .
However , normally functioning proteins and enzymes can also have deleterious effects if their availability is not appropriately matched with metabolic need .
For example , excessive production of the hormone cortisol ( see Table 24.1 ) gives rise to Cushing syndrome .
Clinically , Cushing syndrome is characterized by rapid weight gain , especially in the trunk and face region , depression , and anxiety .
It is worth mentioning that tumors of the pituitary that produce adrenocorticotropic hormone ( ACTH ) , which subsequently stimulates the adrenal cortex to release excessive cortisol , produce similar effects .
This indirect mechanism of cortisol overproduction is referred to as Cushing disease .
Patients with Cushing syndrome can exhibit high blood glucose levels and are at an increased risk of becoming obese .
They also show slow growth , accumulation of fat between the shoulders , weak muscles , bone pain ( because cortisol causes proteins to be broken down to make glucose via gluconeogenesis ) , and fatigue .
Other symptoms include excessive sweating ( hyperhidrosis ) , capillary dilation , and thinning of the skin , which can lead to easy bruising .
The treatments for Cushing syndrome are all focused on reducing excessive cortisol levels .
Depending on the cause of the excess , treatment may be as simple as discontinuing the use of cortisol ointments .
In cases of tumors , surgery is often used to remove the offending tumor .
Where surgery is inappropriate , radiation therapy can be used to reduce the size of a tumor or ablate portions of the adrenal cortex .
Finally , medications are available that can help to regulate the amounts of cortisol .
Insufficient cortisol production is equally problematic .
Adrenal insufficiency , or Addison ’ s disease , is characterized by the reduced production of cortisol from the adrenal gland .
It can result from malfunction of the adrenal glands—they do not produce enough cortisol—or it can be a consequence of decreased ACTH availability from the pituitary .
Patients with Addison ’ s disease may have low blood pressure , paleness , extreme weakness , fatigue , slow or sluggish movements , lightheadedness , and salt cravings due to the loss of sodium and high blood potassium levels ( hyperkalemia ) .
Victims also may suffer from loss of appetite , chronic diarrhea , vomiting , mouth lesions , and patchy skin color .
Diagnosis typically involves blood tests and imaging tests of the adrenal and pituitary glands .
Treatment involves cortisol replacement therapy , which usually must be continued for life .
The chemical reactions underlying metabolism involve the transfer of electrons from one compound to another by processes catalyzed by enzymes .
The electrons in these reactions commonly come from hydrogen atoms , which consist of an electron and a proton .
A molecule gives up a hydrogen atom , in the form of a hydrogen ion ( H ) and an electron , breaking the molecule into smaller parts .
The loss of an electron , or oxidation , releases a small amount of energy ; both the electron and the energy are then passed to another molecule in the process of reduction , or the gaining of an electron .
These two reactions always happen together in an oxidation-reduction reaction ( also called a redox reaction ) —when an electron is passed between molecules , the donor is oxidized and the recipient is reduced .
Oxidation-reduction reactions often happen in a series , so that a molecule that is reduced is subsequently oxidized , passing on not only the electron it just received but also the energy it received .
As the series of reactions progresses , energy accumulates that is used to combine P and ADP to form ATP , the high-energy molecule that the body uses for fuel .
Oxidation-reduction reactions are catalyzed by enzymes that trigger the removal of hydrogen atoms .
Coenzymes work with enzymes and accept hydrogen atoms .
The two most common coenzymes of oxidation-reduction reactions are nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide ( NAD ) and flavin adenine dinucleotide ( FAD ) .
Their respective reduced coenzymes are NADH and FADH , which are energy-containing molecules used to transfer energy during the creation of ATP .
The family of carbohydrates includes both simple and complex sugars .
Glucose and fructose are examples of simple sugars , and starch , glycogen , and cellulose are all examples of complex sugars .
The complex sugars are also called polysaccharides and are made of multiple monosaccharide molecules .
Polysaccharides serve as energy storage ( e.g. , starch and glycogen ) and as structural components ( e.g. , chitin in insects and cellulose in plants ) .
During digestion , carbohydrates are broken down into simple , soluble sugars that can be transported across the intestinal wall into the circulatory system to be transported throughout the body .
Carbohydrate digestion begins in the mouth with the action of salivary amylase on starches and ends with monosaccharides being absorbed across the epithelium of the small intestine .
Once the absorbed monosaccharides are transported to the tissues , the process of cellular respiration begins ( Figure 24.4 ) .
This section will focus first on glycolysis , a process where the monosaccharide glucose is oxidized , releasing the energy stored in its bonds to produce ATP .
Glucose is the body ’ s most readily available source of energy .
After digestive processes break polysaccharides down into monosaccharides , including glucose , the monosaccharides are transported across the wall of the small intestine and into the circulatory system , which transports them to the liver .
In the liver , hepatocytes either pass the glucose on through the circulatory system or store excess glucose as glycogen .
Cells in the body take up the circulating glucose in response to insulin and , through a series of reactions called glycolysis , transfer some of the energy in glucose to ADP to form ATP ( Figure 24.5 ) .
The last step in glycolysis produces the product pyruvate .
Glycolysis begins with the phosphorylation of glucose by hexokinase to form glucose-6-phosphate .
This step uses one ATP , which is the donor of the phosphate group .
Under the action of phosphofructokinase , glucose-6-phosphate is converted into fructose-6-phosphate .
At this point , a second ATP donates its phosphate group , forming fructose-1,6-bisphosphate .
This six-carbon sugar is split to form two phosphorylated three-carbon molecules , glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate and dihydroxyacetone phosphate , which are both converted into glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate .
The glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate is further phosphorylated with groups donated by dihydrogen phosphate present in the cell to form the three-carbon molecule 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate .
The energy of this reaction comes from the oxidation of ( removal of electrons from ) glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate .
In a series of reactions leading to pyruvate , the two phosphate groups are then transferred to two ADPs to form two ATPs .
Thus , glycolysis uses two ATPs but generates four ATPs , yielding a net gain of two ATPs and two molecules of pyruvate .
In the presence of oxygen , pyruvate continues on to the Krebs cycle ( also called the citric acid cycle or tricarboxylic acid cycle ( TCA ) , where additional energy is extracted and passed on .
Watch this video ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/glycolysis1 ) to learn about glycolysis .
Glycolysis can be divided into two phases : energy consuming ( also called chemical priming ) and energy yielding .
The first phase is the energy-consuming phase , so it requires two ATP molecules to start the reaction for each molecule of glucose .
However , the end of the reaction produces four ATPs , resulting in a net gain of two ATP energy molecules .
The NADH that is produced in this process will be used later to produce ATP in the mitochondria .
Importantly , by the end of this process , one glucose molecule generates two pyruvate molecules , two high-energy ATP molecules , and two electron-carrying NADH molecules .
The following discussions of glycolysis include the enzymes responsible for the reactions .
When glucose enters a cell , the enzyme hexokinase ( or glucokinase , in the liver ) rapidly adds a phosphate to convert it into glucose-6-phosphate .
A kinase is a type of enzyme that adds a phosphate molecule to a substrate ( in this case , glucose , but it can be true of other molecules also ) .
This conversion step requires one ATP and essentially traps the glucose in the cell , preventing it from passing back through the plasma membrane , thus allowing glycolysis to proceed .
It also functions to maintain a concentration gradient with higher glucose levels in the blood than in the tissues .
By establishing this concentration gradient , the glucose in the blood will be able to flow from an area of high concentration ( the blood ) into an area of low concentration ( the tissues ) to be either used or stored .
Hexokinase is found in nearly every tissue in the body .
Glucokinase , on the other hand , is expressed in tissues that are active when blood glucose levels are high , such as the liver .
Hexokinase has a higher affinity for glucose than glucokinase and therefore is able to convert glucose at a faster rate than glucokinase .
This is important when levels of glucose are very low in the body , as it allows glucose to travel preferentially to those tissues that require it more .
In the next step of the first phase of glycolysis , the enzyme glucose-6-phosphate isomerase converts glucose-6-phosphate into fructose-6-phosphate .
Like glucose , fructose is also a six carbon-containing sugar .
The enzyme phosphofructokinase-1 then adds one more phosphate to convert fructose-6-phosphate into fructose-1-6-bisphosphate , another six-carbon sugar , using another ATP molecule .
Aldolase then breaks down this fructose-1-6-bisphosphate into two three-carbon molecules , glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate and dihydroxyacetone phosphate .
The triosephosphate isomerase enzyme then converts dihydroxyacetone phosphate into a second glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate molecule .
Therefore , by the end of this chemicalpriming or energy-consuming phase , one glucose molecule is broken down into two glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate molecules .
The second phase of glycolysis , the energy-yielding phase , creates the energy that is the product of glycolysis .
Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase converts each three-carbon glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate produced during the energy-consuming phase into 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate .
This reaction releases an electron that is then picked up by NAD to create an NADH molecule .
NADH is a high-energy molecule , like ATP , but unlike ATP , it is not used as energy currency by the cell .
Because there are two glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate molecules , two NADH molecules are synthesized during this step .
Each 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate is subsequently dephosphorylated ( i.e. , a phosphate is removed ) by phosphoglycerate kinase into 3-phosphoglycerate .
Each phosphate released in this reaction can convert one molecule of ADP into one highenergy ATP molecule , resulting in a gain of two ATP molecules .
The enzyme phosphoglycerate mutase then converts the 3-phosphoglycerate molecules into 2-phosphoglycerate .
The enolase enzyme then acts upon the 2-phosphoglycerate molecules to convert them into phosphoenolpyruvate molecules .
The last step of glycolysis involves the dephosphorylation of the two phosphoenolpyruvate molecules by pyruvate kinase to create two pyruvate molecules and two ATP molecules .
In summary , one glucose molecule breaks down into two pyruvate molecules , and creates two net ATP molecules and two NADH molecules by glycolysis .
When oxygen is limited or absent , pyruvate enters an anaerobic pathway .
In these reactions , pyruvate can be converted into lactic acid .
In addition to generating an additional ATP , this pathway serves to keep the pyruvate concentration low so glycolysis continues , and it oxidizes NADH into the NAD needed by glycolysis .
In this reaction , lactic acid replaces oxygen as the final electron acceptor .
Anaerobic respiration occurs in most cells of the body when oxygen is limited or mitochondria are absent or nonfunctional .
For example , because erythrocytes ( red blood cells ) lack mitochondria , they must produce their ATP from anaerobic respiration .
This is an effective pathway of ATP production for short periods of time , ranging from seconds to a few minutes .
The lactic acid produced diffuses into the plasma and is carried to the liver , where it is converted back into pyruvate or glucose via the Cori cycle .
Similarly , when a person exercises , muscles use ATP faster than oxygen can be delivered to them .
They depend on glycolysis and lactic acid production for rapid ATP production .
In the presence of oxygen , pyruvate can enter the Krebs cycle where additional energy is extracted as electrons are transferred from the pyruvate to the receptors NAD , GDP , and FAD , with carbon dioxide being a “ waste product ” ( Figure 24.6 ) .
The NADH and FADH pass electrons on to the electron transport chain , which uses the transferred energy to produce ATP .
As the terminal step in the electron transport chain , oxygen is the terminal electron acceptor and creates water inside the mitochondria .
The pyruvate molecules generated during glycolysis are transported across the mitochondrial membrane into the inner mitochondrial matrix , where they are metabolized by enzymes in a pathway called the Krebs cycle ( Figure 24.7 ) .
The Krebs cycle is also commonly called the citric acid cycle or the tricarboxylic acid ( TCA ) cycle .
During the Krebs cycle , high-energy molecules , including ATP , NADH , and FADH , are created .
NADH and FADH then pass electrons through the electron transport chain in the mitochondria to generate more ATP molecules .
Watch this animation ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/krebscycle ) to observe the Krebs cycle .
The three-carbon pyruvate molecule generated during glycolysis moves from the cytoplasm into the mitochondrial matrix , where it is converted by the enzyme pyruvate dehydrogenase into a two-carbon acetyl coenzyme A ( acetyl CoA ) molecule .
This reaction is an oxidative decarboxylation reaction .
It converts the three-carbon pyruvate into a two-carbon acetyl CoA molecule , releasing carbon dioxide and transferring two electrons that combine with NAD to form NADH .
Acetyl CoA enters the Krebs cycle by combining with a four-carbon molecule , oxaloacetate , to form the six-carbon molecule citrate , or citric acid , at the same time releasing the coenzyme A molecule .
The six-carbon citrate molecule is systematically converted to a five-carbon molecule and then a four-carbon molecule , ending with oxaloacetate , the beginning of the cycle .
Along the way , each citrate molecule will produce one ATP , one FADH , and three NADH .
The FADH and NADH will enter the oxidative phosphorylation system located in the inner mitochondrial membrane .
In addition , the Krebs cycle supplies the starting materials to process and break down proteins and fats .
To start the Krebs cycle , citrate synthase combines acetyl CoA and oxaloacetate to form a six-carbon citrate molecule ; CoA is subsequently released and can combine with another pyruvate molecule to begin the cycle again .
The aconitase enzyme converts citrate into isocitrate .
In two successive steps of oxidative decarboxylation , two molecules of CO and two NADH molecules are produced when isocitrate dehydrogenase converts isocitrate into the five-carbon α-ketoglutarate , which is then catalyzed and converted into the four-carbon succinyl CoA by α-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase .
The enzyme succinyl CoA dehydrogenase then converts succinyl CoA into succinate and forms the high-energy molecule GTP , which transfers its energy to ADP to produce ATP .
Succinate dehydrogenase then converts succinate into fumarate , forming a molecule of FADH .
Fumarase then converts fumarate into malate , which malate dehydrogenase then converts back into oxaloacetate while reducing NAD to NADH .
Oxaloacetate is then ready to combine with the next acetyl CoA to start the Krebs cycle again ( see Figure 24.7 ) .
For each turn of the cycle , three NADH , one ATP ( through GTP ) , and one FADH are created .
Each carbon of pyruvate is converted into CO , which is released as a byproduct of oxidative ( aerobic ) respiration .
The electron transport chain ( ETC ) uses the NADH and FADH produced by the Krebs cycle to generate ATP .
Electrons from NADH and FADH are transferred through protein complexes embedded in the inner mitochondrial membrane by a series of enzymatic reactions .
The ETC couples the transfer of electrons between a donor ( like NADH ) and an electron acceptor ( like O ) with the transfer of protons ( H ions ) across the inner mitochondrial membrane , enabling the process of oxidative phosphorylation .
In the presence of oxygen , energy is passed , stepwise , through the electron carriers to collect gradually the energy needed to attach a phosphate to ADP and produce ATP .
The role of molecular oxygen , O , is as the terminal electron acceptor for the ETC .
This means that once the electrons have passed through the entire ETC , they must be passed to another , separate molecule .
These electrons , O , and H ions from the matrix combine to form new water molecules .
This is the basis for your need to breathe in oxygen .
Without oxygen , electron flow through the ETC ceases .
Watch this video ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/ETchain ) to learn about the electron transport chain .
The electrons released from NADH and FADH are passed along the chain by each of the carriers , which are reduced when they receive the electron and oxidized when passing it on to the next carrier .
Each of these reactions releases a small amount of energy , which is used to pump H ions across the inner membrane .
The accumulation of these protons in the space between the membranes creates a proton gradient with respect to the mitochondrial matrix .
Also embedded in the inner mitochondrial membrane is an amazing protein pore complex called ATP synthase .
Effectively , it is a turbine that is powered by the flow of H ions across the inner membrane down a gradient and into the mitochondrial matrix .
As the H ions traverse the complex , the shaft of the complex rotates .
This rotation enables other portions of ATP synthase to encourage ADP and P to create ATP .
In accounting for the total number of ATP produced per glucose molecule through aerobic respiration , it is important to remember the following points : A net of two ATP are produced through glycolysis ( four produced and two consumed during the energy-consuming stage ) .
However , these two ATP are used for transporting the NADH produced during glycolysis from the cytoplasm into the mitochondria .
Therefore , the net production of ATP during glycolysis is zero .
In all phases after glycolysis , the number of ATP , NADH , and FADH produced must be multiplied by two to reflect how each glucose molecule produces two pyruvate molecules .
In the ETC , about three ATP are produced for every oxidized NADH .
However , only about two ATP are produced for every oxidized FADH .
The electrons from FADH produce less ATP , because they start at a lower point in the ETC ( Complex II ) compared to the electrons from NADH ( Complex I ) ( see Figure 24.8 ) .
Therefore , for every glucose molecule that enters aerobic respiration , a net total of 36 ATPs are produced ( Figure 24.9 ) .
Gluconeogenesis is the synthesis of new glucose molecules from pyruvate , lactate , glycerol , or the amino acids alanine or glutamine .
This process takes place primarily in the liver during periods of low glucose , that is , under conditions of fasting , starvation , and low carbohydrate diets .
So , the question can be raised as to why the body would create something it has just spent a fair amount of effort to break down ?
Certain key organs , including the brain , can use only glucose as an energy source ; therefore , it is essential that the body maintain a minimum blood glucose concentration .
When the blood glucose concentration falls below that certain point , new glucose is synthesized by the liver to raise the blood concentration to normal .
Gluconeogenesis is not simply the reverse of glycolysis .
There are some important differences ( Figure 24.10 ) .
Pyruvate is a common starting material for gluconeogenesis .
First , the pyruvate is converted into oxaloacetate .
Oxaloacetate then serves as a substrate for the enzyme phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase ( PEPCK ) , which transforms oxaloacetate into phosphoenolpyruvate ( PEP ) .
From this step , gluconeogenesis is nearly the reverse of glycolysis .
PEP is converted back into 2-phosphoglycerate , which is converted into 3-phosphoglycerate .
Then , 3-phosphoglycerate is converted into 1,3 bisphosphoglycerate and then into glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate .
Two molecules of glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate then combine and then into glucose-6-phosphate .
Finally , a series of reactions generates glucose itself .
In gluconeogenesis ( as compared to glycolysis ) , the enzyme hexokinase is replaced by glucose-6-phosphatase , and the enzyme phosphofructokinase-1 is replaced by fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase .
This helps the cell to regulate glycolysis and gluconeogenesis independently of each other .
As will be discussed as part of lipolysis , fats can be broken down into glycerol , which can be phosphorylated to form dihydroxyacetone phosphate or DHAP .
DHAP can either enter the glycolytic pathway or be used by the liver as a substrate for gluconeogenesis .
to form fructose-1-6-bisphosphate , which is converted into fructose 6-phosphate The human body ’ s metabolic rate decreases nearly 2 percent per decade after age 30 .
Changes in body composition , including reduced lean muscle mass , are mostly responsible for this decrease .
The most dramatic loss of muscle mass , and consequential decline in metabolic rate , occurs between 50 and 70 years of age .
Loss of muscle mass is the equivalent of reduced strength , which tends to inhibit seniors from engaging in sufficient physical activity .
This results in a positive-feedback system where the reduced physical activity leads to even more muscle loss , further reducing metabolism .
There are several things that can be done to help prevent general declines in metabolism and to fight back against the cyclic nature of these declines .
These include eating breakfast , eating small meals frequently , consuming plenty of lean protein , drinking water to remain hydrated , exercising ( including strength training ) , and getting enough sleep .
These measures can help keep energy levels from dropping and curb the urge for increased calorie consumption from excessive snacking .
While these strategies are not guaranteed to maintain metabolism , they do help prevent muscle loss and may increase energy levels .
Some experts also suggest avoiding sugar , which can lead to excess fat storage .
Spicy foods and green tea might also be beneficial .
Because stress activates cortisol release , and cortisol slows metabolism , avoiding stress , or at least practicing relaxation techniques , can also help .
Lipid metabolism entails the oxidation of fatty acids to either generate energy or synthesize new lipids from smaller constituent molecules .
Lipid metabolism is associated with carbohydrate metabolism , as products of glucose ( such as acetyl CoA ) can be converted into lipids .
Lipid metabolism begins in the intestine where ingested triglycerides are broken down into smaller chain fatty acids and subsequently into monoglyceride molecules ( see Figure 24.11b ) by pancreatic lipases , enzymes that break down fats after they are emulsified by bile salts .
When food reaches the small intestine in the form of chyme , a digestive hormone called cholecystokinin ( CCK ) is released by intestinal cells in the intestinal mucosa .
CCK stimulates the release of pancreatic lipase from the pancreas and stimulates the contraction of the gallbladder to release stored bile salts into the intestine .
CCK also travels to the brain , where it can act as a hunger suppressant .
Together , the pancreatic lipases and bile salts break down triglycerides into free fatty acids .
These fatty acids can be transported across the intestinal membrane .
However , once they cross the membrane , they are recombined to again form triglyceride molecules .
Within the intestinal cells , these triglycerides are packaged along with cholesterol molecules in phospholipid vesicles called chylomicrons ( Figure 24.12 ) .
The chylomicrons enable fats and cholesterol to move within the aqueous environment of your lymphatic and circulatory systems .
Chylomicrons leave the enterocytes by exocytosis and enter the lymphatic system via lacteals in the villi of the intestine .
From the lymphatic system , the chylomicrons are transported to the circulatory system .
Once in the circulation , they can either go to the liver or be stored in fat cells ( adipocytes ) that comprise adipose ( fat ) tissue found throughout the body .
To obtain energy from fat , triglycerides must first be broken down by hydrolysis into their two principal components , fatty acids and glycerol .
This process , called lipolysis , takes place in the cytoplasm .
The resulting fatty acids are oxidized by βoxidation into acetyl CoA , which is used by the Krebs cycle .
The glycerol that is released from triglycerides after lipolysis directly enters the glycolysis pathway as DHAP .
Because one triglyceride molecule yields three fatty acid molecules with as much as 16 or more carbons in each one , fat molecules yield more energy than carbohydrates and are an important source of energy for the human body .
Triglycerides yield more than twice the energy per unit mass when compared to carbohydrates and proteins .
Therefore , when glucose levels are low , triglycerides can be converted into acetyl CoA molecules and used to generate ATP through aerobic respiration .
The breakdown of fatty acids , called fatty acid oxidation or beta ( β ) -oxidation , begins in the cytoplasm , where fatty acids are converted into fatty acyl CoA molecules .
This fatty acyl CoA combines with carnitine to create a fatty acyl carnitine molecule , which helps to transport the fatty acid across the mitochondrial membrane .
Once inside the mitochondrial matrix , the fatty acyl carnitine molecule is converted back into fatty acyl CoA and then into acetyl CoA ( Figure 24.13 ) .
The newly formed acetyl CoA enters the Krebs cycle and is used to produce ATP in the same way as acetyl CoA derived from pyruvate .
If excessive acetyl CoA is created from the oxidation of fatty acids and the Krebs cycle is overloaded and can not handle it , the acetyl CoA is diverted to create ketone bodies .
These ketone bodies can serve as a fuel source if glucose levels are too low in the body .
Ketones serve as fuel in times of prolonged starvation or when patients suffer from uncontrolled diabetes and can not utilize most of the circulating glucose .
In both cases , fat stores are liberated to generate energy through the Krebs cycle and will generate ketone bodies when too much acetyl CoA accumulates .
In this ketone synthesis reaction , excess acetyl CoA is converted into hydroxymethylglutaryl CoA ( HMG CoA ) .
HMG CoA is a precursor of cholesterol and is an intermediate that is subsequently converted into β-hydroxybutyrate , the primary ketone body in the blood ( Figure 24.14 ) .
Organs that have classically been thought to be dependent solely on glucose , such as the brain , can actually use ketones as an alternative energy source .
This keeps the brain functioning when glucose is limited .
When ketones are produced faster than they can be used , they can be broken down into CO and acetone .
The acetone is removed by exhalation .
One symptom of ketogenesis is that the patient ’ s breath smells sweet like alcohol .
This effect provides one way of telling if a diabetic is properly controlling the disease .
The carbon dioxide produced can acidify the blood , leading to diabetic ketoacidosis , a dangerous condition in diabetics .
Ketones oxidize to produce energy for the brain .
beta ( β ) -hydroxybutyrate is oxidized to acetoacetate and NADH is released .
An HS-CoA molecule is added to acetoacetate , forming acetoacetyl CoA .
The carbon within the acetoacetyl CoA that is not bonded to the CoA then detaches , splitting the molecule in two .
This carbon then attaches to another free HSCoA , resulting in two acetyl CoA molecules .
These two acetyl CoA molecules are then processed through the Krebs cycle to generate energy ( Figure 24.15 ) .
When glucose levels are plentiful , the excess acetyl CoA generated by glycolysis can be converted into fatty acids , triglycerides , cholesterol , steroids , and bile salts .
This process , called lipogenesis , creates lipids ( fat ) from the acetyl CoA and takes place in the cytoplasm of adipocytes ( fat cells ) and hepatocytes ( liver cells ) .
When you eat more glucose or carbohydrates than your body needs , your system uses acetyl CoA to turn the excess into fat .
Although there are several metabolic sources of acetyl CoA , it is most commonly derived from glycolysis .
Acetyl CoA availability is significant , because it initiates lipogenesis .
Lipogenesis begins with acetyl CoA and advances by the subsequent addition of two carbon atoms from another acetyl CoA ; this process is repeated until fatty acids are the appropriate length .
Because this is a bondcreating anabolic process , ATP is consumed .
However , the creation of triglycerides and lipids is an efficient way of storing the energy available in carbohydrates .
Triglycerides and lipids , high-energy molecules , are stored in adipose tissue until they are needed .
Although lipogenesis occurs in the cytoplasm , the necessary acetyl CoA is created in the mitochondria and can not be transported across the mitochondrial membrane .
To solve this problem , pyruvate is converted into both oxaloacetate and acetyl CoA .
Two different enzymes are required for these conversions .
Oxaloacetate forms via the action of pyruvate carboxylase , whereas the action of pyruvate dehydrogenase creates acetyl CoA .
Oxaloacetate and acetyl CoA combine to form citrate , which can cross the mitochondrial membrane and enter the cytoplasm .
In the cytoplasm , citrate is converted back into oxaloacetate and acetyl CoA .
Oxaloacetate is converted into malate and then into pyruvate .
Pyruvate crosses back across the mitochondrial membrane to wait for the next cycle of lipogenesis .
The acetyl CoA is converted into malonyl CoA that is used to synthesize fatty acids .
Figure 24.16 summarizes the pathways of lipid metabolism .
They represent cell signaling receptors , signaling molecules , structural members , enzymes , intracellular trafficking components , extracellular matrix scaffolds , ion pumps , ion channels , oxygen and CO transporters ( hemoglobin ) .
That is not even the complete list !
There is protein in bones ( collagen ) , muscles , and tendons ; the hemoglobin that transports oxygen ; and enzymes that catalyze all biochemical reactions .
Protein is also used for growth and repair .
Amid all these necessary functions , proteins also hold the potential to serve as a metabolic fuel source .
Proteins are not stored for later use , so excess proteins must be converted into glucose or triglycerides , and used to supply energy or build energy reserves .
Although the body can synthesize proteins from amino acids , food is an important source of those amino acids , especially because humans can not synthesize all of the 20 amino acids used to build proteins .
The digestion of proteins begins in the stomach .
When protein-rich foods enter the stomach , they are greeted by a mixture of the enzyme pepsin and hydrochloric acid ( HCl ; 0.5 percent ) .
The latter produces an environmental pH of 1.5–3.5 that denatures proteins within food .
Pepsin cuts proteins into smaller polypeptides and their constituent amino acids .
When the food-gastric juice mixture ( chyme ) enters the small intestine , the pancreas releases sodium bicarbonate to neutralize the HCl .
This helps to protect the lining of the intestine .
The small intestine also releases digestive hormones , including secretin and CCK , which stimulate digestive processes to break down the proteins further .
Secretin also stimulates the pancreas to release sodium bicarbonate .
The pancreas releases most of the digestive enzymes , including the proteases trypsin , chymotrypsin , and elastase , which aid protein digestion .
In order to avoid breaking down the proteins that make up the pancreas and small intestine , pancreatic enzymes are released as inactive proenzymes that are only activated in the small intestine .
In the pancreas , vesicles store trypsin and chymotrypsin as trypsinogen and chymotrypsinogen .
Once released into the small intestine , an enzyme found in the wall of the small intestine , called enterokinase , binds to trypsinogen and converts it into its active form , trypsin .
Trypsin then binds to chymotrypsinogen to convert it into the active chymotrypsin .
Trypsin and chymotrypsin break down large proteins into smaller peptides , a process called proteolysis .
These smaller peptides are catabolized into their constituent amino acids , which are transported across the apical surface of the intestinal mucosa in a process that is mediated by sodium-amino acid transporters .
These transporters bind sodium and then bind the amino acid to transport it across the membrane .
At the basal surface of the mucosal cells , the sodium and amino acid are released .
The sodium can be reused in the transporter , whereas the amino acids are transferred into the bloodstream to be transported to the liver and cells throughout the body for protein synthesis .
Freely available amino acids are used to create proteins .
If amino acids exist in excess , the body has no capacity or mechanism for their storage ; thus , they are converted into glucose or ketones , or they are decomposed .
Amino acid decomposition results in hydrocarbons and nitrogenous waste .
However , high concentrations of nitrogen are toxic .
The urea cycle processes nitrogen and facilitates its excretion from the body .
The urea cycle is a set of biochemical reactions that produces urea from ammonium ions in order to prevent a toxic level of ammonium in the body .
It occurs primarily in the liver and , to a lesser extent , in the kidney .
Prior to the urea cycle , ammonium ions are produced from the breakdown of amino acids .
In these reactions , an amine group , or ammonium ion , from the amino acid is exchanged with a keto group on another molecule .
This transamination event creates a molecule that is necessary for the Krebs cycle and an ammonium ion that enters into the urea cycle to be eliminated .
In the urea cycle , ammonium is combined with CO , resulting in urea and water .
The urea is eliminated through the kidneys in the urine ( Figure 24.18 ) .
Amino acids can also be used as a source of energy , especially in times of starvation .
Because the processing of amino acids results in the creation of metabolic intermediates , including pyruvate , acetyl CoA , acetoacyl CoA , oxaloacetate , and α-ketoglutarate , amino acids can serve as a source of energy production through the Krebs cycle ( Figure 24.19 ) .
Figure 24.20 summarizes the pathways of catabolism and anabolism for carbohydrates , lipids , and proteins .
Pyruvate dehydrogenase complex deficiency ( PDCD ) and phenylketonuria ( PKU ) are genetic disorders .
Pyruvate dehydrogenase is the enzyme that converts pyruvate into acetyl CoA , the molecule necessary to begin the Krebs cycle to produce ATP .
With low levels of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex ( PDC ) , the rate of cycling through the Krebs cycle is dramatically reduced .
This results in a decrease in the total amount of energy that is produced by the cells of the body .
PDC deficiency results in a neurodegenerative disease that ranges in severity , depending on the levels of the PDC enzyme .
It may cause developmental defects , muscle spasms , and death .
Treatments can include diet modification , vitamin supplementation , and gene therapy ; however , damage to the central nervous system usually can not be reversed .
PKU affects about 1 in every 15,000 births in the United States .
People afflicted with PKU lack sufficient activity of the enzyme phenylalanine hydroxylase and are therefore unable to break down phenylalanine into tyrosine adequately .
Because of this , levels of phenylalanine rise to toxic levels in the body , which results in damage to the central nervous system and brain .
Symptoms include delayed neurological development , hyperactivity , mental retardation , seizures , skin rash , tremors , and uncontrolled movements of the arms and legs .
Pregnant women with PKU are at a high risk for exposing the fetus to too much phenylalanine , which can cross the placenta and affect fetal development .
Babies exposed to excess phenylalanine in utero may present with heart defects , physical and/or mental retardation , and microcephaly .
Every infant in the United States and Canada is tested at birth to determine whether PKU is present .
The earlier a modified diet is begun , the less severe the symptoms will be .
The person must closely follow a strict diet that is low in phenylalanine to avoid symptoms and damage .
Phenylalanine is found in high concentrations in artificial sweeteners , including aspartame .
Therefore , these sweeteners must be avoided .
Some animal products and certain starches are also high in phenylalanine , and intake of these foods should be carefully monitored .
How does the body meet this constant demand for energy ?
Your body processes the food you eat both to use immediately and , importantly , to store as energy for later demands .
If there were no method in place to store excess energy , you would need to eat constantly in order to meet energy demands .
Distinct mechanisms are in place to facilitate energy storage , and to make stored energy available during times of fasting and starvation .
The absorptive state , or the fed state , occurs after a meal when your body is digesting the food and absorbing the nutrients ( anabolism exceeds catabolism ) .
Digestion begins the moment you put food into your mouth , as the food is broken down into its constituent parts to be absorbed through the intestine .
The digestion of carbohydrates begins in the mouth , whereas the digestion of proteins and fats begins in the stomach and small intestine .
The constituent parts of these carbohydrates , fats , and proteins are transported across the intestinal wall and enter the bloodstream ( sugars and amino acids ) or the lymphatic system ( fats ) .
From the intestines , these systems transport them to the liver , adipose tissue , or muscle cells that will process and use , or store , the energy .
Depending on the amounts and types of nutrients ingested , the absorptive state can linger for up to 4 hours .
The ingestion of food and the rise of glucose concentrations in the bloodstream stimulate pancreatic beta cells to release insulin into the bloodstream , where it initiates the absorption of blood glucose by liver hepatocytes , and by adipose and muscle cells .
Once inside these cells , glucose is immediately converted into glucose-6-phosphate .
By doing this , a concentration gradient is established where glucose levels are higher in the blood than in the cells .
This allows for glucose to continue moving from the blood to the cells where it is needed .
Insulin also stimulates the storage of glucose as glycogen in the liver and muscle cells where it can be used for later energy needs of the body .
Insulin also promotes the synthesis of protein in muscle .
As you will see , muscle protein can be catabolized and used as fuel in times of starvation .
If energy is exerted shortly after eating , the dietary fats and sugars that were just ingested will be processed and used immediately for energy .
If not , the excess glucose is stored as glycogen in the liver and muscle cells , or as fat in adipose tissue ; excess dietary fat is also stored as triglycerides in adipose tissues .
Figure 24.21 summarizes the metabolic processes occurring in the body during the absorptive state .
The postabsorptive state , or the fasting state , occurs when the food has been digested , absorbed , and stored .
You commonly fast overnight , but skipping meals during the day puts your body in the postabsorptive state as well .
During this state , the body must rely initially on stored glycogen .
Glucose levels in the blood begin to drop as it is absorbed and used by the cells .
In response to the decrease in glucose , insulin levels also drop .
Glycogen and triglyceride storage slows .
However , due to the demands of the tissues and organs , blood glucose levels must be maintained in the normal range of 80–120 mg/ dL .
In response to a drop in blood glucose concentration , the hormone glucagon is released from the alpha cells of the pancreas .
Glucagon acts upon the liver cells , where it inhibits the synthesis of glycogen and stimulates the breakdown of stored glycogen back into glucose .
This glucose is released from the liver to be used by the peripheral tissues and the brain .
As a result , blood glucose levels begin to rise .
Gluconeogenesis will also begin in the liver to replace the glucose that has been used by the peripheral tissues .
After ingestion of food , fats and proteins are processed as described previously ; however , the glucose processing changes a bit .
The peripheral tissues preferentially absorb glucose .
The liver , which normally absorbs and processes glucose , will not do so after a prolonged fast .
The gluconeogenesis that has been ongoing in the liver will continue after fasting to replace the glycogen stores that were depleted in the liver .
After these stores have been replenished , excess glucose that is absorbed by the liver will be converted into triglycerides and fatty acids for long-term storage .
Figure 24.22 summarizes the metabolic processes occurring in the body during the postabsorptive state .
When the body is deprived of nourishment for an extended period of time , it goes into “ survival mode. ” The first priority for survival is to provide enough glucose or fuel for the brain .
The second priority is the conservation of amino acids for proteins .
Therefore , the body uses ketones to satisfy the energy needs of the brain and other glucose-dependent organs , and to maintain proteins in the cells ( see Figure 24.2 ) .
Because glucose levels are very low during starvation , glycolysis will shut off in cells that can use alternative fuels .
For example , muscles will switch from using glucose to fatty acids as fuel .
As previously explained , fatty acids can be converted into acetyl CoA and processed through the Krebs cycle to make ATP .
Pyruvate , lactate , and alanine from muscle cells are not converted into acetyl CoA and used in the Krebs cycle , but are exported to the liver to be used in the synthesis of glucose .
As starvation continues , and more glucose is needed , glycerol from fatty acids can be liberated and used as a source for gluconeogenesis .
After several days of starvation , ketone bodies become the major source of fuel for the heart and other organs .
As starvation continues , fatty acids and triglyceride stores are used to create ketones for the body .
This prevents the continued breakdown of proteins that serve as carbon sources for gluconeogenesis .
Once these stores are fully depleted , proteins from muscles are released and broken down for glucose synthesis .
Overall survival is dependent on the amount of fat and protein stored in the body .
The core temperature of the body remains steady at around 36.5–37.5 °C ( or 97.7–99.5 °F ) .
In the process of ATP production by cells throughout the body , approximately 60 percent of the energy produced is in the form of heat used to maintain body temperature .
Thermoregulation is an example of negative feedback .
The hypothalamus in the brain is the master switch that works as a thermostat to regulate the body ’ s core temperature ( Figure 24.23 ) .
If the temperature is too high , the hypothalamus can initiate several processes to lower it .
These include increasing the circulation of the blood to the surface of the body to allow for the dissipation of heat through the skin and initiation of sweating to allow evaporation of water on the skin to cool its surface .
Conversely , if the temperature falls below the set core temperature , the hypothalamus can initiate shivering to generate heat .
The body uses more energy and generates more heat .
In addition , thyroid hormone will stimulate more energy use and heat production by cells throughout the body .
An environment is said to be thermoneutral when the body does not expend or release energy to maintain its core temperature .
For a naked human , this is an ambient air temperature of around 84 °F .
If the temperature is higher , for example , when wearing clothes , the body compensates with cooling mechanisms .
The body loses heat through the mechanisms of heat exchange .
When the environment is not thermoneutral , the body uses four mechanisms of heat exchange to maintain homeostasis : conduction , convection , radiation , and evaporation .
Each of these mechanisms relies on the property of heat to flow from a higher concentration to a lower concentration ; therefore , each of the mechanisms of heat exchange varies in rate according to the temperature and conditions of the environment .
Conduction is the transfer of heat by two objects that are in direct contact with one another .
It occurs when the skin comes in contact with a cold or warm object .
For example , when holding a glass of ice water , the heat from your skin will warm the glass and in turn melt the ice .
Alternatively , on a cold day , you might warm up by wrapping your cold hands around a hot mug of coffee .
Only about 3 percent of the body ’ s heat is lost through conduction .
Convection is the transfer of heat to the air surrounding the skin .
The warmed air rises away from the body and is replaced by cooler air that is subsequently heated .
Convection can also occur in water .
When the water temperature is lower than the body ’ s temperature , the body loses heat by warming the water closest to the skin , which moves away to be replaced by cooler water .
The convection currents created by the temperature changes continue to draw heat away from the body more quickly than the body can replace it , resulting in hyperthermia .
About 15 percent of the body ’ s heat is lost through convection .
Radiation is the transfer of heat via infrared waves .
This occurs between any two objects when their temperatures differ .
A radiator can warm a room via radiant heat .
On a sunny day , the radiation from the sun warms the skin .
The same principle works from the body to the environment .
About 60 percent of the heat lost by the body is lost through radiation .
Evaporation is the transfer of heat by the evaporation of water .
Because it takes a great deal of energy for a water molecule to change from a liquid to a gas , evaporating water ( in the form of sweat ) takes with it a great deal of energy from the skin .
However , the rate at which evaporation occurs depends on relative humidity—more sweat evaporates in lower humidity environments .
Sweating is the primary means of cooling the body during exercise , whereas at rest , about 20 percent of the heat lost by the body occurs through evaporation .
The metabolic rate is the amount of energy consumed minus the amount of energy expended by the body .
The basal metabolic rate ( BMR ) describes the amount of daily energy expended by humans at rest , in a neutrally temperate environment , while in the postabsorptive state .
It measures how much energy the body needs for normal , basic , daily activity .
About 70 percent of all daily energy expenditure comes from the basic functions of the organs in the body .
Another 20 percent comes from physical activity , and the remaining 10 percent is necessary for body thermoregulation or temperature control .
This rate will be higher if a person is more active or has more lean body mass .
As you age , the BMR generally decreases as the percentage of less lean muscle mass decreases .
Importantly , the energy is stored primarily as fats .
The quantity and quality of food that is ingested , digested , and absorbed affects the amount of fat that is stored as excess calories .
Diet—both what you eat and how much you eat—has a dramatic impact on your health .
Eating too much or too little food can lead to serious medical issues , including cardiovascular disease , cancer , anorexia , and diabetes , among others .
Combine an unhealthy diet with unhealthy environmental conditions , such as smoking , and the potential medical complications increase significantly .
The amount of energy that is needed or ingested per day is measured in calories .
The nutritional Calorie ( C ) is the amount of heat it takes to raise 1 kg ( 1000 g ) of water by 1 °C .
This is different from the calorie ( c ) used in the physical sciences , which is the amount of heat it takes to raise 1 g of water by 1 °C .
When we refer to `` calorie , '' we are referring to the nutritional Calorie .
On average , a person needs 1500 to 2000 calories per day to sustain ( or carry out ) daily activities .
The total number of calories needed by one person is dependent on their body mass , age , height , gender , activity level , and the amount of exercise per day .
If exercise is regular part of one ’ s day , more calories are required .
As a rule , people underestimate the number of calories ingested and overestimate the amount they burn through exercise .
This can lead to ingestion of too many calories per day .
The accumulation of an extra 3500 calories adds one pound of weight .
If an excess of 200 calories per day is ingested , one extra pound of body weight will be gained every 18 days .
At that rate , an extra 20 pounds can be gained over the course of a year .
Of course , this increase in calories could be offset by increased exercise .
Running or jogging one mile burns almost 100 calories .
The type of food ingested also affects the body ’ s metabolic rate .
Processing of carbohydrates requires less energy than processing of proteins .
In fact , the breakdown of carbohydrates requires the least amount of energy , whereas the processing of proteins demands the most energy .
In general , the amount of calories ingested and the amount of calories burned determines the overall weight .
To lose weight , the number of calories burned per day must exceed the number ingested .
Calories are in almost everything you ingest , so when considering calorie intake , beverages must also be considered .
To help provide guidelines regarding the types and quantities of food that should be eaten every day , the USDA has updated their food guidelines from MyPyramid to MyPlate .
They have put the recommended elements of a healthy meal into the context of a place setting of food .
MyPlate categorizes food into the standard six food groups : fruits , vegetables , grains , protein foods , dairy , and oils .
The accompanying website gives clear recommendations regarding quantity and type of each food that you should consume each day , as well as identifying which foods belong in each category .
The accompanying graphic ( Figure 24.24 ) gives a clear visual with general recommendations for a healthy and balanced meal .
The guidelines recommend to “ Make half your plate fruits and vegetables. ” The other half is grains and protein , with a slightly higher quantity of grains than protein .
Dairy products are represented by a drink , but the quantity can be applied to other dairy products as well .
ChooseMyPlate.gov provides extensive online resources for planning a healthy diet and lifestyle , including offering weight management tips and recommendations for physical activity .
It also includes the SuperTracker , a web-based application to help you analyze your own diet and physical activity .
Obesity in the United States is epidemic .
The rate of obesity has been steadily rising since the 1980s .
In the 1990s , most states reported that less than 10 percent of their populations was obese , and the state with the highest rate reported that only 15 percent of their population was considered obese .
By 2010 , the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention reported that nearly 36 percent of adults over 20 years old were obese and an additional 33 percent were overweight , leaving only about 30 percent of the population at a healthy weight .
These studies find the highest levels of obesity are concentrated in the southern states .
They also find the level of childhood obesity is rising .
Obesity is defined by the body mass index ( BMI ) , which is a measure of an individual ’ s weight-to-height ratio .
The normal , or healthy , BMI range is between 18 and 24.9 kg/m .
Overweight is defined as a BMI of 25 to 29.9 kg/m , and obesity is considered to be a BMI greater than 30 kg/m .
Obesity can arise from a number of factors , including overeating , poor diet , sedentary lifestyle , limited sleep , genetic factors , and even diseases or drugs .
Research has shown that losing weight can help reduce or reverse the complications associated with these conditions .
Vitamins are organic compounds found in foods and are a necessary part of the biochemical reactions in the body .
They are involved in a number of processes , including mineral and bone metabolism , and cell and tissue growth , and they act as cofactors for energy metabolism .
The B vitamins play the largest role of any vitamins in metabolism ( Table 24.3 and Table 24.4 ) .
You get most of your vitamins through your diet , although some can be formed from the precursors absorbed during digestion .
For example , the body synthesizes vitamin A from the β-carotene in orange vegetables like carrots and sweet potatoes .
Vitamins are either fat-soluble or water-soluble .
Fat-soluble vitamins A , D , E , and K , are absorbed through the intestinal tract with lipids in chylomicrons .
Vitamin D is also synthesized in the skin through exposure to sunlight .
Because they are carried in lipids , fat-soluble vitamins can accumulate in the lipids stored in the body .
If excess vitamins are retained in the lipid stores in the body , hypervitaminosis can result .
Water-soluble vitamins , including the eight B vitamins and vitamin C , are absorbed with water in the gastrointestinal tract .
These vitamins move easily through bodily fluids , which are water based , so they are not stored in the body .
Excess watersoluble vitamins are excreted in the urine .
Therefore , hypervitaminosis of water-soluble vitamins rarely occurs , except with an excess of vitamin supplements .
Minerals in food are inorganic compounds that work with other nutrients to ensure the body functions properly .
Minerals can not be made in the body ; they come from the diet .
The amount of minerals in the body is small—only 4 percent of the total body mass—and most of that consists of the minerals that the body requires in moderate quantities : potassium , sodium , calcium , phosphorus , magnesium , and chloride .
The most common minerals in the body are calcium and phosphorous , both of which are stored in the skeleton and necessary for the hardening of bones .
Most minerals are ionized , and their ionic forms are used in physiological processes throughout the body .
Sodium and chloride ions are electrolytes in the blood and extracellular tissues , and iron ions are critical to the formation of hemoglobin .
There are additional trace minerals that are still important to the body ’ s functions , but their required quantities are much lower .
Like vitamins , minerals can be consumed in toxic quantities ( although it is rare ) .
A healthy diet includes most of the minerals your body requires , so supplements and processed foods can add potentially toxic levels of minerals .
Table 24.5 and Table 24.6 provide a summary of minerals and their function in the body .
However , there are additional , equally important functions played by the system .
Take for example , regulation of pH , a function shared with the lungs and the buffers in the blood .
Additionally , the regulation of blood pressure is a role shared with the heart and blood vessels .
What about regulating the concentration of solutes in the blood ?
Did you know that the kidney is important in determining the concentration of red blood cells ?
Eighty-five percent of the erythropoietin ( EPO ) produced to stimulate red blood cell production is produced in the kidneys .
The kidneys also perform the final synthesis step of vitamin D production , converting calcidiol to calcitriol , the active form of vitamin D. If the kidneys fail , these functions are compromised or lost altogether , with devastating effects on homeostasis .
The affected individual might experience weakness , lethargy , shortness of breath , anemia , widespread edema ( swelling ) , metabolic acidosis , rising potassium levels , heart arrhythmias , and more .
Each of these functions is vital to your well-being and survival .
The urinary system , controlled by the nervous system , also stores urine until a convenient time for disposal and then provides the anatomical structures to transport this waste liquid to the outside of the body .
Failure of nervous control or the anatomical structures leading to a loss of control of urination results in a condition called incontinence .
This chapter will help you to understand the anatomy of the urinary system and how it enables the physiologic functions critical to homeostasis .
It is best to think of the kidney as a regulator of plasma makeup rather than simply a urine producer .
Watch this video ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/urineintro ) from the Howard Hughes Medical Institute for an introduction to the urinary system .
Because the glomeruli filter the blood based mostly on particle size , large elements like blood cells , platelets , antibodies , and albumen are excluded .
The glomerulus is the first part of the nephron , which then continues as a highly specialized tubular structure responsible for creating the final urine composition .
All other solutes , such as ions , amino acids , vitamins , and wastes , are filtered to create a filtrate composition very similar to plasma .
The glomeruli create about 200 liters ( 189 quarts ) of this filtrate every day , yet you excrete less than two liters of waste you call urine .
Characteristics of the urine change , depending on influences such as water intake , exercise , environmental temperature , nutrient intake , and other factors ( Table 25.1 ) .
Some of the characteristics such as color and odor are rough descriptors of your state of hydration .
For example , if you exercise or work outside , and sweat a great deal , your urine will turn darker and produce a slight odor , even if you drink plenty of water .
Athletes are often advised to consume water until their urine is clear .
This is good advice ; however , it takes time for the kidneys to process body fluids and store it in the bladder .
Another way of looking at this is that the quality of the urine produced is an average over the time it takes to make that urine .
Producing clear urine may take only a few minutes if you are drinking a lot of water or several hours if you are working outside and not drinking much .
Urinalysis ( urine analysis ) often provides clues to renal disease .
Normally , only traces of protein are found in urine , and when higher amounts are found , damage to the glomeruli is the likely basis .
Unusually large quantities of urine may point to diseases like diabetes mellitus or hypothalamic tumors that cause diabetes insipidus .
The color of urine is determined mostly by the breakdown products of red blood cell destruction ( Figure 25.2 ) .
The “ heme ” of hemoglobin is converted by the liver into water-soluble forms that can be excreted into the bile and indirectly into the urine .
This yellow pigment is urochrome .
Urine color may also be affected by certain foods like beets , berries , and fava beans .
A kidney stone or a cancer of the urinary system may produce sufficient bleeding to manifest as pink or even bright red urine .
Diseases of the liver or obstructions of bile drainage from the liver impart a dark “ tea ” or “ cola ” hue to the urine .
Dehydration produces darker , concentrated urine that may also possess the slight odor of ammonia .
Most of the ammonia produced from protein breakdown is converted into urea by the liver , so ammonia is rarely detected in fresh urine .
The strong ammonia odor you may detect in bathrooms or alleys is due to the breakdown of urea into ammonia by bacteria in the environment .
About one in five people detect a distinctive odor in their urine after consuming asparagus ; other foods such as onions , garlic , and fish can impart their own aromas !
These food-caused odors are harmless .
Urine volume varies considerably .
The normal range is one to two liters per day ( Table 25.2 ) .
The kidneys must produce a minimum urine volume of about 500 mL/day to rid the body of wastes .
Output below this level may be caused by severe dehydration or renal disease and is termed oliguria .
The virtual absence of urine production is termed anuria .
Excessive urine production is polyuria , which may be due to diabetes mellitus or diabetes insipidus .
In diabetes mellitus , blood glucose levels exceed the number of available sodium-glucose transporters in the kidney , and glucose appears in the urine .
The osmotic nature of glucose attracts water , leading to its loss in the urine .
In the case of diabetes insipidus , insufficient pituitary antidiuretic hormone ( ADH ) release or insufficient numbers of ADH receptors in the collecting ducts means that too few water channels are inserted into the cell membranes that line the collecting ducts of the kidney .
Insufficient numbers of water channels ( aquaporins ) reduce water absorption , resulting in high volumes of very dilute urine .
The pH ( hydrogen ion concentration ) of the urine can vary more than 1000-fold , from a normal low of 4.5 to a maximum of 8.0 .
Diet can influence pH ; meats lower the pH , whereas citrus fruits , vegetables , and dairy products raise the pH .
Chronically high or low pH can lead to disorders , such as the development of kidney stones or osteomalacia .
Specific gravity is a measure of the quantity of solutes per unit volume of a solution and is traditionally easier to measure than osmolarity .
Urine will always have a specific gravity greater than pure water ( water = 1.0 ) due to the presence of solutes .
Laboratories can now measure urine osmolarity directly , which is a more accurate indicator of urinary solutes than specific gravity .
Remember that osmolarity is the number of osmoles or milliosmoles per liter of fluid ( mOsmol/L ) .
Urine osmolarity ranges from a low of 50–100 mOsmol/L to as high as 1200 mOsmol/L H O .
Cells are not normally found in the urine .
The presence of leukocytes may indicate a urinary tract infection .
Leukocyte esterase is released by leukocytes ; if detected in the urine , it can be taken as indirect evidence of a urinary tract infection ( UTI ) .
Protein does not normally leave the glomerular capillaries , so only trace amounts of protein should be found in the urine , approximately 10 mg/100 mL in a random sample .
If excessive protein is detected in the urine , it usually means that the glomerulus is damaged and is allowing protein to “ leak ” into the filtrate .
Ketones are byproducts of fat metabolism .
Finding ketones in the urine suggests that the body is using fat as an energy source in preference to glucose .
Instead , the cells are forced to use fat as their energy source , and fat consumed at such a level produces excessive ketones as byproducts .
These excess ketones will appear in the urine .
Ketones may also appear if there is a severe deficiency of proteins or carbohydrates in the diet . )
occur normally in the urine .
Gram-negative bacteria metabolize nitrate into nitrite ( NO Nitrates ( NO in the urine is indirect evidence of infection .
There should be no blood found in the urine .
It may sometimes appear in urine samples as a result of menstrual contamination , but this is not an abnormal condition .
Now that you understand what the normal characteristics of urine are , the next section will introduce you to how you store and dispose of this waste product and how you make it .
Urine is a fluid of variable composition that requires specialized structures to remove it from the body safely and efficiently .
Blood is filtered , and the filtrate is transformed into urine at a relatively constant rate throughout the day .
This processed liquid is stored until a convenient time for excretion .
All structures involved in the transport and storage of the urine are large enough to be visible to the naked eye .
This transport and storage system not only stores the waste , but it protects the tissues from damage due to the wide range of pH and osmolarity of the urine , prevents infection by foreign organisms , and for the male , provides reproductive functions .
The urethra transports urine from the bladder to the outside of the body for disposal .
The urethra is the only urologic organ that shows any significant anatomic difference between males and females ; all other urine transport structures are identical ( Figure 25.3 ) .
The urethra tracks posterior and inferior to the pubic symphysis ( see Figure 25.3a ) .
In both males and females , the proximal urethra is lined by transitional epithelium , whereas the terminal portion is a nonkeratinized , stratified squamous epithelium .
In the male , pseudostratified columnar epithelium lines the urethra between these two cell types .
Voiding is regulated by an involuntary autonomic nervous system-controlled internal urinary sphincter , consisting of smooth muscle and voluntary skeletal muscle that forms the external urinary sphincter below it .
The external urethral orifice is embedded in the anterior vaginal wall inferior to the clitoris , superior to the vaginal opening ( introitus ) , and medial to the labia minora .
Its short length , about 4 cm , is less of a barrier to fecal bacteria than the longer male urethra and the best explanation for the greater incidence of UTI in women .
Voluntary control of the external urethral sphincter is a function of the pudendal nerve .
It arises in the sacral region of the spinal cord , traveling via the S2–S4 nerves of the sacral plexus .
The male urethra passes through the prostate gland immediately inferior to the bladder before passing below the pubic symphysis ( see Figure 25.3b ) .
The length of the male urethra varies between men but averages 20 cm in length .
It is divided into four regions : the preprostatic urethra , the prostatic urethra , the membranous urethra , and the spongy or penile urethra .
The preprostatic urethra is very short and incorporated into the bladder wall .
The prostatic urethra passes through the prostate gland .
During sexual intercourse , it receives sperm via the ejaculatory ducts and secretions from the seminal vesicles .
Paired Cowper ’ s glands ( bulbourethral glands ) produce and secrete mucus into the urethra to buffer urethral pH during sexual stimulation .
The mucus neutralizes the usually acidic environment and lubricates the urethra , decreasing the resistance to ejaculation .
The membranous urethra passes through the deep muscles of the perineum , where it is invested by the overlying urethral sphincters .
The spongy urethra exits at the tip ( external urethral orifice ) of the penis after passing through the corpus spongiosum .
Mucous glands are found along much of the length of the urethra and protect the urethra from extremes of urine pH .
Innervation is the same in both males and females .
The urinary bladder collects urine from both ureters ( Figure 25.4 ) .
The bladder lies anterior to the uterus in females , posterior to the pubic bone and anterior to the rectum .
During late pregnancy , its capacity is reduced due to compression by the enlarging uterus , resulting in increased frequency of urination .
In males , the anatomy is similar , minus the uterus , and with the addition of the prostate inferior to the bladder .
The bladder is partially retroperitoneal ( outside the peritoneal cavity ) with its peritoneal-covered “ dome ” projecting into the abdomen when the bladder is distended with urine .
at http : //141.214.65.171/Histology/Urinary % 20System/ View the University 212N_HISTO_40X.svs/view.apml ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/bladderMG ) to explore the tissue sample in greater detail .
of Michigan WebScope The bladder is a highly distensible organ comprised of irregular crisscrossing bands of smooth muscle collectively called the detrusor muscle .
The interior surface is made of transitional cellular epithelium that is structurally suited for the large volume fluctuations of the bladder .
When empty , it resembles columnar epithelia , but when stretched , it “ transitions ” ( hence the name ) to a squamous appearance ( see Figure 25.4 ) .
Volumes in adults can range from nearly zero to 500–600 mL .
The detrusor muscle contracts with significant force in the young .
The bladder ’ s strength diminishes with age , but voluntary contractions of abdominal skeletal muscles can increase intra-abdominal pressure to promote more forceful bladder emptying .
Such voluntary contraction is also used in forceful defecation and childbirth .
Micturition is a less-often used , but proper term for urination or voiding .
It results from an interplay of involuntary and voluntary actions by the internal and external urethral sphincters .
When bladder volume reaches about 150 mL , an urge to void is sensed but is easily overridden .
Voluntary control of urination relies on consciously preventing relaxation of the external urethral sphincter to maintain urinary continence .
As the bladder fills , subsequent urges become harder to ignore .
Ultimately , voluntary constraint fails with resulting incontinence , which will occur as bladder volume approaches 300 to 400 mL .
Normal micturition is a result of stretch receptors in the bladder wall that transmit nerve impulses to the sacral region of the spinal cord to generate a spinal reflex .
The resulting parasympathetic neural outflow causes contraction of the detrusor muscle and relaxation of the involuntary internal urethral sphincter .
At the same time , the spinal cord inhibits somatic motor neurons , resulting in the relaxation of the skeletal muscle of the external urethral sphincter .
The micturition reflex is active in infants but with maturity , children learn to override the reflex by asserting external sphincter control , thereby delaying voiding ( potty training ) .
This reflex may be preserved even in the face of spinal cord injury that results in paraplegia or quadriplegia .
However , relaxation of the external sphincter may not be possible in all cases , and therefore , periodic catheterization may be necessary for bladder emptying .
Nerves involved in the control of urination include the hypogastric , pelvic , and pudendal ( Figure 25.5 ) .
Voluntary micturition requires an intact spinal cord and functional pudendal nerve arising from the sacral micturition center .
Since the external urinary sphincter is voluntary skeletal muscle , actions by cholinergic neurons maintain contraction ( and thereby continence ) during filling of the bladder .
At the same time , sympathetic nervous activity via the hypogastric nerves suppresses contraction of the detrusor muscle .
With further bladder stretch , afferent signals traveling over sacral pelvic nerves activate parasympathetic neurons .
This activates efferent neurons to release acetylcholine at the neuromuscular junctions , producing detrusor contraction and bladder emptying .
The kidneys and ureters are completely retroperitoneal , and the bladder has a peritoneal covering only over the dome .
As urine is formed , it drains into the calyces of the kidney , which merge to form the funnel-shaped renal pelvis in the hilum of each kidney .
The renal pelvis narrows to become the ureter of each kidney .
As urine passes through the ureter , it does not passively drain into the bladder but rather is propelled by waves of peristalsis .
As the ureters enter the pelvis , they sweep laterally , hugging the pelvic walls .
As they approach the bladder , they turn medially and pierce the bladder wall obliquely .
This is important because it creates an one-way valve ( a physiological sphincter rather than an anatomical sphincter ) that allows urine into the bladder but prevents reflux of urine from the bladder back into the ureter .
Children born lacking this oblique course of the ureter through the bladder wall are susceptible to “ vesicoureteral reflux , ” which dramatically increases their risk of serious UTI .
Pregnancy also increases the likelihood of reflux and UTI .
The ureters are approximately 30 cm long .
The inner mucosa is lined with transitional epithelium ( Figure 25.6 ) and scattered goblet cells that secrete protective mucus .
The muscular layer of the ureter consists of longitudinal and circular smooth muscles that create the peristaltic contractions to move the urine into the bladder without the aid of gravity .
Finally , a loose adventitial layer composed of collagen and fat anchors the ureters between the parietal peritoneum and the posterior abdominal wall .
They are roughly the size of your fist , and the male kidney is typically a bit larger than the female kidney .
The kidneys are well vascularized , receiving about 25 percent of the cardiac output at rest .
There have never been sufficient kidney donations to provide a kidney to each person needing one .
Watch this video ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/TED ) to learn about the TED ( Technology , Entertainment , Design ) Conference held in March 2011 .
The left kidney is located at about the T12 to L3 vertebrae , whereas the right is lower due to slight displacement by the liver .
Upper portions of the kidneys are somewhat protected by the eleventh and twelfth ribs ( Figure 25.7 ) .
Each kidney weighs about 125–175 g in males and 115–155 g in females .
They are about 11–14 cm in length , 6 cm wide , and 4 cm thick , and are directly covered by a fibrous capsule composed of dense , irregular connective tissue that helps to hold their shape and protect them .
This capsule is covered by a shock-absorbing layer of adipose tissue called the renal fat pad , which in turn is encompassed by a tough renal fascia .
The fascia and , to a lesser extent , the overlying peritoneum serve to firmly anchor the kidneys to the posterior abdominal wall in a retroperitoneal position .
On the superior aspect of each kidney is the adrenal gland .
The adrenal cortex directly influences renal function through the production of the hormone aldosterone to stimulate sodium reabsorption .
A frontal section through the kidney reveals an outer region called the renal cortex and an inner region called the medulla ( Figure 25.8 ) .
The renal columns are connective tissue extensions that radiate downward from the cortex through the medulla to separate the most characteristic features of the medulla , the renal pyramids and renal papillae .
The papillae are bundles of collecting ducts that transport urine made by nephrons to the calyces of the kidney for excretion .
The renal columns also serve to divide the kidney into 6–8 lobes and provide a supportive framework for vessels that enter and exit the cortex .
The pyramids and renal columns taken together constitute the kidney lobes .
The renal hilum is the entry and exit site for structures servicing the kidneys : vessels , nerves , lymphatics , and ureters .
The medial-facing hila are tucked into the sweeping convex outline of the cortex .
Emerging from the hilum is the renal pelvis , which is formed from the major and minor calyxes in the kidney .
The smooth muscle in the renal pelvis funnels urine via peristalsis into the ureter .
The renal arteries form directly from the descending aorta , whereas the renal veins return cleansed blood directly to the inferior vena cava .
The artery , vein , and renal pelvis are arranged in an anterior-to-posterior order .
The renal artery first divides into segmental arteries , followed by further branching to form interlobar arteries that pass through the renal columns to reach the cortex ( Figure 25.9 ) .
The interlobar arteries , in turn , branch into arcuate arteries , cortical radiate arteries , and then into afferent arterioles .
The afferent arterioles service about 1.3 million nephrons in each kidney .
Nephrons are the “ functional units ” of the kidney ; they cleanse the blood and balance the constituents of the circulation .
The afferent arterioles form a tuft of high-pressure capillaries about 200 µm in diameter , the glomerulus .
The rest of the nephron consists of a continuous sophisticated tubule whose proximal end surrounds the glomerulus in an intimate embrace—this is Bowman ’ s capsule .
The glomerulus and Bowman ’ s capsule together form the renal corpuscle .
As mentioned earlier , these glomerular capillaries filter the blood based on particle size .
After passing through the renal corpuscle , the capillaries form a second arteriole , the efferent arteriole ( Figure 25.10 ) .
These will next form a capillary network around the more distal portions of the nephron tubule , the peritubular capillaries and vasa recta , before returning to the venous system .
As the glomerular filtrate progresses through the nephron , these capillary networks recover most of the solutes and water , and return them to the circulation .
Since a capillary bed ( the glomerulus ) drains into a vessel that in turn forms a second capillary bed , the definition of a portal system is met .
This is the only portal system in which an arteriole is found between the first and second capillary beds .
( Portal systems also link the hypothalamus to the anterior pituitary , and the blood vessels of the digestive viscera to the liver . )
Visit this link ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/bloodflow5 ) to view an interactive tutorial of the flow of blood through the kidney .
In a dissected kidney , it is easy to identify the cortex ; it appears lighter in color compared to the rest of the kidney .
All of the renal corpuscles as well as both the proximal convoluted tubules ( PCTs ) and distal convoluted tubules are found here .
Some nephrons have a short loop of Henle that does not dip beyond the cortex .
These nephrons are called cortical nephrons .
About 15 percent of nephrons have long loops of Henle that extend deep into the medulla and are called juxtamedullary nephrons .
Only a light or electron microscope can reveal these structures .
Even then , serial sections and computer reconstruction are necessary to give us a comprehensive view of the functional anatomy of the nephron and its associated blood vessels .
Nephrons take a simple filtrate of the blood and modify it into urine .
Many changes take place in the different parts of the nephron before urine is created for disposal .
The term forming urine will be used hereafter to describe the filtrate as it is modified into true urine .
The principle task of the nephron population is to balance the plasma to homeostatic set points and excrete potential toxins in the urine .
They do this by accomplishing three principle functions—filtration , reabsorption , and secretion .
As discussed earlier , the renal corpuscle consists of a tuft of capillaries called the glomerulus that is largely surrounded by Bowman ’ s ( glomerular ) capsule .
The glomerulus is a high-pressure capillary bed between afferent and efferent arterioles .
Bowman ’ s capsule surrounds the glomerulus to form a lumen , and captures and directs this filtrate to the PCT .
The outermost part of Bowman ’ s capsule , the parietal layer , is a simple squamous epithelium .
It transitions onto the glomerular capillaries in an intimate embrace to form the visceral layer of the capsule .
Here , the cells are not squamous , but uniquely shaped cells ( podocytes ) extending finger-like arms ( pedicels ) to cover the glomerular capillaries ( Figure 25.11 ) .
These projections interdigitate to form filtration slits , leaving small gaps between the digits to form a sieve .
As blood passes through the glomerulus , 10 to 20 percent of the plasma filters between these sieve-like fingers to be captured by Bowman ’ s capsule and funneled to the PCT .
Where the fenestrae ( windows ) in the glomerular capillaries match the spaces between the podocyte “ fingers , ” the only thing separating the capillary lumen and the lumen of Bowman ’ s capsule is their shared basement membrane ( Figure 25.12 ) .
These three features comprise what is known as the filtration membrane .
This membrane permits very rapid movement of filtrate from capillary to capsule though pores that are only 70 nm in diameter .
The fenestrations prevent filtration of blood cells or large proteins , but allow most other constituents through .
These substances cross readily if they are less than 4 nm in size and most pass freely up to 8 nm in size .
An additional factor affecting the ability of substances to cross this barrier is their electric charge .
The proteins associated with these pores are negatively charged , so they tend to repel negatively charged substances and allow positively charged substances to pass more readily .
The basement membrane prevents filtration of medium-to-large proteins such as globulins .
There are also mesangial cells in the filtration membrane that can contract to help regulate the rate of filtration of the glomerulus .
Overall , filtration is regulated by fenestrations in capillary endothelial cells , podocytes with filtration slits , membrane charge , and the basement membrane between capillary cells .
The result is the creation of a filtrate that does not contain cells or large proteins , and has a slight predominance of positively charged substances .
Lying just outside Bowman ’ s capsule and the glomerulus is the juxtaglomerular apparatus ( JGA ) ( Figure 25.13 ) .
At the juncture where the afferent and efferent arterioles enter and leave Bowman ’ s capsule , the initial part of the distal convoluted tubule ( DCT ) comes into direct contact with the arterioles .
The wall of the DCT at that point forms a part of the JGA known as the macula densa .
This cluster of cuboidal epithelial cells monitors the fluid composition of fluid flowing through the DCT .
In response to the concentration of Na in the fluid flowing past them , these cells release paracrine signals .
They also have a single , nonmotile cilium that responds to the rate of fluid movement in the tubule .
The paracrine signals released in response to changes in flow rate and Na concentration are adenosine triphosphate ( ATP ) and adenosine .
A second cell type in this apparatus is the juxtaglomerular cell .
This is a modified , smooth muscle cell lining the afferent arteriole that can contract or relax in response to ATP or adenosine released by the macula densa .
Such contraction and relaxation regulate blood flow to the glomerulus .
If the osmolarity of the filtrate is too high ( hyperosmotic ) , the juxtaglomerular cells will contract , decreasing the glomerular filtration rate ( GFR ) so less plasma is filtered , leading to less urine formation and greater retention of fluid .
This will ultimately decrease blood osmolarity toward the physiologic norm .
If the osmolarity of the filtrate is too low , the juxtaglomerular cells will relax , increasing the GFR and enhancing the loss of water to the urine , causing blood osmolarity to rise .
In other words , when osmolarity goes up , filtration and urine formation decrease and water is retained .
When osmolarity goes down , filtration and urine formation increase and water is lost by way of the urine .
The net result of these opposing actions is to keep the rate of filtration relatively constant .
A second function of the macula densa cells is to regulate renin release from the juxtaglomerular cells of the afferent arteriole ( Figure 25.14 ) .
Active renin is a protein comprised of 304 amino acids that cleaves several amino acids from angiotensinogen to produce angiotensin I .
Angiotensin I is not biologically active until converted to angiotensin II by angiotensin-converting enzyme ( ACE ) from the lungs .
Angiotensin II is a systemic vasoconstrictor that helps to regulate blood pressure by increasing it .
Angiotensin II also stimulates the release of the steroid hormone aldosterone from the adrenal cortex .
Aldosterone stimulates Na reabsorption by the kidney , which also results in water retention and increased blood pressure .
Filtered fluid collected by Bowman ’ s capsule enters into the PCT .
It is called convoluted due to its tortuous path .
Simple cuboidal cells form this tubule with prominent microvilli on the luminal surface , forming a brush border .
These microvilli create a large surface area to maximize the absorption and secretion of solutes ( Na , Cl , glucose , etc .
) , the most essential function of this portion of the nephron .
These cells actively transport ions across their membranes , so they possess a high concentration of mitochondria in order to produce sufficient ATP .
The descending and ascending portions of the loop of Henle ( sometimes referred to as the nephron loop ) are , of course , just continuations of the same tubule .
They run adjacent and parallel to each other after having made a hairpin turn at the deepest point of their descent .
The descending loop of Henle consists of an initial short , thick portion and long , thin portion , whereas the ascending loop consists of an initial short , thin portion followed by a long , thick portion .
The descending thick portion consists of simple cuboidal epithelium similar to that of the PCT .
The descending and ascending thin portions consists of simple squamous epithelium .
As you will see later , these are important differences , since different portions of the loop have different permeabilities for solutes and water .
The ascending thick portion consists of simple cuboidal epithelium similar to the DCT .
The DCT , like the PCT , is very tortuous and formed by simple cuboidal epithelium , but it is shorter than the PCT .
These cells are not as active as those in the PCT ; thus , there are fewer microvilli on the apical surface .
However , these cells must also pump ions against their concentration gradient , so you will find of large numbers of mitochondria , although fewer than in the PCT .
The collecting ducts are continuous with the nephron but not technically part of it .
In fact , each duct collects filtrate from several nephrons for final modification .
Collecting ducts merge as they descend deeper in the medulla to form about 30 terminal ducts , which empty at a papilla .
They are lined with simple squamous epithelium with receptors for ADH .
When stimulated by ADH , these cells will insert aquaporin channel proteins into their membranes , which as their name suggests , allow water to pass from the duct lumen through the cells and into the interstitial spaces to be recovered by the vasa recta .
This process allows for the recovery of large amounts of water from the filtrate back into the blood .
In the absence of ADH , these channels are not inserted , resulting in the excretion of water in the form of dilute urine .
Most , if not all , cells of the body contain aquaporin molecules , whose channels are so small that only water can pass .
At least 10 types of aquaporins are known in humans , and six of those are found in the kidney .
The function of all aquaporins is to allow the movement of water across the lipid-rich , hydrophobic cell membrane ( Figure 25.15 ) .
You will discover that different parts of the nephron utilize specific processes to produce urine : filtration , reabsorption , and secretion .
You will learn how each of these processes works and where they occur along the nephron and collecting ducts .
The physiologic goal is to modify the composition of the plasma and , in doing so , produce the waste product urine .
Failure of the renal anatomy and/or physiology can lead suddenly or gradually to renal failure .
In this event , a number of symptoms , signs , or laboratory findings point to the diagnosis ( Table 25.3 ) .
The volume of filtrate formed by both kidneys per minute is termed the glomerular filtration rate ( GFR ) .
The heart pumps about 5 L blood per min under resting conditions .
Approximately 20 percent or one liter enters the kidneys to be filtered .
On average , this liter results in the production of about 125 mL/min filtrate produced in men ( range of 90 to 140 mL/min ) and 105 mL/min filtrate produced in women ( range of 80 to 125 mL/min ) .
This amount equates to a volume of about 180 L/day in men and 150 L/day in women .
Ninety-nine percent of this filtrate is returned to the circulation by reabsorption so that only about 1–2 liters of urine are produced per day ( Table 25.4 ) .
GFR is influenced by the hydrostatic pressure and colloid osmotic pressure on either side of the capillary membrane of the glomerulus .
Recall that filtration occurs as pressure forces fluid and solutes through a semipermeable barrier with the solute movement constrained by particle size .
Hydrostatic pressure is the pressure produced by a fluid against a surface .
If you have a fluid on both sides of a barrier , both fluids exert a pressure in opposing directions .
Net fluid movement will be in the direction of the lower pressure .
Osmosis is the movement of solvent ( water ) across a membrane that is impermeable to a solute in the solution .
This creates a pressure , osmotic pressure , which will exist until the solute concentration is the same on both sides of a semipermeable membrane .
As long as the concentration differs , water will move .
Glomerular filtration occurs when glomerular hydrostatic pressure exceeds the luminal hydrostatic pressure of Bowman ’ s capsule .
There is also an opposing force , the osmotic pressure , which is typically higher in the glomerular capillary .
To understand why this is so , look more closely at the microenvironment on either side of the filtration membrane .
You will find osmotic pressure exerted by the solutes inside the lumen of the capillary as well as inside of Bowman ’ s capsule .
Since the filtration membrane limits the size of particles crossing the membrane , the osmotic pressure inside the glomerular capillary is higher than the osmotic pressure in Bowman ’ s capsule .
Recall that cells and the medium-to-large proteins can not pass between the podocyte processes or through the fenestrations of the capillary endothelial cells .
This means that red and white blood cells , platelets , albumins , and other proteins too large to pass through the filter remain in the capillary , creating an average colloid osmotic pressure of 30 mm Hg within the capillary .
The absence of proteins in Bowman ’ s space ( the lumen within Bowman ’ s capsule ) results in an osmotic pressure near zero .
Thus , the only pressure moving fluid across the capillary wall into the lumen of Bowman ’ s space is hydrostatic pressure .
Hydrostatic ( fluid ) pressure is sufficient to push water through the membrane despite the osmotic pressure working against it .
The sum of all of the influences , both osmotic and hydrostatic , results in a net filtration pressure ( NFP ) of about 10 mm Hg ( Figure 25.16 ) .
A proper concentration of solutes in the blood is important in maintaining osmotic pressure both in the glomerulus and systemically .
There are disorders in which too much protein passes through the filtration slits into the kidney filtrate .
This excess protein in the filtrate leads to a deficiency of circulating plasma proteins .
In turn , the presence of protein in the urine increases its osmolarity ; this holds more water in the filtrate and results in an increase in urine volume .
Because there is less circulating protein , principally albumin , the osmotic pressure of the blood falls .
Less osmotic pressure pulling water into the capillaries tips the balance towards hydrostatic pressure , which tends to push it out of the capillaries .
The net effect is that water is lost from the circulation to interstitial tissues and cells .
This “ plumps up ” the tissues and cells , a condition termed systemic edema .
NFP determines filtration rates through the kidney .
Intuitively , you should realize that minor changes in osmolarity of the blood or changes in capillary blood pressure result in major changes in the amount of filtrate formed at any given point in time .
The kidney is able to cope with a wide range of blood pressures .
In large part , this is due to the autoregulatory nature of smooth muscle .
When you stretch it , it contracts .
Thus , when blood pressure goes up , smooth muscle in the afferent capillaries contracts to limit any increase in blood flow and filtration rate .
When blood pressure drops , the same capillaries relax to maintain blood flow and filtration rate .
The net result is a relatively steady flow of blood into the glomerulus and a relatively steady filtration rate in spite of significant systemic blood pressure changes .
Mean arterial blood pressure is calculated by adding 1/3 of the difference between the systolic and diastolic pressures to the diastolic pressure .
Therefore , if the blood pressure is 110/80 , the difference between systolic and diastolic pressure is 30 .
One third of this is 10 , and when you add this to the diastolic pressure of 80 , you arrive at a calculated mean arterial pressure of 90 mm Hg .
Therefore , if you use mean arterial pressure for the GBHP in the formula for calculating NFP , you can determine that as long as mean arterial pressure is above approximately 60 mm Hg , the pressure will be adequate to maintain glomerular filtration .
Blood pressures below this level will impair renal function and cause systemic disorders that are severe enough to threaten survival .
This condition is called shock .
Determination of the GFR is one of the tools used to assess the kidney ’ s excretory function .
This is more than just an academic exercise .
Since many drugs are excreted in the urine , a decline in renal function can lead to toxic accumulations .
Additionally , administration of appropriate drug dosages for those drugs primarily excreted by the kidney requires an accurate assessment of GFR .
GFR can be estimated closely by intravenous administration of inulin .
Inulin is a plant polysaccharide that is neither reabsorbed nor secreted by the kidney .
Its appearance in the urine is directly proportional to the rate at which it is filtered by the renal corpuscle .
However , since measuring inulin clearance is cumbersome in the clinical setting , most often , the GFR is estimated by measuring naturally occurring creatinine , a protein-derived molecule produced by muscle metabolism that is not reabsorbed and only slightly secreted by the nephron .
That recovery occurs in the PCT , loop of Henle , DCT , and the collecting ducts ( Table 25.5 and Figure 25.17 ) .
Various portions of the nephron differ in their capacity to reabsorb water and specific solutes .
While much of the reabsorption and secretion occur passively based on concentration gradients , the amount of water that is reabsorbed or lost is tightly regulated .
This control is exerted directly by ADH and aldosterone , and indirectly by renin .
Most water is recovered in the PCT , loop of Henle , and DCT .
About 10 percent ( about 18 L ) reaches the collecting ducts .
The collecting ducts , under the influence of ADH , can recover almost all of the water passing through them , in cases of dehydration , or almost none of the water , in cases of over-hydration .
Mechanisms by which substances move across membranes for reabsorption or secretion include active transport , diffusion , facilitated diffusion , secondary active transport , and osmosis .
These were discussed in an earlier chapter , and you may wish to review them .
Active transport utilizes energy , usually the energy found in a phosphate bond of ATP , to move a substance across a membrane from a low to a high concentration .
It is very specific and must have an appropriately shaped receptor for the substance to be transported .
An example would be the active transport of Na out of a cell and K into a cell by the Na /K pump .
Both ions are moved in opposite directions from a lower to a higher concentration .
Simple diffusion moves a substance from a higher to a lower concentration down its concentration gradient .
It requires no energy and only needs to be soluble .
Facilitated diffusion is similar to diffusion in that it moves a substance down its concentration gradient .
The difference is that it requires specific membrane receptors or channel proteins for movement .
The movement of glucose and , in certain situations , Na ions , is an example of facilitated diffusion .
In some cases of mediated transport , two different substances share the same channel protein port ; these mechanisms are described by the terms symport and antiport .
Symport mechanisms move two or more substances in the same direction at the same time , whereas antiport mechanisms move two or more substances in opposite directions across the cell membrane .
Both mechanisms may utilize concentration gradients maintained by ATP pumps .
As described previously , when active transport powers the transport of another substance in this way , it is called “ secondary active transport. ” Glucose reabsorption in the kidneys is by secondary active transport .
Na /K ATPases on the basal membrane of a tubular cell constantly pump Na out of the cell , maintaining a strong electrochemical gradient for Na to move into the cell from the tubular lumen .
On the luminal ( apical ) surface , a Na /glucose symport protein assists both Na+ and glucose movement into the cell .
The cotransporter moves glucose into the cell against its concentration gradient as Na moves down the electrochemical gradient created by the basal membranes Na /K ATPases .
The glucose molecule then diffuses across the basal membrane by facilitated diffusion into the interstitial space and from there into peritubular capillaries .
Most of the Ca , Na , glucose , and amino acids must be reabsorbed by the nephron to maintain homeostatic plasma concentrations .
Other substances , such as urea , K , ammonia ( NH , creatinine , and some drugs are secreted into the filtrate as waste products .
Acid–base balance is maintained through actions of the lungs and kidneys : The lungs rid the body of H , whereas the kidneys secrete or reabsorb H and HCO ( Table 25.6 ) .
In the case of urea , about 50 percent is passively reabsorbed by the PCT .
More is recovered by in the collecting ducts as needed .
ADH induces the insertion of urea transporters and aquaporin channel proteins .
The renal corpuscle filters the blood to create a filtrate that differs from blood mainly in the absence of cells and large proteins .
From this point to the ends of the collecting ducts , the filtrate or forming urine is undergoing modification through secretion and reabsorption before true urine is produced .
The first point at which the forming urine is modified is in the PCT .
Here , some substances are reabsorbed , whereas others are secreted .
Note the use of the term “ reabsorbed. ” All of these substances were “ absorbed ” in the digestive tract—99 percent of the water and most of the solutes filtered by the nephron must be reabsorbed .
Water and substances that are reabsorbed are returned to the circulation by the peritubular and vasa recta capillaries .
It is important to understand the difference between the glomerulus and the peritubular and vasa recta capillaries .
The glomerulus has a relatively high pressure inside its capillaries and can sustain this by dilating the afferent arteriole while constricting the efferent arteriole .
This assures adequate filtration pressure even as the systemic blood pressure varies .
Movement of water into the peritubular capillaries and vasa recta will be influenced primarily by osmolarity and concentration gradients .
Sodium is actively pumped out of the PCT into the interstitial spaces between cells and diffuses down its concentration gradient into the peritubular capillary .
As it does so , water will follow passively to maintain an isotonic fluid environment inside the capillary .
This is called obligatory water reabsorption , because water is “ obliged ” to follow the Na ( Figure 25.18 ) .
More substances move across the membranes of the PCT than any other portion of the nephron .
Many of these substances ( amino acids and glucose ) use symport mechanisms for transport along with Na .
Antiport , active transport , diffusion , and facilitated diffusion are additional mechanisms by which substances are moved from one side of a membrane to the other .
Recall that cells have two surfaces : apical and basal .
The apical surface is the one facing the lumen or open space of a cavity or tube , in this case , the inside of the PCT .
The basal surface of the cell faces the connective tissue base to which the cell attaches ( basement membrane ) or the cell membrane closer to the basement membrane if there is a stratified layer of cells .
In the PCT , there is a single layer of simple cuboidal endothelial cells against the basement membrane .
The numbers and particular types of pumps and channels vary between the apical and basilar surfaces .
A few of the substances that are transported with Na ( symport mechanism ) on the apical membrane include Cl , Ca , amino acids , glucose , and .
Sodium is actively exchanged for K using ATP on the basal membrane .
Most of the substances transported by a symport mechanism on the apical membrane are transported by facilitated diffusion on the basal membrane .
At least three ions , K , Ca , and Mg , diffuse laterally between adjacent cell membranes ( transcellular ) .
About 67 percent of the water , Na , and K entering the nephron is reabsorbed in the PCT and returned to the circulation .
Almost 100 percent of glucose , amino acids , and other organic substances such as vitamins are normally recovered here .
Some glucose may appear in the urine if circulating glucose levels are high enough that all the glucose transporters in the PCT are saturated , so that their capacity to move glucose is exceeded ( transport maximum , or T ) .
In men , the maximum amount of glucose that can be recovered is about 375 mg/min , whereas in women , it is about 300 mg/min .
This recovery rate translates to an arterial concentration of about 200 mg/dL .
Though an exceptionally high sugar intake might cause sugar to appear briefly in the urine , the appearance of glycosuria usually points to type I or II diabetes mellitus .
The transport of are also recovered in the PCT .
glucose from the lumen of the PCT to the interstitial space is similar to the way it is absorbed by the small intestine .
Both glucose and Na bind simultaneously to the same symport proteins on the apical surface of the cell to be transported in the same direction , toward the interstitial space .
Sodium moves down its electrochemical and concentration gradient into the cell and takes glucose with it .
Na is then actively pumped out of the cell at the basal surface of the cell into the interstitial space .
Glucose leaves the cell to enter the interstitial space by facilitated diffusion .
The energy to move glucose comes from the Na /K ATPase that pumps Na out of the cell on the basal surface .
Fifty percent of Cl and variable quantities of Ca , Mg , and ) is vital to the maintenance of acid–base balance , since it is a very powerful and fast-acting Recovery of bicarbonate ( HCO buffer .
An important enzyme is used to catalyze this mechanism : carbonic anhydrase ( CA ) .
This same enzyme and reaction is used in red blood cells in the transportation of CO , in the stomach to produce hydrochloric acid , and in the pancreas to buffer acidic chyme from the stomach .
In the kidney , most of the CA is located within the cell , but to produce HCO a small amount is bound to the brush border of the membrane on the apical surface of the cell .
In the lumen of the PCT , combines with hydrogen ions to form carbonic acid ( H CO ) .
This is enzymatically catalyzed into CO and water , HCO which diffuse across the apical membrane into the cell .
Water can move osmotically across the lipid bilayer membrane due to the presence of aquaporin water channels .
Inside the cell , the reverse reaction occurs to produce bicarbonate ions ) .
These bicarbonate ions are cotransported with Na across the basal membrane to the interstitial space around the ( HCO PCT ( Figure 25.19 ) .
At the same time this is occurring , a Na /H antiporter excretes H into the lumen , while it recovers Na .
Note how the hydrogen ion is recycled so that bicarbonate can be recovered .
Also , note that a Na gradient is created by the Na /K pump .
The significant recovery of solutes from the PCT lumen to the interstitial space creates an osmotic gradient that promotes water recovery .
As noted before , water moves through channels created by the aquaporin proteins .
These proteins are found in all cells in varying amounts and help regulate water movement across membranes and through cells by creating a passageway across the hydrophobic lipid bilayer membrane .
Changing the number of aquaporin proteins in membranes of the collecting ducts also helps to regulate the osmolarity of the blood .
The movement of many positively charged ions also creates an electrochemical gradient .
This charge promotes the movement of negative ions toward the interstitial spaces and the movement of positive ions toward the lumen .
The loop of Henle consists of two sections : thick and thin descending and thin and thick ascending sections .
The loops of cortical nephrons do not extend into the renal medulla very far , if at all .
Juxtamedullary nephrons have loops that extend variable distances , some very deep into the medulla .
The descending and ascending portions of the loop are highly specialized to enable recovery of much of the Na and water that were filtered by the glomerulus .
As the forming urine moves through the loop , the osmolarity will change from isosmotic with blood ( about 278–300 mOsmol/kg ) to both a very hypertonic solution of about 1200 mOsmol/kg and a very hypotonic solution of about 100 mOsmol/kg .
These changes are accomplished by osmosis in the descending limb and active transport in the ascending limb .
Solutes and water recovered from these loops are returned to the circulation by way of the vasa recta .
The majority of the descending loop is comprised of simple squamous epithelial cells ; to simplify the function of the loop , this discussion focuses on these cells .
These membranes have permanent aquaporin channel proteins that allow unrestricted movement of water from the descending loop into the surrounding interstitium as osmolarity increases from about 300 mOsmol/kg to about 1200 mOsmol/kg .
This increase results in reabsorption of up to 15 percent of the water entering the nephron .
Modest amounts of urea , Na , and other ions are also recovered here .
Most of the solutes that were filtered in the glomerulus have now been recovered along with a majority of water , about 82 percent .
As the forming urine enters the ascending loop , major adjustments will be made to the concentration of solutes to create what you perceive as urine .
The ascending loop is made of very short thin and longer thick portions .
Once again , to simplify the function , this section only considers the thick portion .
The thick portion is lined with simple cuboidal epithelium without a brush border .
It is completely impermeable to water due to the absence of aquaporin proteins , but ions , mainly Na and CL , are actively reabsorbed by a cotransport system .
This has two significant effects : Removal of NaCl while retaining water leads to a hypoosomotic filtrate by the time it reaches the DCT ; pumping NaCl into the interstitial space contributes to the hyperosmotic environment in the kidney medulla .
The Na K ATPase pumps in the basal membrane create an electrochemical gradient , allowing reabsorption of Cl by Na /Cl symporters in the apical membrane .
At the same time that Na is actively pumped from the basal side of the cell into the interstitial fluid , Cl follows the Na from the lumen into the interstitial fluid by a paracellular route between cells through leaky tight junctions .
These are found between cells of the ascending loop , where they allow certain solutes to move according to their concentration gradient .
Most of the K that enters the cell via symporters returns to the lumen ( down its concentration gradient ) through leaky channels in the apical membrane .
Note the environment now created in the interstitial space : With the “ back door exiting ” K , there is one Na and two Cl ions left in the interstitium surrounding the ascending loop .
Therefore , in comparison to the lumen of the loop , the interstitial space is now a negatively charged environment .
This negative charge attracts cations ( Na , K , Ca , and Mg ) from the lumen via a paracellular route to the interstitial space and vasa recta .
The structure of the loop of Henle and associated vasa recta create a countercurrent multiplier system ( Figure 25.20 ) .
The countercurrent term comes from the fact that the descending and ascending loops are next to each other and their fluid flows in opposite directions ( countercurrent ) .
The multiplier term is due to the action of solute pumps that increase ( multiply ) the concentrations of urea and Na deep in the medulla .
As discussed above , the ascending loop actively reabsorbs NaCl out of the forming urine into the interstitial spaces .
In addition , collecting ducts have urea pumps that actively pump urea into the interstitial spaces .
This results in the recovery of NaCl to the circulation via the vasa recta and creates a high osmolar environment in the depths of the medulla .
Ammonia ( NH ) is a toxic byproduct of protein metabolism .
It is formed as amino acids are deaminated by liver hepatocytes .
That means that the amine group , NH , is removed from amino acids as they are broken down .
Most of the resulting ammonia is converted into urea by liver hepatocytes .
Urea is not only less toxic but is utilized to aid in the recovery of water by the loop of Henle and collecting ducts .
Thus , the movement of Na and urea into the interstitial spaces by these mechanisms creates the hyperosmotic environment of the medulla .
The net result of this countercurrent multiplier system is to recover both water and Na in the circulation .
The amino acid glutamine can be deaminated by the kidney .
As NH from the amino acid is converted into NH and pumped into the lumen of the PCT , Na and HCO are excreted into the interstitial fluid of the renal pyramid via a symport mechanism .
When this process occurs in the cells of the PCT , the added benefit is a net loss of a hydrogen ion ( complexed ) in the blood .
Ammonia to ammonia to form the weak acid NH and bicarbonate are exchanged in a one-to-one ratio .
This exchange is yet another means by which the body can buffer and excrete acid .
The presence of aquaporin channels in the descending loop allows prodigious quantities of water to leave the loop and enter the hyperosmolar interstitium of the pyramid , where it is returned to the circulation by the vasa recta .
As the loop turns to become the ascending loop , there is an absence of aquaporin channels , so water can not leave the loop .
However , in the basal membrane of cells of the thick ascending loop , ATPase pumps actively remove Na from the cell .
A Na /K /2Cl symporter in the apical membrane passively allows these ions to enter the cell cytoplasm from the lumen of the loop down a concentration gradient created by the pump .
This mechanism works to dilute the fluid of the ascending loop ultimately to approximately 50–100 mOsmol/L .
At the transition from the DCT to the collecting duct , about 20 percent of the original water is still present and about 10 ) in the urine and a gain of a bicarbonate ion ( HCO percent of the sodium .
If no other mechanism for water reabsorption existed , about 20–25 liters of urine would be produced .
Now consider what is happening in the adjacent capillaries , the vasa recta .
They are recovering both solutes and water at a rate that preserves the countercurrent multiplier system .
In general , blood flows slowly in capillaries to allow time for exchange of nutrients and wastes .
In the vasa recta particularly , this rate of flow is important for two additional reasons .
The flow must be slow to allow blood cells to lose and regain water without either crenating or bursting .
Second , a rapid flow would remove too much Na and urea , destroying the osmolar gradient that is necessary for the recovery of solutes and water .
Watch this video ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/multiplier ) to learn about the countercurrent multiplier system .
Approximately 80 percent of filtered water has been recovered by the time the dilute forming urine enters the DCT .
The DCT will recover another 10–15 percent before the forming urine enters the collecting ducts .
Aldosterone increases the amount of Na /K ATPase in the basal membrane of the DCT and collecting duct .
The movement of Na out of the lumen of the collecting duct creates a negative charge that promotes the movement of Cl out of the lumen into the interstitial space by a paracellular route across tight junctions .
Peritubular capillaries receive the solutes and water , returning them to the circulation .
Cells of the DCT also recover Ca from the filtrate .
Receptors for parathyroid hormone ( PTH ) are found in DCT cells and when bound to PTH , induce the insertion of calcium channels on their luminal surface .
The channels enhance Ca recovery from the forming urine .
In addition , as Na is pumped out of the cell , the resulting electrochemical gradient attracts Ca into the cell .
Finally , calcitriol ( 1,25 dihydroxyvitamin D , the active form of vitamin D ) is very important for calcium recovery .
It induces the production of calcium-binding proteins that transport Ca into the cell .
These binding proteins are also important for the movement of calcium inside the cell and aid in exocytosis of calcium across the basolateral membrane .
Any Ca not reabsorbed at this point is lost in the urine .
Solutes move across the membranes of the collecting ducts , which contain two distinct cell types , principal cells and intercalated cells .
A principal cell possesses channels for the recovery or loss of sodium and potassium .
An intercalated cell secretes or absorbs acid or bicarbonate .
As in other portions of the nephron , there is an array of micromachines ( pumps and channels ) on display in the membranes of these cells .
Regulation of urine volume and osmolarity are major functions of the collecting ducts .
By varying the amount of water that is recovered , the collecting ducts play a major role in maintaining the body ’ s normal osmolarity .
If the blood becomes hyperosmotic , the collecting ducts recover more water to dilute the blood ; if the blood becomes hyposmotic , the collecting ducts recover less of the water , leading to concentration of the blood .
Another way of saying this is : If plasma osmolarity rises , more water is recovered and urine volume decreases ; if plasma osmolarity decreases , less water is recovered and urine volume increases .
This function is regulated by the posterior pituitary hormone ADH ( vasopressin ) .
With mild dehydration , plasma osmolarity rises slightly .
This increase is detected by osmoreceptors in the hypothalamus , which stimulates the release of ADH from the posterior pituitary .
If plasma osmolarity decreases slightly , the opposite occurs .
When stimulated by ADH , aquaporin channels are inserted into the apical membrane of principal cells , which line the collecting ducts .
As the ducts descend through the medulla , the osmolarity surrounding them increases ( due to the countercurrent mechanisms described above ) .
If aquaporin water channels are present , water will be osmotically pulled from the collecting duct into the surrounding interstitial space and into the peritubular capillaries .
Therefore , the final urine will be more concentrated .
If less ADH is secreted , fewer aquaporin channels are inserted and less water is recovered , resulting in dilute urine .
By altering the number of aquaporin channels , the volume of water recovered or lost is altered .
This , in turn , regulates the blood osmolarity , blood pressure , and osmolarity of the urine .
As Na is pumped from the forming urine , water is passively recaptured for the circulation ; this preservation of vascular volume is critically important for the maintenance of a normal blood pressure .
Aldosterone is secreted by the adrenal cortex in response to angiotensin II stimulation .
As an extremely potent vasoconstrictor , angiotensin II functions immediately to increase blood pressure .
By also stimulating aldosterone production , it provides a longer-lasting mechanism to support blood pressure by maintaining vascular volume ( water recovery ) .
In addition to receptors for ADH , principal cells have receptors for the steroid hormone aldosterone .
While ADH is primarily involved in the regulation of water recovery , aldosterone regulates Na recovery .
Aldosterone stimulates principal cells to manufacture luminal Na and K channels as well as Na /K ATPase pumps on the basal membrane of the cells .
When aldosterone output increases , more Na is recovered from the forming urine and water follows the Na passively .
As the pump recovers Na for the body , it is also pumping K into the forming urine , since the pump moves K in the opposite direction .
When aldosterone decreases , more Na remains in the forming urine and more K is recovered in the circulation .
Symport channels move Na and Cl together .
Still other channels in the principal cells secrete K into the collecting duct in direct proportion to the recovery of Na .
Intercalated cells play significant roles in regulating blood pH .
Intercalated cells reabsorb K and HCO H .
This function lowers the acidity of the plasma while increasing the acidity of the urine .
This rate determines how much solute is retained or discarded , how much water is retained or discarded , and ultimately , the osmolarity of blood and the blood pressure of the body .
The kidneys are innervated by the sympathetic neurons of the autonomic nervous system via the celiac plexus and splanchnic nerves .
Reduction of sympathetic stimulation results in vasodilation and increased blood flow through the kidneys during resting conditions .
When the frequency of action potentials increases , the arteriolar smooth muscle constricts ( vasoconstriction ) , resulting in diminished glomerular flow , so less filtration occurs .
Under conditions of stress , sympathetic nervous activity increases , resulting in the direct vasoconstriction of afferent arterioles ( norepinephrine effect ) as well as stimulation of the adrenal medulla .
The adrenal medulla , in turn , produces a generalized vasoconstriction through the release of epinephrine .
This includes vasoconstriction of the afferent arterioles , further reducing the volume of blood flowing through the kidneys .
This process redirects blood to other organs with more immediate needs .
If blood pressure falls , the sympathetic nerves will also stimulate the release of renin .
Additional renin increases production of the powerful vasoconstrictor angiotensin II .
Angiotensin II , as discussed above , will also stimulate aldosterone production to augment blood volume through retention of more Na and water .
Only a 10 mm Hg pressure differential across the glomerulus is required for normal GFR , so very small changes in afferent arterial pressure significantly increase or decrease GFR .
The kidneys are very effective at regulating the rate of blood flow over a wide range of blood pressures .
Your blood pressure will decrease when you are relaxed or sleeping .
It will increase when exercising .
Yet , despite these changes , the filtration rate through the kidney will change very little .
This is due to two internal autoregulatory mechanisms that operate without outside influence : the myogenic mechanism and the tubuloglomerular feedback mechanism .
The myogenic mechanism regulating blood flow within the kidney depends upon a characteristic shared by most smooth muscle cells of the body .
When you stretch a smooth muscle cell , it contracts ; when you stop , it relaxes , restoring its resting length .
This mechanism works in the afferent arteriole that supplies the glomerulus .
When blood pressure increases , smooth muscle cells in the wall of the arteriole are stretched and respond by contracting to resist the pressure , resulting in little change in flow .
When blood pressure drops , the same smooth muscle cells relax to lower resistance , allowing a continued even flow of blood .
The tubuloglomerular feedback mechanism involves the JGA and a paracrine signaling mechanism utilizing ATP , adenosine , and nitric oxide ( NO ) .
This mechanism stimulates either contraction or relaxation of afferent arteriolar smooth muscle cells ( Table 25.7 ) .
Recall that the DCT is in intimate contact with the afferent and efferent arterioles of the glomerulus .
Specialized macula densa cells in this segment of the tubule respond to changes in the fluid flow rate and Na concentration .
As GFR increases , there is less time for NaCl to be reabsorbed in the PCT , resulting in higher osmolarity in the filtrate .
The increased fluid movement more strongly deflects single nonmotile cilia on macula densa cells .
This increased osmolarity of the forming urine , and the greater flow rate within the DCT , activates macula densa cells to respond by releasing ATP and adenosine ( a metabolite of ATP ) .
ATP and adenosine act locally as paracrine factors to stimulate the myogenic juxtaglomerular cells of the afferent arteriole to constrict , slowing blood flow and reducing GFR .
Conversely , when GFR decreases , less Na is in the forming urine , and most will be reabsorbed before reaching the macula densa , which will result in decreased ATP and adenosine , allowing the afferent arteriole to dilate and increase GFR .
NO has the opposite effect , relaxing the afferent arteriole at the same time ATP and adenosine are stimulating it to contract .
Thus , NO fine-tunes the effects of adenosine and ATP on GFR .
They act to stimulate or inhibit blood flow .
Some of these are endocrine , acting from a distance , whereas others are paracrine , acting locally .
Renin is an enzyme that is produced by the granular cells of the afferent arteriole at the JGA .
It enzymatically converts angiotensinogen ( made by the liver , freely circulating ) into angiotensin I .
Its release is stimulated by prostaglandins and NO from the JGA in response to decreased extracellular fluid volume .
ACE is not a hormone but it is functionally important in regulating systemic blood pressure and kidney function .
It is produced in the lungs but binds to the surfaces of endothelial cells in the afferent arterioles and glomerulus .
It enzymatically converts inactive angiotensin I into active angiotensin II .
ACE is important in raising blood pressure .
People with high blood pressure are sometimes prescribed ACE inhibitors to lower their blood pressure .
Angiotensin II is a potent vasoconstrictor that plays an immediate role in the regulation of blood pressure .
It acts systemically to cause vasoconstriction as well as constriction of both the afferent and efferent arterioles of the glomerulus .
In instances of blood loss or dehydration , it reduces both GFR and renal blood flow , thereby limiting fluid loss and preserving blood volume .
Its release is usually stimulated by decreases in blood pressure , and so the preservation of adequate blood pressure is its primary role .
Aldosterone , often called the “ salt-retaining hormone , ” is released from the adrenal cortex in response to angiotensin II or directly in response to increased plasma K .
It promotes Na reabsorption by the nephron , promoting the retention of water .
It is also important in regulating K , promoting its excretion .
( This dual effect on two minerals and its origin in the adrenal cortex explains its designation as a mineralocorticoid . )
As a result , renin has an immediate effect on blood pressure due to angiotensin II–stimulated vasoconstriction and a prolonged effect through Na recovery due to aldosterone .
At the same time that aldosterone causes increased recovery of Na , it also causes greater loss of K .
Progesterone is a steroid that is structurally similar to aldosterone .
It binds to the aldosterone receptor and weakly stimulates Na reabsorption and increased water recovery .
This process is unimportant in men due to low levels of circulating progesterone .
It may cause increased retention of water during some periods of the menstrual cycle in women when progesterone levels increase .
Diuretics are drugs that can increase water loss by interfering with the recapture of solutes and water from the forming urine .
They are often prescribed to lower blood pressure .
Coffee , tea , and alcoholic beverages are familiar diuretics .
ADH , a 9-amino acid peptide released by the posterior pituitary , works to do the exact opposite .
It promotes the recovery of water , decreases urine volume , and maintains plasma osmolarity and blood pressure .
From there , it enters the vasa recta capillaries to return to the circulation .
Water is attracted by the high osmotic environment of the deep kidney medulla .
Endothelins , 21-amino acid peptides , are extremely powerful vasoconstrictors .
They are produced by endothelial cells of the renal blood vessels , mesangial cells , and cells of the DCT .
Hormones stimulating endothelin release include angiotensin II , bradykinin , and epinephrine .
They do not typically influence blood pressure in healthy people .
On the other hand , in people with diabetic kidney disease , endothelin is chronically elevated , resulting in sodium retention .
They also diminish GFR by damaging the podocytes and by potently vasoconstricting both the afferent and efferent arterioles .
Natriuretic hormones are peptides that stimulate the kidneys to excrete sodium—an effect opposite that of aldosterone .
Natriuretic hormones act by inhibiting aldosterone release and therefore inhibiting Na recovery in the collecting ducts .
If Na remains in the forming urine , its osmotic force will cause a concurrent loss of water .
Natriuretic hormones also inhibit ADH release , which of course will result in less water recovery .
Therefore , natriuretic peptides inhibit both Na and water recovery .
One example from this family of hormones is atrial natriuretic hormone ( ANH ) , a 28-amino acid peptide produced by heart atria in response to over-stretching of the atrial wall .
The over-stretching occurs in persons with elevated blood pressure or heart failure .
It increases GFR through concurrent vasodilation of the afferent arteriole and vasoconstriction of the efferent arteriole .
These events lead to an increased loss of water and sodium in the forming urine .
It also decreases sodium reabsorption in the DCT .
There is also B-type natriuretic peptide ( BNP ) of 32 amino acids produced in the ventricles of the heart .
It has a 10-fold lower affinity for its receptor , so its effects are less than those of ANH .
Its role may be to provide “ fine tuning ” for the regulation of blood pressure .
BNP ’ s longer biologic half-life makes it a good diagnostic marker of congestive heart failure ( Figure 25.21 ) .
Parathyroid hormone ( PTH ) is an 84-amino acid peptide produced by the parathyroid glands in response to decreased circulating Ca levels .
Among its targets is the PCT , where it stimulates the hydroxylation of calcidiol to calcitriol ) , causing its ( 1,25-hydroxycholecalciferol , the active form of vitamin D ) .
It also blocks reabsorption of phosphate ( PO loss in the urine .
The retention of phosphate would result in the formation of calcium phosphate in the plasma , reducing circulating Ca levels .
By ridding the blood of phosphate , higher circulating Ca levels are permitted .
Circumstances that lead to fluid depletion in the body include blood loss and dehydration .
Homeostasis requires that volume and osmolarity be preserved .
Blood volume is important in maintaining sufficient blood pressure , and there are nonrenal mechanisms involved in its preservation , including vasoconstriction , which can act within seconds of a drop in pressure .
Thirst mechanisms are also activated to promote the consumption of water lost through respiration , evaporation , or urination .
Hormonal mechanisms are activated to recover volume while maintaining a normal osmotic environment .
These mechanisms act principally on the kidney .
The body can not directly measure blood volume , but blood pressure can be measured .
Blood pressure often reflects blood volume and is measured by baroreceptors in the aorta and carotid sinuses .
When blood pressure increases , baroreceptors send more frequent action potentials to the central nervous system , leading to widespread vasodilation .
Included in this vasodilation are the afferent arterioles supplying the glomerulus , resulting in increased GFR , and water loss by the kidneys .
If pressure decreases , fewer action potentials travel to the central nervous system , resulting in more sympathetic stimulationproducing vasoconstriction , which will result in decreased filtration and GFR , and water loss .
Decreased blood pressure is also sensed by the granular cells in the afferent arteriole of the JGA .
In response , the enzyme renin is released .
You saw earlier in the chapter that renin activity leads to an almost immediate rise in blood pressure as activated angiotensin II produces vasoconstriction .
The rise in pressure is sustained by the aldosterone effects initiated by angiotensin II ; this includes an increase in Na retention and water volume .
As an aside , late in the menstrual cycle , progesterone has a modest influence on water retention .
Due to its structural similarity to aldosterone , progesterone binds to the aldosterone receptor in the collecting duct of the kidney , causing the same , albeit weaker , effect on Na and water retention .
Cardiomyocytes of the atria also respond to greater stretch ( as blood pressure rises ) by secreting ANH .
ANH opposes the action of aldosterone by inhibiting the recovery of Na by the DCT and collecting ducts .
More Na is lost , and as water follows , total blood volume and pressure decline .
In low-pressure states , ANH does not seem to have much effect .
ADH is also called vasopressin .
Early researchers found that in cases of unusually high secretion of ADH , the hormone caused vasoconstriction ( vasopressor activity , hence the name ) .
Only later were its antidiuretic properties identified .
Synthetic ADH is still used occasionally to stem life-threatening esophagus bleeding in alcoholics .
When blood volume drops 5–10 percent , causing a decrease in blood pressure , there is a rapid and significant increase in ADH release from the posterior pituitary .
Immediate vasoconstriction to increase blood pressure is the result .
ADH also causes activation of aquaporin channels in the collecting ducts to affect the recovery of water to help restore vascular volume .
A diuretic is a compound that increases urine volume .
Three familiar drinks contain diuretic compounds : coffee , tea , and alcohol .
The caffeine in coffee and tea works by promoting vasodilation in the nephron , which increases GFR .
Alcohol increases GFR by inhibiting ADH release from the posterior pituitary , resulting in less water recovery by the collecting duct .
In cases of high blood pressure , diuretics may be prescribed to reduce blood volume and , thereby , reduce blood pressure .
The most frequently prescribed anti-hypertensive diuretic is hydrochlorothiazide .
It inhibits the Na / Cl symporter in the DCT and collecting duct .
The result is a loss of Na with water following passively by osmosis .
Osmotic diuretics promote water loss by osmosis .
An example is the indigestible sugar mannitol , which is most often administered to reduce brain swelling after head injury .
However , it is not the only sugar that can produce a diuretic effect .
In cases of poorly controlled diabetes mellitus , glucose levels exceed the capacity of the tubular glucose symporters , resulting in glucose in the urine .
The unrecovered glucose becomes a powerful osmotic diuretic .
Classically , in the days before glucose could be detected in the blood and urine , clinicians identified diabetes mellitus by the three Ps : polyuria ( diuresis ) , polydipsia ( increased thirst ) , and polyphagia ( increased hunger ) .
Sodium has a very strong osmotic effect and attracts water .
It plays a larger role in the osmolarity of the plasma than any other circulating component of the blood .
If there is too much Na present , either due to poor control or excess dietary consumption , a series of metabolic problems ensue .
There is an increase in total volume of water , which leads to hypertension ( high blood pressure ) .
Over a long period , this increases the risk of serious complications such as heart attacks , strokes , and aneurysms .
It can also contribute to system-wide edema ( swelling ) .
Mechanisms for regulating Na concentration include the renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system and ADH ( see Figure 25.14 ) .
Aldosterone stimulates the uptake of Na on the apical cell membrane of cells in the DCT and collecting ducts , whereas ADH helps to regulate Na concentration indirectly by regulating the reabsorption of water .
Potassium is present in a 30-fold greater concentration inside the cell than outside the cell .
A generalization can be made that K and Na concentrations will move in opposite directions .
When more Na is reabsorbed , more K is secreted ; when less Na is reabsorbed ( leading to excretion by the kidney ) , more K is retained .
When aldosterone causes a recovery of Na in the nephron , a negative electrical gradient is created that promotes the secretion of K and Cl into the lumen .
Chloride is important in acid–base balance in the extracellular space and has other functions , such as in the stomach , where it combines with hydrogen ions in the stomach lumen to form hydrochloric acid , aiding digestion .
Its close association with Na in the extracellular environment makes it the dominant anion of this compartment , and its regulation closely mirrors that of Na .
The parathyroid glands monitor and respond to circulating levels of Ca in the blood .
When levels drop too low , PTH is released to stimulate the DCT to reabsorb Ca from the forming urine .
When levels are adequate or high , less PTH is released and more Ca remains in the forming urine to be lost .
Phosphate levels move in the opposite direction .
When so that its blood level drops , allowing Ca levels to rise .
PTH Ca levels are low , PTH inhibits reabsorption of also stimulates the renal conversion of calcidiol into calcitriol , the active form of vitamin D. Calcitriol then stimulates the intestines to absorb more Ca from the diet .
The acid–base homeostasis of the body is a function of chemical buffers and physiologic buffering provided by the lungs , and ammonia have a very large capacity to absorb or release H as and kidneys .
Buffers , especially proteins , needed to resist a change in pH .
They can act within fractions of a second .
The lungs can rid the body of excess acid very into CO , which is then exhaled .
It is rapid but has limited rapidly ( seconds to minutes ) through the conversion of HCO capacity in the face of a significant acid challenge .
The kidneys can rid the body of both acid and base .
The renal capacity is large but slow ( minutes to hours ) .
The cells of the PCT actively secrete H into the forming urine as Na is reabsorbed .
The body rids itself of excess H and raises blood pH .
In the collecting ducts , the apical surfaces of intercalated cells have proton pumps that actively secrete H into the luminal , forming urine to remove it from the body .
) , H PO As hydrogen ions are pumped into the forming urine , it is buffered by bicarbonate ( HCO ion ) , or ammonia ( forming NH Nitrogen wastes are produced by the breakdown of proteins during normal metabolism .
Proteins are broken down into amino acids , which in turn are deaminated by having their nitrogen groups removed .
Deamination converts the amino ( NH ) ) , urea , or uric acid ( Figure 25.22 ) .
Ammonia is extremely toxic , so groups into ammonia ( NH ) , ammonium ion ( NH most of it is very rapidly converted into urea in the liver .
Human urinary wastes typically contain primarily urea with small amounts of ammonium and very little uric acid .
, ammonium ion ) .
Urine pH typically varies in a normal range from 4.5 to 8.0 .
( dihydrogen phosphate Water-soluble drugs may be excreted in the urine and are influenced by one or all of the following processes : glomerular filtration , tubular secretion , or tubular reabsorption .
Drugs that are structurally small can be filtered by the glomerulus with the filtrate .
Large drug molecules such as heparin or those that are bound to plasma proteins can not be filtered and are not readily eliminated .
Some drugs can be eliminated by carrier proteins that enable secretion of the drug into the tubule lumen .
There are specific carriers that eliminate basic ( such as dopamine or histamine ) or acidic drugs ( such as penicillin or indomethacin ) .
As is the case with other substances , drugs may be both filtered and reabsorbed passively along a concentration gradient .
A change in one system may affect all other systems in the body , with mild to devastating effects .
A failure of urinary continence can be embarrassing and inconvenient , but is not life threatening .
The loss of other urinary functions may prove fatal .
A failure to synthesize vitamin D is one such example .
In order for vitamin D to become active , it must undergo a hydroxylation reaction in the kidney , that is , an –OH group must be added to calcidiol to make calcitriol ( 1,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol ) .
Activated vitamin D is important for absorption of Ca in the digestive tract , its reabsorption in the kidney , and the maintenance of normal serum concentrations of Ca and phosphate .
Calcium is vitally important in bone health , muscle contraction , hormone secretion , and neurotransmitter release .
Inadequate Ca leads to disorders like osteoporosis and osteomalacia in adults and rickets in children .
Deficits may also result in problems with cell proliferation , neuromuscular function , blood clotting , and the inflammatory response .
Recent research has confirmed that vitamin D receptors are present in most , if not all , cells of the body , reflecting the systemic importance of vitamin D. Many scientists have suggested it be referred to as a hormone rather than a vitamin .
EPO is a 193-amino acid protein that stimulates the formation of red blood cells in the bone marrow .
The kidney produces 85 percent of circulating EPO ; the liver , the remainder .
If you move to a higher altitude , the partial pressure of oxygen is lower , meaning there is less pressure to push oxygen across the alveolar membrane and into the red blood cell .
One way the body compensates is to manufacture more red blood cells by increasing EPO production .
If you start an aerobic exercise program , your tissues will need more oxygen to cope , and the kidney will respond with more EPO .
If erythrocytes are lost due to severe or prolonged bleeding , or under produced due to disease or severe malnutrition , the kidneys come to the rescue by producing more EPO .
Renal failure ( loss of EPO production ) is associated with anemia , which makes it difficult for the body to cope with increased oxygen demands or to supply oxygen adequately even under normal conditions .
Anemia diminishes performance and can be life threatening .
Due to osmosis , water follows where Na leads .
Much of the water the kidneys recover from the forming urine follows the reabsorption of Na .
ADH stimulation of aquaporin channels allows for regulation of water recovery in the collecting ducts .
Normally , all of the glucose is recovered , but loss of glucose control ( diabetes mellitus ) may result in an osmotic dieresis severe enough to produce severe dehydration and death .
A loss of renal function means a loss of effective vascular volume control , leading to hypotension ( low blood pressure ) or hypertension ( high blood pressure ) , which can lead to stroke , heart attack , and aneurysm formation .
The kidneys cooperate with the lungs , liver , and adrenal cortex through the renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system ( see Figure 25.14 ) .
The liver synthesizes and secretes the inactive precursor angiotensinogen .
When the blood pressure is low , the kidney synthesizes and releases renin .
Renin converts angiotensinogen into angiotensin I , and ACE produced in the lung converts angiotensin I into biologically active angiotensin II ( Figure 25.23 ) .
The immediate and short-term effect of angiotensin II is to raise blood pressure by causing widespread vasoconstriction .
angiotensin II also stimulates the adrenal cortex to release the steroid hormone aldosterone , which results in renal reabsorption of Na and its associated osmotic recovery of water .
The reabsorption of Na helps to raise and maintain blood pressure over a longer term .
Blood pressure and osmolarity are regulated in a similar fashion .
Severe hypo-osmolarity can cause problems like lysis ( rupture ) of blood cells or widespread edema , which is due to a solute imbalance .
Inadequate solute concentration ( such as protein ) in the plasma results in water moving toward an area of greater solute concentration , in this case , the interstitial space and cell cytoplasm .
If the kidney glomeruli are damaged by an autoimmune illness , large quantities of protein may be lost in the urine .
The resultant drop in serum osmolarity leads to widespread edema that , if severe , may lead to damaging or fatal brain swelling .
Severe hypertonic conditions may arise with severe dehydration from lack of water intake , severe vomiting , or uncontrolled diarrhea .
When the kidney is unable to recover sufficient water from the forming urine , the consequences may be severe ( lethargy , confusion , muscle cramps , and finally , death ) .
Sodium , calcium , and potassium must be closely regulated .
The role of Na and Ca homeostasis has been discussed at length .
Failure of K regulation can have serious consequences on nerve conduction , skeletal muscle function , and most significantly , on cardiac muscle contraction and rhythm .
Recall that enzymes lose their three-dimensional conformation and , therefore , their function if the pH is too acidic or basic .
This loss of conformation may be a consequence of the breaking of hydrogen bonds .
Move the pH away from the optimum for a specific enzyme and you may severely hamper its function throughout the body , including hormone binding , central nervous system signaling , or myocardial contraction .
Proper kidney function is essential for pH homeostasis .
Stem cells are unspecialized cells that can reproduce themselves via cell division , sometimes after years of inactivity .
Under certain conditions , they may differentiate into tissue-specific or organ-specific cells with special functions .
In some cases , stem cells may continually divide to produce a mature cell and to replace themselves .
Stem cell therapy has an enormous potential to improve the quality of life or save the lives of people suffering from debilitating or lifethreatening diseases .
There have been several studies in animals , but since stem cell therapy is still in its infancy , there have been limited experiments in humans .
Acute kidney injury can be caused by a number of factors , including transplants and other surgeries .
It affects 7–10 percent of all hospitalized patients , resulting in the deaths of 35–40 percent of inpatients .
In limited studies using mesenchymal stem cells , there have been fewer instances of kidney damage after surgery , the length of hospital stays has been reduced , and there have been fewer readmissions after release .
How do these stem cells work to protect or repair the kidney ?
Scientists are unsure at this point , but some evidence has shown that these stem cells release several growth factors in endocrine and paracrine ways .
As further studies are conducted to assess the safety and effectiveness of stem cell therapy , we will move closer to a day when kidney injury is rare , and curative treatments are routine .
In the human body , the substances that participate in chemical reactions must remain within narrows ranges of concentration .
Too much or too little of a single substance can disrupt your bodily functions .
Because metabolism relies on reactions that are all interconnected , any disruption might affect multiple organs or even organ systems .
Water is the most ubiquitous substance in the chemical reactions of life .
The interactions of various aqueous solutions—solutions in which water is the solvent—are continuously monitored and adjusted by a large suite of interconnected feedback systems in your body .
Understanding the ways in which the body maintains these critical balances is key to understanding good health .
The dissolved substances in a solution are called solutes .
In the human body , solutes vary in different parts of the body , but may include proteins—including those that transport lipids , carbohydrates , and , very importantly , electrolytes .
Often in medicine , a mineral dissociated from a salt that carries an electrical charge ( an ion ) is called and electrolyte .
For instance , sodium ions ( Na ) and chloride ions ( Cl ) are often referred to as electrolytes .
In the body , water moves through semi-permeable membranes of cells and from one compartment of the body to another by a process called osmosis .
Osmosis is basically the diffusion of water from regions of higher concentration to regions of lower concentration , along an osmotic gradient across a semi-permeable membrane .
As a result , water will move into and out of cells and tissues , depending on the relative concentrations of the water and solutes found there .
An appropriate balance of solutes inside and outside of cells must be maintained to ensure normal function .
Human beings are mostly water , ranging from about 75 percent of body mass in infants to about 50–60 percent in adult men and women , to as low as 45 percent in old age .
The percent of body water changes with development , because the proportions of the body given over to each organ and to muscles , fat , bone , and other tissues change from infancy to adulthood ( Figure 26.2 ) .
Your brain and kidneys have the highest proportions of water , which composes 80–85 percent of their masses .
In contrast , teeth have the lowest proportion of water , at 8–10 percent .
Body fluids can be discussed in terms of their specific fluid compartment , a location that is largely separate from another compartment by some form of a physical barrier .
The intracellular fluid ( ICF ) compartment is the system that includes all fluid enclosed in cells by their plasma membranes .
Extracellular fluid ( ECF ) surrounds all cells in the body .
Extracellular fluid has two primary constituents : the fluid component of the blood ( called plasma ) and the interstitial fluid ( IF ) that surrounds all cells not in the blood ( Figure 26.3 ) .
The ICF lies within cells and is the principal component of the cytosol/cytoplasm .
The ICF makes up about 60 percent of the total water in the human body , and in an average-size adult male , the ICF accounts for about 25 liters ( seven gallons ) of fluid ( Figure 26.4 ) .
This fluid volume tends to be very stable , because the amount of water in living cells is closely regulated .
If the amount of water inside a cell falls to a value that is too low , the cytosol becomes too concentrated with solutes to carry on normal cellular activities ; if too much water enters a cell , the cell may burst and be destroyed .
The ECF accounts for the other one-third of the body ’ s water content .
Approximately 20 percent of the ECF is found in plasma .
Plasma travels through the body in blood vessels and transports a range of materials , including blood cells , proteins ( including clotting factors and antibodies ) , electrolytes , nutrients , gases , and wastes .
Gases , nutrients , and waste materials travel between capillaries and cells through the IF .
Cells are separated from the IF by a selectively permeable cell membrane that helps regulate the passage of materials between the IF and the interior of the cell .
The body has other water-based ECF .
Because these fluids are outside of cells , these fluids are also considered components of the ECF compartment .
The compositions of the two components of the ECF—plasma and IF—are more similar to each other than either is to the ICF ( Figure 26.5 ) .
Blood plasma has high concentrations of sodium , chloride , bicarbonate , and protein .
The IF has high concentrations of sodium , chloride , and bicarbonate , but a relatively lower concentration of protein .
In contrast , the ICF has elevated amounts of potassium , phosphate , magnesium , and protein .
Overall , the ICF contains high concentrations ) , whereas both plasma and the ECF contain high concentrations of sodium and of potassium and phosphate ( chloride .
Watch this video ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/bodyfluids ) to learn more about body fluids , fluid compartments , and electrolytes .
When blood volume decreases due to sweating , from what source is water taken in by the blood ?
Most body fluids are neutral in charge .
Thus , cations , or positively charged ions , and anions , or negatively charged ions , are balanced in fluids .
As seen in the previous graph , sodium ( Na ) ions and chloride ( Cl ) ions are concentrated in the ECF of the body , whereas potassium ( K ) ions are concentrated inside cells .
Although sodium and potassium can “ leak ” through “ pores ” into and out of cells , respectively , the high levels of potassium and low levels of sodium in the ICF are maintained by sodium-potassium pumps in the cell membranes .
These pumps use the energy supplied by ATP to pump sodium out of the cell and potassium into the cell ( Figure 26.6 ) .
Hydrostatic pressure , the force exerted by a fluid against a wall , causes movement of fluid between compartments .
The hydrostatic pressure of blood is the pressure exerted by blood against the walls of the blood vessels by the pumping action of the heart .
In capillaries , hydrostatic pressure ( also known as capillary blood pressure ) is higher than the opposing “ colloid osmotic pressure ” in blood—a “ constant ” pressure primarily produced by circulating albumin—at the arteriolar end of the capillary ( Figure 26.7 ) .
This pressure forces plasma and nutrients out of the capillaries and into surrounding tissues .
Fluid and the cellular wastes in the tissues enter the capillaries at the venule end , where the hydrostatic pressure is less than the osmotic pressure in the vessel .
Filtration pressure squeezes fluid from the plasma in the blood to the IF surrounding the tissue cells .
The surplus fluid in the interstitial space that is not returned directly back to the capillaries is drained from tissues by the lymphatic system , and then re-enters the vascular system at the subclavian veins .
Watch this video ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/dynamicfluid ) to see an explanation of the dynamics of fluid in the body ’ s compartments .
What happens in the tissue when capillary blood pressure is less than osmotic pressure ?
Hydrostatic pressure is especially important in governing the movement of water in the nephrons of the kidneys to ensure proper filtering of the blood to form urine .
As hydrostatic pressure in the kidneys increases , the amount of water leaving the capillaries also increases , and more urine filtrate is formed .
If hydrostatic pressure in the kidneys drops too low , as can happen in dehydration , the functions of the kidneys will be impaired , and less nitrogenous wastes will be removed from the bloodstream .
Extreme dehydration can result in kidney failure .
Fluid also moves between compartments along an osmotic gradient .
Recall that an osmotic gradient is produced by the difference in concentration of all solutes on either side of a semi-permeable membrane .
The magnitude of the osmotic gradient is proportional to the difference in the concentration of solutes on one side of the cell membrane to that on the other side .
Water will move by osmosis from the side where its concentration is high ( and the concentration of solute is low ) to the side of the membrane where its concentration is low ( and the concentration of solute is high ) .
In the body , water moves by osmosis from plasma to the IF ( and the reverse ) and from the IF to the ICF ( and the reverse ) .
In the body , water moves constantly into and out of fluid compartments as conditions change in different parts of the body .
For example , if you are sweating , you will lose water through your skin .
Sweating depletes your tissues of water and increases the solute concentration in those tissues .
As this happens , water diffuses from your blood into sweat glands and surrounding skin tissues that have become dehydrated because of the osmotic gradient .
Additionally , as water leaves the blood , it is replaced by the water in other tissues throughout your body that are not dehydrated .
If this continues , dehydration spreads throughout the body .
When a dehydrated person drinks water and rehydrates , the water is redistributed by the same gradient , but in the opposite direction , replenishing water in all of the tissues .
The movement of some solutes between compartments is active , which consumes energy and is an active transport process , whereas the movement of other solutes is passive , which does not require energy .
Active transport allows cells to move a specific substance against its concentration gradient through a membrane protein , requiring energy in the form of ATP .
For example , the sodium-potassium pump employs active transport to pump sodium out of cells and potassium into cells , with both substances moving against their concentration gradients .
Passive transport of a molecule or ion depends on its ability to pass through the membrane , as well as the existence of a concentration gradient that allows the molecules to diffuse from an area of higher concentration to an area of lower concentration .
Some molecules , like gases , lipids , and water itself ( which also utilizes water channels in the membrane called aquaporins ) , slip fairly easily through the cell membrane ; others , including polar molecules like glucose , amino acids , and ions do not .
Some of these molecules enter and leave cells using facilitated transport , whereby the molecules move down a concentration gradient through specific protein channels in the membrane .
This process does not require energy .
For example , glucose is transferred into cells by glucose transporters that use facilitated transport ( Figure 26.8 ) .
Edema is the accumulation of excess water in the tissues .
It is most common in the soft tissues of the extremities .
The physiological causes of edema include water leakage from blood capillaries .
Edema is almost always caused by an underlying medical condition , by the use of certain therapeutic drugs , by pregnancy , by localized injury , or by an allergic reaction .
In the limbs , the symptoms of edema include swelling of the subcutaneous tissues , an increase in the normal size of the limb , and stretched , tight skin .
One quick way to check for subcutaneous edema localized in a limb is to press a finger into the suspected area .
Edema is likely if the depression persists for several seconds after the finger is removed ( which is called “ pitting ” ) .
Pulmonary edema is excess fluid in the air sacs of the lungs , a common symptom of heart and/or kidney failure .
People with pulmonary edema likely will experience difficulty breathing , and they may experience chest pain .
Pulmonary edema can be life threatening , because it compromises gas exchange in the lungs , and anyone having symptoms should immediately seek medical care .
In pulmonary edema resulting from heart failure , excessive leakage of water occurs because fluids get “ backed up ” in the pulmonary capillaries of the lungs , when the left ventricle of the heart is unable to pump sufficient blood into the systemic circulation .
Because the left side of the heart is unable to pump out its normal volume of blood , the blood in the pulmonary circulation gets “ backed up , ” starting with the left atrium , then into the pulmonary veins , and then into pulmonary capillaries .
The resulting increased hydrostatic pressure within pulmonary capillaries , as blood is still coming in from the pulmonary arteries , causes fluid to be pushed out of them and into lung tissues .
Other causes of edema include damage to blood vessels and/or lymphatic vessels , or a decrease in osmotic pressure in chronic and severe liver disease , where the liver is unable to manufacture plasma proteins ( Figure 26.9 ) .
A decrease in the normal levels of plasma proteins results in a decrease of colloid osmotic pressure ( which counterbalances the hydrostatic pressure ) in the capillaries .
This process causes loss of water from the blood to the surrounding tissues , resulting in edema .
Mild , transient edema of the feet and legs may be caused by sitting or standing in the same position for long periods of time , as in the work of a toll collector or a supermarket cashier .
This is because deep veins in the lower limbs rely on skeletal muscle contractions to push on the veins and thus “ pump ” blood back to the heart .
Otherwise , the venous blood pools in the lower limbs and can leak into surrounding tissues .
Medications that can result in edema include vasodilators , calcium channel blockers used to treat hypertension , nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs , estrogen therapies , and some diabetes medications .
Underlying medical conditions that can contribute to edema include congestive heart failure , kidney damage and kidney disease , disorders that affect the veins of the legs , and cirrhosis and other liver disorders .
Therapy for edema usually focuses on elimination of the cause .
Activities that can reduce the effects of the condition include appropriate exercises to keep the blood and lymph flowing through the affected areas .
Other therapies include elevation of the affected part to assist drainage , massage and compression of the areas to move the fluid out of the tissues , and decreased salt intake to decrease sodium and water retention .
Although most of the intake comes through the digestive tract , about 230 mL ( 8 ounces ) per day is generated metabolically , in the last steps of aerobic respiration .
Additionally , each day about the same volume ( 2500 mL ) of water leaves the body by different routes ; most of this lost water is removed as urine .
The kidneys also can adjust blood volume though mechanisms that draw water out of the filtrate and urine .
The kidneys can regulate water levels in the body ; they conserve water if you are dehydrated , and they can make urine more dilute to expel excess water if necessary .
Water is lost through the skin through evaporation from the skin surface without overt sweating and from air expelled from the lungs .
This type of water loss is called insensible water loss because a person is usually unaware of it .
Osmolality is the ratio of solutes in a solution to a volume of solvent in a solution .
Plasma osmolality is thus the ratio of solutes to water in blood plasma .
A person ’ s plasma osmolality value reflects his or her state of hydration .
A healthy body maintains plasma osmolality within a narrow range , by employing several mechanisms that regulate both water intake and output .
Drinking water is considered voluntary .
So how is water intake regulated by the body ?
Consider someone who is experiencing dehydration , a net loss of water that results in insufficient water in blood and other tissues .
The water that leaves the body , as exhaled air , sweat , or urine , is ultimately extracted from blood plasma .
As the blood becomes more concentrated , the thirst response—a sequence of physiological processes—is triggered ( Figure 26.10 ) .
Osmoreceptors are sensory receptors in the thirst center in the hypothalamus that monitor the concentration of solutes ( osmolality ) of the blood .
If blood osmolality increases above its ideal value , the hypothalamus transmits signals that result in a conscious awareness of thirst .
The person should ( and normally does ) respond by drinking water .
The hypothalamus of a dehydrated person also releases antidiuretic hormone ( ADH ) through the posterior pituitary gland .
ADH signals the kidneys to recover water from urine , effectively diluting the blood plasma .
To conserve water , the hypothalamus of a dehydrated person also sends signals via the sympathetic nervous system to the salivary glands in the mouth .
The signals result in a decrease in watery , serous output ( and an increase in stickier , thicker mucus output ) .
These changes in secretions result in a “ dry mouth ” and the sensation of thirst .
Decreased blood volume resulting from water loss has two additional effects .
First , baroreceptors , blood-pressure receptors in the arch of the aorta and the carotid arteries in the neck , detect a decrease in blood pressure that results from decreased blood volume .
The heart is ultimately signaled to increase its rate and/or strength of contractions to compensate for the lowered blood pressure .
Second , the kidneys have a renin-angiotensin hormonal system that increases the production of the active form of the hormone angiotensin II , which helps stimulate thirst , but also stimulates the release of the hormone aldosterone from the adrenal glands .
Aldosterone increases the reabsorption of sodium in the distal tubules of the nephrons in the kidneys , and water follows this reabsorbed sodium back into the blood .
If adequate fluids are not consumed , dehydration results and a person ’ s body contains too little water to function correctly .
A person who repeatedly vomits or who has diarrhea may become dehydrated , and infants , because their body mass is so low , can become dangerously dehydrated very quickly .
Endurance athletes such as distance runners often become dehydrated during long races .
Dehydration can be a medical emergency , and a dehydrated person may lose consciousness , become comatose , or die , if his or her body is not rehydrated quickly .
Water loss from the body occurs predominantly through the renal system .
A person produces an average of 1.5 liters ( 1.6 quarts ) of urine per day .
Although the volume of urine varies in response to hydration levels , there is a minimum volume of urine production required for proper bodily functions .
The kidney excretes 100 to 1200 milliosmoles of solutes per day to rid the body of a variety of excess salts and other water-soluble chemical wastes , most notably creatinine , urea , and uric acid .
Failure to produce the minimum volume of urine means that metabolic wastes can not be effectively removed from the body , a situation that can impair organ function .
The minimum level of urine production necessary to maintain normal function is about 0.47 liters ( 0.5 quarts ) per day .
The kidneys also must make adjustments in the event of ingestion of too much fluid .
Diuresis , which is the production of urine in excess of normal levels , begins about 30 minutes after drinking a large quantity of fluid .
Diuresis reaches a peak after about 1 hour , and normal urine production is reestablished after about 3 hours .
Antidiuretic hormone ( ADH ) , also known as vasopressin , controls the amount of water reabsorbed from the collecting ducts and tubules in the kidney .
This hormone is produced in the hypothalamus and is delivered to the posterior pituitary for storage and release ( Figure 26.11 ) .
When the osmoreceptors in the hypothalamus detect an increase in the concentration of blood plasma , the hypothalamus signals the release of ADH from the posterior pituitary into the blood .
ADH has two major effects .
It constricts the arterioles in the peripheral circulation , which reduces the flow of blood to the extremities and thereby increases the blood supply to the core of the body .
ADH also causes the epithelial cells that line the renal collecting tubules to move water channel proteins , called aquaporins , from the interior of the cells to the apical surface , where these proteins are inserted into the cell membrane ( Figure 26.12 ) .
The result is an increase in the water permeability of these cells and , thus , a large increase in water passage from the urine through the walls of the collecting tubules , leading to more reabsorption of water into the bloodstream .
When the blood plasma becomes less concentrated and the level of ADH decreases , aquaporins are removed from collecting tubule cell membranes , and the passage of water out of urine and into the blood decreases .
A diuretic is a compound that increases urine output and therefore decreases water conservation by the body .
Diuretics are used to treat hypertension , congestive heart failure , and fluid retention associated with menstruation .
Alcohol acts as a diuretic by inhibiting the release of ADH .
Additionally , caffeine , when consumed in high concentrations , acts as a diuretic .
Some ions assist in the transmission of electrical impulses along cell membranes in neurons and muscles .
Other ions help to stabilize protein structures in enzymes .
Still others aid in releasing hormones from endocrine glands .
All of the ions in plasma contribute to the osmotic balance that controls the movement of water between cells and their environment .
Electrolytes in living systems include sodium , potassium , chloride , bicarbonate , calcium , phosphate , magnesium , copper , zinc , iron , manganese , molybdenum , copper , and chromium .
In terms of body functioning , six electrolytes are most important : sodium , potassium , chloride , bicarbonate , calcium , and phosphate .
These six ions aid in nerve excitability , endocrine secretion , membrane permeability , buffering body fluids , and controlling the movement of fluids between compartments .
These ions enter the body through the digestive tract .
More than 90 percent of the calcium and phosphate that enters the body is incorporated into bones and teeth , with bone serving as a mineral reserve for these ions .
In the event that calcium and phosphate are needed for other functions , bone tissue can be broken down to supply the blood and other tissues with these minerals .
Phosphate is a normal constituent of nucleic acids ; hence , blood levels of phosphate will increase whenever nucleic acids are broken down .
Excretion of ions occurs mainly through the kidneys , with lesser amounts lost in sweat and in feces .
Excessive sweating may cause a significant loss , especially of sodium and chloride .
Severe vomiting or diarrhea will cause a loss of chloride and bicarbonate ions .
Adjustments in respiratory and renal functions allow the body to regulate the levels of these ions in the ECF .
Table 26.1 lists the reference values for blood plasma , cerebrospinal fluid ( CSF ) , and urine for the six ions addressed in this section .
In a clinical setting , sodium , potassium , and chloride are typically analyzed in a routine urine sample .
In contrast , calcium and phosphate analysis requires a collection of urine across a 24-hour period , because the output of these ions can vary considerably over the course of a day .
Urine values reflect the rates of excretion of these ions .
Bicarbonate is the one ion that is not normally excreted in urine ; instead , it is conserved by the kidneys for use in the body ’ s buffering systems .
Sodium is the major cation of the extracellular fluid .
It is responsible for one-half of the osmotic pressure gradient that exists between the interior of cells and their surrounding environment .
People eating a typical Western diet , which is very high in NaCl , routinely take in 130 to 160 mmol/day of sodium , but humans require only 1 to 2 mmol/day .
This excess sodium appears to be a major factor in hypertension ( high blood pressure ) in some people .
Excretion of sodium is accomplished primarily by the kidneys .
Sodium is freely filtered through the glomerular capillaries of the kidneys , and although much of the filtered sodium is reabsorbed in the proximal convoluted tubule , some remains in the filtrate and urine , and is normally excreted .
Hyponatremia is a lower-than-normal concentration of sodium , usually associated with excess water accumulation in the body , which dilutes the sodium .
An absolute loss of sodium may be due to a decreased intake of the ion coupled with its continual excretion in the urine .
An abnormal loss of sodium from the body can result from several conditions , including excessive sweating , vomiting , or diarrhea ; the use of diuretics ; excessive production of urine , which can occur in diabetes ; and acidosis , either metabolic acidosis or diabetic ketoacidosis .
A relative decrease in blood sodium can occur because of an imbalance of sodium in one of the body ’ s other fluid compartments , like IF , or from a dilution of sodium due to water retention related to edema or congestive heart failure .
At the cellular level , hyponatremia results in increased entry of water into cells by osmosis , because the concentration of solutes within the cell exceeds the concentration of solutes in the now-diluted ECF .
The excess water causes swelling of the cells ; the swelling of red blood cells—decreasing their oxygen-carrying efficiency and making them potentially too large to fit through capillaries—along with the swelling of neurons in the brain can result in brain damage or even death .
Hypernatremia is an abnormal increase of blood sodium .
It can result from water loss from the blood , resulting in the hemoconcentration of all blood constituents .
Hormonal imbalances involving ADH and aldosterone may also result in higher-than-normal sodium values .
Potassium is the major intracellular cation .
It helps establish the resting membrane potential in neurons and muscle fibers after membrane depolarization and action potentials .
In contrast to sodium , potassium has very little effect on osmotic pressure .
The low levels of potassium in blood and CSF are due to the sodium-potassium pumps in cell membranes , which maintain the normal potassium concentration gradients between the ICF and ECF .
The recommendation for daily intake/consumption of potassium is 4700 mg. Potassium is excreted , both actively and passively , through the renal tubules , especially the distal convoluted tubule and collecting ducts .
Potassium participates in the exchange with sodium in the renal tubules under the influence of aldosterone , which also relies on basolateral sodium-potassium pumps .
Hypokalemia is an abnormally low potassium blood level .
Similar to the situation with hyponatremia , hypokalemia can occur because of either an absolute reduction of potassium in the body or a relative reduction of potassium in the blood due to the redistribution of potassium .
An absolute loss of potassium can arise from decreased intake , frequently related to starvation .
It can also come about from vomiting , diarrhea , or alkalosis .
Some insulin-dependent diabetic patients experience a relative reduction of potassium in the blood from the redistribution of potassium .
Hyperkalemia , an elevated potassium blood level , also can impair the function of skeletal muscles , the nervous system , and the heart .
Hyperkalemia can result from increased dietary intake of potassium .
In such a situation , potassium from the blood ends up in the ECF in abnormally high concentrations .
This can result in a partial depolarization ( excitation ) of the plasma membrane of skeletal muscle fibers , neurons , and cardiac cells of the heart , and can also lead to an inability of cells to repolarize .
For the heart , this means that it won ’ t relax after a contraction , and will effectively “ seize ” and stop pumping blood , which is fatal within minutes .
Because of such effects on the nervous system , a person with hyperkalemia may also exhibit mental confusion , numbness , and weakened respiratory muscles .
Chloride is the predominant extracellular anion .
Chloride is a major contributor to the osmotic pressure gradient between the ICF and ECF , and plays an important role in maintaining proper hydration .
Chloride functions to balance cations in the ECF , maintaining the electrical neutrality of this fluid .
The paths of secretion and reabsorption of chloride ions in the renal system follow the paths of sodium ions .
Hypochloremia , or lower-than-normal blood chloride levels , can occur because of defective renal tubular absorption .
Vomiting , diarrhea , and metabolic acidosis can also lead to hypochloremia .
Hyperchloremia , or higher-than-normal blood chloride levels , can occur due to dehydration , excessive intake of dietary salt ( NaCl ) or swallowing of sea water , aspirin intoxication , congestive heart failure , and the hereditary , chronic lung disease , cystic fibrosis .
In people who have cystic fibrosis , chloride levels in sweat are two to five times those of normal levels , and analysis of sweat is often used in the diagnosis of the disease .
Read this article ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/saltwater ) for an explanation of the effect of seawater on humans .
What effect does drinking seawater have on the body ?
Bicarbonate is the second most abundant anion in the blood .
Its principal function is to maintain your body ’ s acid-base balance by being part of buffer systems .
This role will be discussed in a different section .
Bicarbonate ions result from a chemical reaction that starts with carbon dioxide ( CO ) and water , two molecules that are produced at the end of aerobic metabolism .
Only a small amount of CO can be dissolved in body fluids .
Thus , over 90 percent of the CO is converted into bicarbonate ions , HCO , through the following reactions : The bidirectional arrows indicate that the reactions can go in either direction , depending on the concentrations of the reactants and products .
Carbon dioxide is produced in large amounts in tissues that have a high metabolic rate .
Carbon dioxide is converted into bicarbonate in the cytoplasm of red blood cells through the action of an enzyme called carbonic anhydrase .
Bicarbonate is transported in the blood .
Once in the lungs , the reactions reverse direction , and CO is regenerated from bicarbonate to be exhaled as metabolic waste .
About two pounds of calcium in your body are bound up in bone , which provides hardness to the bone and serves as a mineral reserve for calcium and its salts for the rest of the tissues .
Teeth also have a high concentration of calcium within them .
A little more than one-half of blood calcium is bound to proteins , leaving the rest in its ionized form .
Calcium ions , Ca , are necessary for muscle contraction , enzyme activity , and blood coagulation .
In addition , calcium helps to stabilize cell membranes and is essential for the release of neurotransmitters from neurons and of hormones from endocrine glands .
Hypocalcemia , or abnormally low calcium blood levels , is seen in hypoparathyroidism , which may follow the removal of the thyroid gland , because the four nodules of the parathyroid gland are embedded in it .
Hypercalcemia , or abnormally high calcium blood levels , is seen in primary hyperparathyroidism .
Some malignancies may also result in hypercalcemia .
Phosphate is present in the body in three ionic forms : , in phospholipids , such as those that make up the cell membrane , and in ATP , nucleotides , and buffers .
Hypophosphatemia , or abnormally low phosphate blood levels , occurs with heavy use of antacids , during alcohol withdrawal , and during malnourishment .
In the face of phosphate depletion , the kidneys usually conserve phosphate , but during starvation , this conservation is impaired greatly .
Hyperphosphatemia , or abnormally increased levels of phosphates in the blood , occurs if there is decreased renal function or in cases of acute lymphocytic leukemia .
Additionally , because phosphate is a major constituent of the ICF , any significant destruction of cells can result in dumping of phosphate into the ECF .
Sodium is reabsorbed from the renal filtrate , and potassium is excreted into the filtrate in the renal collecting tubule .
The control of this exchange is governed principally by two hormones—aldosterone and angiotensin II .
Recall that aldosterone increases the excretion of potassium and the reabsorption of sodium in the distal tubule .
Aldosterone is released if blood levels of potassium increase , if blood levels of sodium severely decrease , or if blood pressure decreases .
Its net effect is to conserve and increase water levels in the plasma by reducing the excretion of sodium , and thus water , from the kidneys .
In a negative feedback loop , increased osmolality of the ECF ( which follows aldosterone-stimulated sodium absorption ) inhibits the release of the hormone ( Figure 26.13 ) .
The most common form is .
Bone and teeth bind up 85 percent of the body ’ s phosphate as part of calcium-phosphate salts .
Phosphate is found , and Angiotensin II causes vasoconstriction and an increase in systemic blood pressure .
This action increases the glomerular filtration rate , resulting in more material filtered out of the glomerular capillaries and into Bowman ’ s capsule .
Angiotensin II also signals an increase in the release of aldosterone from the adrenal cortex .
In the distal convoluted tubules and collecting ducts of the kidneys , aldosterone stimulates the synthesis and activation of the sodium-potassium pump ( Figure 26.14 ) .
Sodium passes from the filtrate , into and through the cells of the tubules and ducts , into the ECF and then into capillaries .
Water follows the sodium due to osmosis .
Thus , aldosterone causes an increase in blood sodium levels and blood volume .
Aldosterone ’ s effect on potassium is the reverse of that of sodium ; under its influence , excess potassium is pumped into the renal filtrate for excretion from the body .
Calcium and phosphate are both regulated through the actions of three hormones : parathyroid hormone ( PTH ) , dihydroxyvitamin D ( calcitriol ) , and calcitonin .
All three are released or synthesized in response to the blood levels of calcium .
PTH is released from the parathyroid gland in response to a decrease in the concentration of blood calcium .
The hormone activates osteoclasts to break down bone matrix and release inorganic calcium-phosphate salts .
PTH also increases the gastrointestinal absorption of dietary calcium by converting vitamin D into dihydroxyvitamin D ( calcitriol ) , an active form of vitamin D that intestinal epithelial cells require to absorb calcium .
PTH raises blood calcium levels by inhibiting the loss of calcium through the kidneys .
PTH also increases the loss of phosphate through the kidneys .
Calcitonin is released from the thyroid gland in response to elevated blood levels of calcium .
The hormone increases the activity of osteoblasts , which remove calcium from the blood and incorporate calcium into the bony matrix .
Acid-balance balance is measured using the pH scale , as shown in Figure 26.15 .
A variety of buffering systems permits blood and other bodily fluids to maintain a narrow pH range , even in the face of perturbations .
A buffer is a chemical system that prevents a radical change in fluid pH by dampening the change in hydrogen ion concentrations in the case of excess acid or base .
Most commonly , the substance that absorbs the ions is either a weak acid , which takes up hydroxyl ions , or a weak base , which takes up hydrogen ions .
The buffer systems in the human body are extremely efficient , and different systems work at different rates .
It takes only seconds for the chemical buffers in the blood to make adjustments to pH .
The respiratory tract can adjust the blood pH upward in minutes by exhaling CO from the body .
The renal system can also adjust blood pH through the excretion of hydrogen ions ( H ) and the conservation of bicarbonate , but this process takes hours to days to have an effect .
The buffer systems functioning in blood plasma include plasma proteins , phosphate , and bicarbonate and carbonic acid buffers .
The kidneys help control acid-base balance by excreting hydrogen ions and generating bicarbonate that helps maintain blood plasma pH within a normal range .
Protein buffer systems work predominantly inside cells .
Nearly all proteins can function as buffers .
Proteins are made up of amino acids , which contain positively charged amino groups and negatively charged carboxyl groups .
The charged regions of these molecules can bind hydrogen and hydroxyl ions , and thus function as buffers .
Buffering by proteins accounts for two-thirds of the buffering power of the blood and most of the buffering within cells .
Hemoglobin is the principal protein inside of red blood cells and accounts for one-third of the mass of the cell .
During the conversion of CO into bicarbonate , hydrogen ions liberated in the reaction are buffered by hemoglobin , which is reduced by the dissociation of oxygen .
This buffering helps maintain normal pH .
The process is reversed in the pulmonary capillaries to re-form CO , which then can diffuse into the air sacs to be exhaled into the atmosphere .
This process is discussed in detail in the chapter on the respiratory system .
) , which is a weak acid , Phosphates are found in the blood in two forms : sodium dihydrogen phosphate , which is a weak base .
When ( NaOH ) , the weak acid reverts back to the weak base and produces water .
Acids and bases are still present , but they hold onto the ions .
The bicarbonate-carbonic acid buffer works in a fashion similar to phosphate buffers .
The bicarbonate is regulated in the blood by sodium , as are the phosphate ions .
When sodium bicarbonate ( NaHCO ) , comes into contact with a strong acid , such as HCl , carbonic acid ( H CO ) , which is a weak acid , and NaCl are formed .
When carbonic acid comes into contact with a strong base , such as NaOH , bicarbonate and water are formed .
As with the phosphate buffer , a weak acid or weak base captures the free ions , and a significant change in pH is prevented .
Bicarbonate ions and carbonic acid are present in the blood in a 20:1 ratio if the blood pH is within the normal range .
With 20 times more bicarbonate than carbonic acid , this capture system is most efficient at buffering changes that would make the blood more acidic .
This is useful because most of the body ’ s metabolic wastes , such as lactic acid and ketones , are acids .
Carbonic acid levels in the blood are controlled by the expiration of CO through the lungs .
In red blood cells , carbonic anhydrase forces the dissociation of the acid , rendering the blood less acidic .
Because of this acid dissociation , CO is exhaled ( see equations above ) .
The level of bicarbonate in the blood is controlled through the renal system , where bicarbonate ions in the renal filtrate are conserved and passed back into the blood .
However , the bicarbonate buffer is the primary buffering system of the IF surrounding the cells in tissues throughout the body .
The respiratory system contributes to the balance of acids and bases in the body by regulating the blood levels of carbonic acid ( Figure 26.16 ) .
CO in the blood readily reacts with water to form carbonic acid , and the levels of CO and carbonic acid in the blood are in equilibrium .
When the CO level in the blood rises ( as it does when you hold your breath ) , the excess CO reacts with water to form additional carbonic acid , lowering blood pH .
Increasing the rate and/or depth of respiration ( which you might feel the “ urge ” to do after holding your breath ) allows you to exhale more CO .
The loss of CO from the body reduces blood levels of carbonic acid and thereby adjusts the pH upward , toward normal levels .
As you might have surmised , this process also works in the opposite direction .
Excessive deep and rapid breathing ( as in hyperventilation ) rids the blood of CO and reduces the level of carbonic acid , making the blood too alkaline .
This brief alkalosis can be remedied by rebreathing air that has been exhaled into a paper bag .
Rebreathing exhaled air will rapidly bring blood pH down toward normal .
The chemical reactions that regulate the levels of CO and carbonic acid occur in the lungs when blood travels through the lung ’ s pulmonary capillaries .
Minor adjustments in breathing are usually sufficient to adjust the pH of the blood by changing how much CO is exhaled .
In fact , doubling the respiratory rate for less than 1 minute , removing “ extra ” CO , would increase the blood pH by 0.2 .
This situation is common if you are exercising strenuously over a period of time .
To keep up the necessary energy production , you would produce excess CO ( and lactic acid if exercising beyond your aerobic threshold ) .
In order to balance the increased acid production , the respiration rate goes up to remove the CO .
This helps to keep you from developing acidosis .
The body regulates the respiratory rate by the use of chemoreceptors , which primarily use CO as a signal .
Peripheral blood sensors are found in the walls of the aorta and carotid arteries .
These sensors signal the brain to provide immediate adjustments to the respiratory rate if CO levels rise or fall .
Yet other sensors are found in the brain itself .
Changes in the pH of CSF affect the respiratory center in the medulla oblongata , which can directly modulate breathing rate to bring the pH back into the normal range .
Hypercapnia , or abnormally elevated blood levels of CO , occurs in any situation that impairs respiratory functions , including pneumonia and congestive heart failure .
Reduced breathing ( hypoventilation ) due to drugs such as morphine , barbiturates , or ethanol ( or even just holding one ’ s breath ) can also result in hypercapnia .
Hypocapnia , or abnormally low blood levels of CO , occurs with any cause of hyperventilation that drives off the CO , such as salicylate toxicity , elevated room temperatures , fever , or hysteria .
The renal regulation of the body ’ s acid-base balance addresses the metabolic component of the buffering system .
Whereas the respiratory system ( together with breathing centers in the brain ) controls the blood levels of carbonic acid by controlling the exhalation of CO , the renal system controls the blood levels of bicarbonate .
A decrease of blood bicarbonate can result from the inhibition of carbonic anhydrase by certain diuretics or from excessive bicarbonate loss due to diarrhea .
Blood bicarbonate levels are also typically lower in people who have Addison ’ s disease ( chronic adrenal insufficiency ) , in which aldosterone levels are reduced , and in people who have renal damage , such as chronic nephritis .
Finally , low bicarbonate blood levels can result from elevated levels of ketones ( common in unmanaged diabetes mellitus ) , which bind bicarbonate in the filtrate and prevent its conservation .
, found in the filtrate , are essential to the bicarbonate buffer system , yet the cells of the tubule are Bicarbonate ions , HCO not permeable to bicarbonate ions .
The steps involved in supplying bicarbonate ions to the system are seen in Figure 26.17 and are summarized below : Step 1 : Sodium ions are reabsorbed from the filtrate in exchange for H by an antiport mechanism in the apical membranes of cells lining the renal tubule .
Step 2 : The cells produce bicarbonate ions that can be shunted to peritubular capillaries .
Step 3 : When CO is available , the reaction is driven to the formation of carbonic acid , which dissociates to form a bicarbonate ion and a hydrogen ion .
Step 4 : The bicarbonate ion passes into the peritubular capillaries and returns to the blood .
The hydrogen ion is secreted into the filtrate , where it can become part of new water molecules and be reabsorbed as such , or removed in the urine .
It is also possible that salts in the filtrate , such as sulfates , phosphates , or ammonia , will capture hydrogen ions .
If this occurs , the hydrogen ions will not be available to combine with bicarbonate ions and produce CO .
In such cases , bicarbonate ions are not conserved from the filtrate to the blood , which will also contribute to a pH imbalance and acidosis .
The hydrogen ions also compete with potassium to exchange with sodium in the renal tubules .
If more potassium is present than normal , potassium , rather than the hydrogen ions , will be exchanged , and increased potassium enters the filtrate .
When this occurs , fewer hydrogen ions in the filtrate participate in the conversion of bicarbonate into CO and less bicarbonate is conserved .
If there is less potassium , more hydrogen ions enter the filtrate to be exchanged with sodium and more bicarbonate is conserved .
Chloride ions are important in neutralizing positive ion charges in the body .
If chloride is lost , the body uses bicarbonate ions in place of the lost chloride ions .
Thus , lost chloride results in an increased reabsorption of bicarbonate by the renal system .
Diabetic acidosis , or ketoacidosis , occurs most frequently in people with poorly controlled diabetes mellitus .
When certain tissues in the body can not get adequate amounts of glucose , they depend on the breakdown of fatty acids for energy .
When acetyl groups break off the fatty acid chains , the acetyl groups then non-enzymatically combine to form ketone bodies , acetoacetic acid , beta-hydroxybutyric acid , and acetone , all of which increase the acidity of the blood .
In this condition , the brain isn ’ t supplied with enough of its fuel—glucose—to produce all of the ATP it requires to function .
Ketoacidosis can be severe and , if not detected and treated properly , can lead to diabetic coma , which can be fatal .
A common early symptom of ketoacidosis is deep , rapid breathing as the body attempts to drive off CO and compensate for the acidosis .
Another common symptom is fruity-smelling breath , due to the exhalation of acetone .
Other symptoms include dry skin and mouth , a flushed face , nausea , vomiting , and stomach pain .
Treatment for diabetic coma is ingestion or injection of sugar ; its prevention is the proper daily administration of insulin .
A person who is diabetic and uses insulin can initiate ketoacidosis if a dose of insulin is missed .
Among people with type 2 diabetes , those of Hispanic and African-American descent are more likely to go into ketoacidosis than those of other ethnic backgrounds , although the reason for this is unknown .
A person who has a blood pH below 7.35 is considered to be in acidosis ( actually , “ physiological acidosis , ” because blood is not truly acidic until its pH drops below 7 ) , and a continuous blood pH below 7.0 can be fatal .
Acidosis has several symptoms , including headache and confusion , and the individual can become lethargic and easily fatigued ( Figure 26.18 ) .
A person who has a blood pH above 7.45 is considered to be in alkalosis , and a pH above 7.8 is fatal .
Some symptoms of alkalosis include cognitive impairment ( which can progress to unconsciousness ) , tingling or numbness in the extremities , muscle twitching and spasm , and nausea and vomiting .
Both acidosis and alkalosis can be caused by either metabolic or respiratory disorders .
As discussed earlier in this chapter , the concentration of carbonic acid in the blood is dependent on the level of CO in the body and the amount of CO gas exhaled through the lungs .
Thus , the respiratory contribution to acid-base balance is usually discussed in terms of CO ( rather than of carbonic acid ) .
Remember that a molecule of carbonic acid is lost for every molecule of CO exhaled , and a molecule of carbonic acid is formed for every molecule of CO retained .
Metabolic acidosis occurs when the blood is too acidic ( pH below 7.35 ) due to too little bicarbonate , a condition called primary bicarbonate deficiency .
At the normal pH of 7.40 , the ratio of bicarbonate to carbonic acid buffer is 20:1 .
If a person ’ s blood pH drops below 7.35 , then he or she is in metabolic acidosis .
The most common cause of metabolic acidosis is the presence of organic acids or excessive ketones in the blood .
Table 26.2 lists some other causes of metabolic acidosis .
The first three of the eight causes of metabolic acidosis listed are medical ( or unusual physiological ) conditions .
Strenuous exercise can cause temporary metabolic acidosis due to the production of lactic acid .
The last five causes result from the ingestion of specific substances .
The active form of aspirin is its metabolite , sulfasalicylic acid .
An overdose of aspirin causes acidosis due to the acidity of this metabolite .
Metabolic acidosis can also result from uremia , which is the retention of urea and uric acid .
Metabolic acidosis can also arise from diabetic ketoacidosis , wherein an excess of ketones is present in the blood .
Other causes of metabolic acidosis are a decrease in the excretion of hydrogen ions , which inhibits the conservation of bicarbonate ions , and excessive loss of bicarbonate ions through the gastrointestinal tract due to diarrhea .
Metabolic alkalosis is the opposite of metabolic acidosis .
It occurs when the blood is too alkaline ( pH above 7.45 ) due to too much bicarbonate ( called primary bicarbonate excess ) .
A transient excess of bicarbonate in the blood can follow ingestion of excessive amounts of bicarbonate , citrate , or antacids for conditions such as stomach acid reflux—known as heartburn .
Cushing ’ s disease , which is the chronic hypersecretion of adrenocorticotrophic hormone ( ACTH ) by the anterior pituitary gland , can cause chronic metabolic alkalosis .
The oversecretion of ACTH results in elevated aldosterone levels and an increased loss of potassium by urinary excretion .
Other causes of metabolic alkalosis include the loss of hydrochloric acid from the stomach through vomiting , potassium depletion due to the use of diuretics for hypertension , and the excessive use of laxatives .
Respiratory acidosis occurs when the blood is overly acidic due to an excess of carbonic acid , resulting from too much CO in the blood .
Respiratory acidosis can result from anything that interferes with respiration , such as pneumonia , emphysema , or congestive heart failure .
Respiratory alkalosis occurs when the blood is overly alkaline due to a deficiency in carbonic acid and CO levels in the blood .
This condition usually occurs when too much CO is exhaled from the lungs , as occurs in hyperventilation , which is breathing that is deeper or more frequent than normal .
An elevated respiratory rate leading to hyperventilation can be due to extreme emotional upset or fear , fever , infections , hypoxia , or abnormally high levels of catecholamines , such as epinephrine and norepinephrine .
Surprisingly , aspirin overdose—salicylate toxicity—can result in respiratory alkalosis as the body tries to compensate for initial acidosis .
Watch this video ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/altitude ) to see a demonstration of the effect altitude has on blood pH .
What effect does high altitude have on blood pH , and why ?
Various compensatory mechanisms exist to maintain blood pH within a narrow range , including buffers , respiration , and renal mechanisms .
Although compensatory mechanisms usually work very well , when one of these mechanisms is not working properly ( like kidney failure or respiratory disease ) , they have their limits .
If the pH and bicarbonate to carbonic acid ratio are changed too drastically , the body may not be able to compensate .
Moreover , extreme changes in pH can denature proteins .
Extensive damage to proteins in this way can result in disruption of normal metabolic processes , serious tissue damage , and ultimately death .
Respiratory compensation for metabolic acidosis increases the respiratory rate to drive off CO and readjust the bicarbonate to carbonic acid ratio to the 20:1 level .
This adjustment can occur within minutes .
Respiratory compensation for metabolic alkalosis is not as adept as its compensation for acidosis .
The normal response of the respiratory system to elevated pH is to increase the amount of CO in the blood by decreasing the respiratory rate to conserve CO .
There is a limit to the decrease in respiration , however , that the body can tolerate .
Hence , the respiratory route is less efficient at compensating for metabolic alkalosis than for acidosis .
Metabolic and renal compensation for respiratory diseases that can create acidosis revolves around the conservation of bicarbonate ions .
In cases of respiratory acidosis , the kidney increases the conservation of bicarbonate and secretion of H through the exchange mechanism discussed earlier .
These processes increase the concentration of bicarbonate in the blood , reestablishing the proper relative concentrations of bicarbonate and carbonic acid .
In cases of respiratory alkalosis , the kidneys decrease the production of bicarbonate and reabsorb H from the tubular fluid .
These processes can be limited by the exchange of potassium by the renal cells , which use a K -H exchange mechanism ( antiporter ) .
can identify acidosis and alkalosis , indicating whether the Lab tests for pH , CO partial pressure ( pCO ) , and HCO imbalance is respiratory or metabolic , and the extent to which compensatory mechanisms are working .
The blood pH value , as shown in Table 26.3 , indicates whether the blood is in acidosis , the normal range , or alkalosis .
The pCO and values aid in determining whether the condition is metabolic or respiratory , and whether the patient has been total HCO able to compensate for the problem .
Table 26.3 lists the conditions and laboratory results that can be used to classify these conditions .
Metabolic acid-base imbalances typically result from kidney disease , and the respiratory system usually responds to compensate .
Metabolic acidosis is problematic , as lower-than-normal amounts of bicarbonate are present in the blood .
The pCO would be normal at first , but if compensation has occurred , it would decrease as the body reestablishes the proper ratio of bicarbonate and carbonic acid/CO .
Respiratory acidosis is problematic , as excess CO is present in the blood .
Bicarbonate levels would be normal at first , but if compensation has occurred , they would increase in an attempt to reestablish the proper ratio of bicarbonate and carbonic acid/CO .
Alkalosis is characterized by a higher-than-normal pH .
Metabolic alkalosis is problematic , as elevated pH and excess bicarbonate are present .
The pCO would again be normal at first , but if compensation has occurred , it would increase as the body attempts to reestablish the proper ratios of bicarbonate and carbonic acid/CO .
Respiratory alkalosis is problematic , as CO deficiency is present in the bloodstream .
The bicarbonate concentration would be normal at first .
When renal compensation occurs , however , the bicarbonate concentration in blood decreases as the kidneys attempt to reestablish the proper ratios of bicarbonate and carbonic acid/CO by eliminating more bicarbonate to bring the pH into the physiological range .
We do not often consider that a child ’ s birth is proof of the healthy functioning of both her mother ’ s and father ’ s reproductive systems .
Moreover , her parents ’ endocrine systems had to secrete the appropriate regulating hormones to induce the production and release of unique male and female gametes , reproductive cells containing the parents ’ genetic material ( one set of 23 chromosomes ) .
Her parent ’ s reproductive behavior had to facilitate the transfer of male gametes—the sperm—to the female reproductive tract at just the right time to encounter the female gamete , an oocyte ( egg ) .
Finally , combination of the gametes ( fertilization ) had to occur , followed by implantation and development .
In this chapter , you will explore the male and female reproductive systems , whose healthy functioning can culminate in the powerful sound of a newborn ’ s first cry .
At fertilization , the chromosomes in one male gamete , called a sperm ( or spermatozoon ) , combine with the chromosomes in one female gamete , called an oocyte .
The function of the male reproductive system ( Figure 27.2 ) is to produce sperm and transfer them to the female reproductive tract .
The paired testes are a crucial component in this process , as they produce both sperm and androgens , the hormones that support male reproductive physiology .
In humans , the most important male androgen is testosterone .
Several accessory organs and ducts aid the process of sperm maturation and transport the sperm and other seminal components to the penis , which delivers sperm to the female reproductive tract .
In this section , we examine each of these different structures , and discuss the process of sperm production and transport .
The testes are located in a skin-covered , highly pigmented , muscular sack called the scrotum that extends from the body behind the penis ( see Figure 27.2 ) .
This location is important in sperm production , which occurs within the testes , and proceeds more efficiently when the testes are kept 2 to 4°C below core body temperature .
The dartos muscle makes up the subcutaneous muscle layer of the scrotum ( Figure 27.3 ) .
It continues internally to make up the scrotal septum , a wall that divides the scrotum into two compartments , each housing one testis .
Descending from the internal oblique muscle of the abdominal wall are the two cremaster muscles , which cover each testis like a muscular net .
By contracting simultaneously , the dartos and cremaster muscles can elevate the testes in cold weather ( or water ) , moving the testes closer to the body and decreasing the surface area of the scrotum to retain heat .
Alternatively , as the environmental temperature increases , the scrotum relaxes , moving the testes farther from the body core and increasing scrotal surface area , which promotes heat loss .
Externally , the scrotum has a raised medial thickening on the surface called the raphae .
The testes ( singular = testis ) are the male gonads —that is , the male reproductive organs .
They produce both sperm and androgens , such as testosterone , and are active throughout the reproductive lifespan of the male .
Paired ovals , the testes are each approximately 4 to 5 cm in length and are housed within the scrotum ( see Figure 27.3 ) .
They are surrounded by two distinct layers of protective connective tissue ( Figure 27.4 ) .
The outer tunica vaginalis is a serous membrane that has both a parietal and a thin visceral layer .
Beneath the tunica vaginalis is the tunica albuginea , a tough , white , dense connective tissue layer covering the testis itself .
Not only does the tunica albuginea cover the outside of the testis , it also invaginates to form septa that divide the testis into 300 to 400 structures called lobules .
Within the lobules , sperm develop in structures called seminiferous tubules .
During the seventh month of the developmental period of a male fetus , each testis moves through the abdominal musculature to descend into the scrotal cavity .
This is called the “ descent of the testis. ” Cryptorchidism is the clinical term used when one or both of the testes fail to descend into the scrotum prior to birth .
The tightly coiled seminiferous tubules form the bulk of each testis .
They are composed of developing sperm cells surrounding a lumen , the hollow center of the tubule , where formed sperm are released into the duct system of the testis .
Specifically , from the lumens of the seminiferous tubules , sperm move into the straight tubules ( or tubuli recti ) , and from there into a fine meshwork of tubules called the rete testes .
Sperm leave the rete testes , and the testis itself , through the 15 to 20 efferent ductules that cross the tunica albuginea .
Inside the seminiferous tubules are six different cell types .
These include supporting cells called sustentacular cells , as well as five types of developing sperm cells called germ cells .
Germ cell development progresses from the basement membrane—at the perimeter of the tubule—toward the lumen .
Let ’ s look more closely at these cell types .
Surrounding all stages of the developing sperm cells are elongate , branching Sertoli cells .
Sertoli cells are a type of supporting cell called a sustentacular cell , or sustentocyte , that are typically found in epithelial tissue .
Sertoli cells secrete signaling molecules that promote sperm production and can control whether germ cells live or die .
They extend physically around the germ cells from the peripheral basement membrane of the seminiferous tubules to the lumen .
Tight junctions between these sustentacular cells create the blood–testis barrier , which keeps bloodborne substances from reaching the germ cells and , at the same time , keeps surface antigens on developing germ cells from escaping into the bloodstream and prompting an autoimmune response .
The least mature cells , the spermatogonia ( singular = spermatogonium ) , line the basement membrane inside the tubule .
Spermatogonia are the stem cells of the testis , which means that they are still able to differentiate into a variety of different cell types throughout adulthood .
Spermatogonia divide to produce primary and secondary spermatocytes , then spermatids , which finally produce formed sperm .
The process that begins with spermatogonia and concludes with the production of sperm is called spermatogenesis .
As just noted , spermatogenesis occurs in the seminiferous tubules that form the bulk of each testis ( see Figure 27.4 ) .
The process begins at puberty , after which time sperm are produced constantly throughout a man ’ s life .
One production cycle , from spermatogonia through formed sperm , takes approximately 64 days .
A new cycle starts approximately every 16 days , although this timing is not synchronous across the seminiferous tubules .
Sperm counts—the total number of sperm a man produces—slowly decline after age 35 , and some studies suggest that smoking can lower sperm counts irrespective of age .
The process of spermatogenesis begins with mitosis of the diploid spermatogonia ( Figure 27.5 ) .
Because these cells are diploid ( 2 n ) , they each have a complete copy of the father ’ s genetic material , or 46 chromosomes .
However , mature gametes are haploid ( 1 n ) , containing 23 chromosomes—meaning that daughter cells of spermatogonia must undergo a second cellular division through the process of meiosis .
Two identical diploid cells result from spermatogonia mitosis .
One of these cells remains a spermatogonium , and the other becomes a primary spermatocyte , the next stage in the process of spermatogenesis .
As in mitosis , DNA is replicated in a primary spermatocyte , before it undergoes a cell division called meiosis I .
During meiosis I each of the 23 pairs of chromosomes separates .
This results in two cells , called secondary spermatocytes , each with only half the number of chromosomes .
Now a second round of cell division ( meiosis II ) occurs in both of the secondary spermatocytes .
During meiosis II each of the 23 replicated chromosomes divides , similar to what happens during mitosis .
Thus , meiosis results in separating the chromosome pairs .
This second meiotic division results in a total of four cells with only half of the number of chromosomes .
Each of these new cells is a spermatid .
Although haploid , early spermatids look very similar to cells in the earlier stages of spermatogenesis , with a round shape , central nucleus , and large amount of cytoplasm .
A process called spermiogenesis transforms these early spermatids , reducing the cytoplasm , and beginning the formation of the parts of a true sperm .
The fifth stage of germ cell formation—spermatozoa , or formed sperm—is the end result of this process , which occurs in the portion of the tubule nearest the lumen .
Eventually , the sperm are released into the lumen and are moved along a series of ducts in the testis toward a structure called the epididymis for the next step of sperm maturation .
Sperm are smaller than most cells in the body ; in fact , the volume of a sperm cell is 85,000 times less than that of the female gamete .
Approximately 100 to 300 million sperm are produced each day , whereas women typically ovulate only one oocyte per month .
As is true for most cells in the body , the structure of sperm cells speaks to their function .
Sperm have a distinctive head , mid-piece , and tail region ( Figure 27.6 ) .
The head of the sperm contains the extremely compact haploid nucleus with very little cytoplasm .
These qualities contribute to the overall small size of the sperm ( the head is only 5 μ m long ) .
A structure called the acrosome covers most of the head of the sperm cell as a “ cap ” that is filled with lysosomal enzymes important for preparing sperm to participate in fertilization .
Tightly packed mitochondria fill the midpiece of the sperm .
ATP produced by these mitochondria will power the flagellum , which extends from the neck and the mid-piece through the tail of the sperm , enabling it to move the entire sperm cell .
The central strand of the flagellum , the axial filament , is formed from one centriole inside the maturing sperm cell during the final stages of spermatogenesis .
To fertilize an egg , sperm must be moved from the seminiferous tubules in the testes , through the epididymis , and—later during ejaculation—along the length of the penis and out into the female reproductive tract .
From the lumen of the seminiferous tubules , the immotile sperm are surrounded by testicular fluid and moved to the epididymis ( plural = epididymides ) , a coiled tube attached to the testis where newly formed sperm continue to mature ( see Figure 27.4 ) .
Though the epididymis does not take up much room in its tightly coiled state , it would be approximately 6 m ( 20 feet ) long if straightened .
It takes an average of 12 days for sperm to move through the coils of the epididymis , with the shortest recorded transit time in humans being one day .
Sperm enter the head of the epididymis and are moved along predominantly by the contraction of smooth muscles lining the epididymal tubes .
As they are moved along the length of the epididymis , the sperm further mature and acquire the ability to move under their own power .
Once inside the female reproductive tract , they will use this ability to move independently toward the unfertilized egg .
The more mature sperm are then stored in the tail of the epididymis ( the final section ) until ejaculation occurs .
During ejaculation , sperm exit the tail of the epididymis and are pushed by smooth muscle contraction to the ductus deferens ( also called the vas deferens ) .
The ductus deferens is a thick , muscular tube that is bundled together inside the scrotum with connective tissue , blood vessels , and nerves into a structure called the spermatic cord ( see Figure 27.2 and Figure 27.3 ) .
Because the ductus deferens is physically accessible within the scrotum , surgical sterilization to interrupt sperm delivery can be performed by cutting and sealing a small section of the ductus ( vas ) deferens .
This procedure is called a vasectomy , and it is an effective form of male birth control .
Although it may be possible to reverse a vasectomy , clinicians consider the procedure permanent , and advise men to undergo it only if they are certain they no longer wish to father children .
Watch this video ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/vasectomy ) to learn about a vasectomy .
As described in this video , a vasectomy is a procedure in which a small section of the ductus ( vas ) deferens is removed from the scrotum .
This interrupts the path taken by sperm through the ductus deferens .
If sperm do not exit through the vas , either because the man has had a vasectomy or has not ejaculated , in what region of the testis do they remain ?
From each epididymis , each ductus deferens extends superiorly into the abdominal cavity through the inguinal canal in the abdominal wall .
From here , the ductus deferens continues posteriorly to the pelvic cavity , ending posterior to the bladder where it dilates in a region called the ampulla ( meaning “ flask ” ) .
Sperm make up only 5 percent of the final volume of semen , the thick , milky fluid that the male ejaculates .
The bulk of semen is produced by three critical accessory glands of the male reproductive system : the seminal vesicles , the prostate , and the bulbourethral glands .
As sperm pass through the ampulla of the ductus deferens at ejaculation , they mix with fluid from the associated seminal vesicle ( see Figure 27.2 ) .
The paired seminal vesicles are glands that contribute approximately 60 percent of the semen volume .
Seminal vesicle fluid contains large amounts of fructose , which is used by the sperm mitochondria to generate ATP to allow movement through the female reproductive tract .
The fluid , now containing both sperm and seminal vesicle secretions , next moves into the associated ejaculatory duct , a short structure formed from the ampulla of the ductus deferens and the duct of the seminal vesicle .
The paired ejaculatory ducts transport the seminal fluid into the next structure , the prostate gland .
As shown in Figure 27.2 , the centrally located prostate gland sits anterior to the rectum at the base of the bladder surrounding the prostatic urethra ( the portion of the urethra that runs within the prostate ) .
About the size of a walnut , the prostate is formed of both muscular and glandular tissues .
It excretes an alkaline , milky fluid to the passing seminal fluid—now called semen—that is critical to first coagulate and then decoagulate the semen following ejaculation .
The temporary thickening of semen helps retain it within the female reproductive tract , providing time for sperm to utilize the fructose provided by seminal vesicle secretions .
When the semen regains its fluid state , sperm can then pass farther into the female reproductive tract .
The prostate normally doubles in size during puberty .
At approximately age 25 , it gradually begins to enlarge again .
By age 60 , approximately 40 percent of men have some degree of BPH .
By age 80 , the number of affected individuals has jumped to as many as 80 percent .
Treatments for BPH attempt to relieve the pressure on the urethra so that urine can flow more normally .
Mild to moderate symptoms are treated with medication , whereas severe enlargement of the prostate is treated by surgery in which a portion of the prostate tissue is removed .
Another common disorder involving the prostate is prostate cancer .
According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ( CDC ) , prostate cancer is the second most common cancer in men .
However , some forms of prostate cancer grow very slowly and thus may not ever require treatment .
Aggressive forms of prostate cancer , in contrast , involve metastasis to vulnerable organs like the lungs and brain .
There is no link between BPH and prostate cancer , but the symptoms are similar .
Prostate cancer is detected by a medical history , a blood test , and a rectal exam that allows physicians to palpate the prostate and check for unusual masses .
If a mass is detected , the cancer diagnosis is confirmed by biopsy of the cells .
The final addition to semen is made by two bulbourethral glands ( or Cowper ’ s glands ) that release a thick , salty fluid that lubricates the end of the urethra and the vagina , and helps to clean urine residues from the penile urethra .
The fluid from these accessory glands is released after the male becomes sexually aroused , and shortly before the release of the semen .
It is therefore sometimes called pre-ejaculate .
It is important to note that , in addition to the lubricating proteins , it is possible for bulbourethral fluid to pick up sperm already present in the urethra , and therefore it may be able to cause pregnancy .
Watch this video ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/spermpath ) to explore the structures of the male reproductive system and the path of sperm , which starts in the testes and ends as the sperm leave the penis through the urethra .
Where are sperm deposited after they leave the ejaculatory duct ?
The penis is the male organ of copulation ( sexual intercourse ) .
It is flaccid for non-sexual actions , such as urination , and turgid and rod-like with sexual arousal .
When erect , the stiffness of the organ allows it to penetrate into the vagina and deposit semen into the female reproductive tract .
The shaft of the penis surrounds the urethra ( Figure 27.7 ) .
The shaft is composed of three column-like chambers of erectile tissue that span the length of the shaft .
Each of the two larger lateral chambers is called a corpus cavernosum ( plural = corpora cavernosa ) .
Together , these make up the bulk of the penis .
The corpus spongiosum , which can be felt as a raised ridge on the erect penis , is a smaller chamber that surrounds the spongy , or penile , urethra .
The end of the penis , called the glans penis , has a high concentration of nerve endings , resulting in very sensitive skin that influences the likelihood of ejaculation ( see Figure 27.2 ) .
The skin from the shaft extends down over the glans and forms a collar called the prepuce ( or foreskin ) .
The foreskin also contains a dense concentration of nerve endings , and both lubricate and protect the sensitive skin of the glans penis .
A surgical procedure called circumcision , often performed for religious or social reasons , removes the prepuce , typically within days of birth .
Both sexual arousal and REM sleep ( during which dreaming occurs ) can induce an erection .
Penile erections are the result of vasocongestion , or engorgement of the tissues because of more arterial blood flowing into the penis than is leaving in the veins .
During sexual arousal , nitric oxide ( NO ) is released from nerve endings near blood vessels within the corpora cavernosa and spongiosum .
Release of NO activates a signaling pathway that results in relaxation of the smooth muscles that surround the penile arteries , causing them to dilate .
This dilation increases the amount of blood that can enter the penis and induces the endothelial cells in the penile arterial walls to also secrete NO and perpetuate the vasodilation .
The rapid increase in blood volume fills the erectile chambers , and the increased pressure of the filled chambers compresses the thinwalled penile venules , preventing venous drainage of the penis .
The result of this increased blood flow to the penis and reduced blood return from the penis is erection .
Depending on the flaccid dimensions of a penis , it can increase in size slightly or greatly during erection , with the average length of an erect penis measuring approximately 15 cm .
Erectile dysfunction ( ED ) is a condition in which a man has difficulty either initiating or maintaining an erection .
The combined prevalence of minimal , moderate , and complete ED is approximately 40 percent in men at age 40 , and reaches nearly 70 percent by 70 years of age .
In addition to aging , ED is associated with diabetes , vascular disease , psychiatric disorders , prostate disorders , the use of some drugs such as certain antidepressants , and problems with the testes resulting in low testosterone concentrations .
These physical and emotional conditions can lead to interruptions in the vasodilation pathway and result in an inability to achieve an erection .
Recall that the release of NO induces relaxation of the smooth muscles that surround the penile arteries , leading to the vasodilation necessary to achieve an erection .
To reverse the process of vasodilation , an enzyme called phosphodiesterase ( PDE ) degrades a key component of the NO signaling pathway called cGMP .
There are several different forms of this enzyme , and PDE type 5 is the type of PDE found in the tissues of the penis .
Scientists discovered that inhibiting PDE5 increases blood flow , and allows vasodilation of the penis to occur .
PDEs and the vasodilation signaling pathway are found in the vasculature in other parts of the body .
In the 1990s , clinical trials of a PDE5 inhibitor called sildenafil were initiated to treat hypertension and angina pectoris ( chest pain caused by poor blood flow through the heart ) .
The trial showed that the drug was not effective at treating heart conditions , but many men experienced erection and priapism ( erection lasting longer than 4 hours ) .
Because of this , a clinical trial was started to investigate the ability of sildenafil to promote erections in men suffering from ED .
In 1998 , the FDA approved the drug , marketed as Viagra .
Since approval of the drug , sildenafil and similar PDE inhibitors now generate over a billion dollars a year in sales , and are reported to be effective in treating approximately 70 to 85 percent of cases of ED .
Importantly , men with health problems—especially those with cardiac disease taking nitrates—should avoid Viagra or talk to their physician to find out if they are a candidate for the use of this drug , as deaths have been reported for at-risk users .
Testosterone , an androgen , is a steroid hormone produced by Leydig cells .
The alternate term for Leydig cells , interstitial cells , reflects their location between the seminiferous tubules in the testes .
In male embryos , testosterone is secreted by Leydig cells by the seventh week of development , with peak concentrations reached in the second trimester .
This early release of testosterone results in the anatomical differentiation of the male sexual organs .
In childhood , testosterone concentrations are low .
They increase during puberty , activating characteristic physical changes and initiating spermatogenesis .
The continued presence of testosterone is necessary to keep the male reproductive system working properly , and Leydig cells produce approximately 6 to 7 mg of testosterone per day .
Testicular steroidogenesis ( the manufacture of androgens , including testosterone ) results in testosterone concentrations that are 100 times higher in the testes than in the circulation .
Maintaining these normal concentrations of testosterone promotes spermatogenesis , whereas low levels of testosterone can lead to infertility .
In addition to intratesticular secretion , testosterone is also released into the systemic circulation and plays an important role in muscle development , bone growth , the development of secondary sex characteristics , and maintaining libido ( sex drive ) in both males and females .
In females , the ovaries secrete small amounts of testosterone , although most is converted to estradiol .
A small amount of testosterone is also secreted by the adrenal glands in both sexes .
The regulation of testosterone concentrations throughout the body is critical for male reproductive function .
The intricate interplay between the endocrine system and the reproductive system is shown in Figure 27.8 .
The regulation of Leydig cell production of testosterone begins outside of the testes .
The hypothalamus and the pituitary gland in the brain integrate external and internal signals to control testosterone synthesis and secretion .
The regulation begins in the hypothalamus .
Pulsatile release of a hormone called gonadotropin-releasing hormone ( GnRH ) from the hypothalamus stimulates the endocrine release of hormones from the pituitary gland .
Binding of GnRH to its receptors on the anterior pituitary gland stimulates release of the two gonadotropins : luteinizing hormone ( LH ) and follicle-stimulating hormone ( FSH ) .
These two hormones are critical for reproductive function in both men and women .
In men , FSH binds predominantly to the Sertoli cells within the seminiferous tubules to promote spermatogenesis .
FSH also stimulates the Sertoli cells to produce hormones called inhibins , which function to inhibit FSH release from the pituitary , thus reducing testosterone secretion .
These polypeptide hormones correlate directly with Sertoli cell function and sperm number ; inhibin B can be used as a marker of spermatogenic activity .
In men , LH binds to receptors on Leydig cells in the testes and upregulates the production of testosterone .
A negative feedback loop predominantly controls the synthesis and secretion of both FSH and LH .
Low blood concentrations of testosterone stimulate the hypothalamic release of GnRH .
GnRH then stimulates the anterior pituitary to secrete LH into the bloodstream .
In the testis , LH binds to LH receptors on Leydig cells and stimulates the release of testosterone .
When concentrations of testosterone in the blood reach a critical threshold , testosterone itself will bind to androgen receptors on both the hypothalamus and the anterior pituitary , inhibiting the synthesis and secretion of GnRH and LH , respectively .
When the blood concentrations of testosterone once again decline , testosterone no longer interacts with the receptors to the same degree and GnRH and LH are once again secreted , stimulating more testosterone production .
This same process occurs with FSH and inhibin to control spermatogenesis .
Declines in Leydig cell activity can occur in men beginning at 40 to 50 years of age .
The resulting reduction in circulating testosterone concentrations can lead to symptoms of andropause , also known as male menopause .
While the reduction in sex steroids in men is akin to female menopause , there is no clear sign—such as a lack of a menstrual period—to denote the initiation of andropause .
Instead , men report feelings of fatigue , reduced muscle mass , depression , anxiety , irritability , loss of libido , and insomnia .
A reduction in spermatogenesis resulting in lowered fertility is also reported , and sexual dysfunction can also be associated with andropausal symptoms .
Whereas some researchers believe that certain aspects of andropause are difficult to tease apart from aging in general , testosterone replacement is sometimes prescribed to alleviate some symptoms .
Unlike its male counterpart , the female reproductive system is located primarily inside the pelvic cavity ( Figure 27.9 ) .
Recall that the ovaries are the female gonads .
The gamete they produce is called an oocyte .
We ’ ll discuss the production of oocytes in detail shortly .
First , let ’ s look at some of the structures of the female reproductive system .
The external female reproductive structures are referred to collectively as the vulva ( Figure 27.10 ) .
The mons pubis is a pad of fat that is located at the anterior , over the pubic bone .
After puberty , it becomes covered in pubic hair .
The labia majora ( labia = “ lips ” ; majora = “ larger ” ) are folds of hair-covered skin that begin just posterior to the mons pubis .
The thinner and more pigmented labia minora ( labia = “ lips ” ; minora = “ smaller ” ) extend medial to the labia majora .
Although they naturally vary in shape and size from woman to woman , the labia minora serve to protect the female urethra and the entrance to the female reproductive tract .
The superior , anterior portions of the labia minora come together to encircle the clitoris ( or glans clitoris ) , an organ that originates from the same cells as the glans penis and has abundant nerves that make it important in sexual sensation and orgasm .
The hymen is a thin membrane that sometimes partially covers the entrance to the vagina .
An intact hymen can not be used as an indication of “ virginity ” ; even at birth , this is only a partial membrane , as menstrual fluid and other secretions must be able to exit the body , regardless of penile–vaginal intercourse .
The vaginal opening is located between the opening of the urethra and the anus .
It is flanked by outlets to the Bartholin ’ s glands ( or greater vestibular glands ) .
The vagina , shown at the bottom of Figure 27.9 and Figure 27.9 , is a muscular canal ( approximately 10 cm long ) that serves as the entrance to the reproductive tract .
It also serves as the exit from the uterus during menses and childbirth .
The outer walls of the anterior and posterior vagina are formed into longitudinal columns , or ridges , and the superior portion of the vagina—called the fornix—meets the protruding uterine cervix .
The walls of the vagina are lined with an outer , fibrous adventitia ; a middle layer of smooth muscle ; and an inner mucous membrane with transverse folds called rugae .
Together , the middle and inner layers allow the expansion of the vagina to accommodate intercourse and childbirth .
The thin , perforated hymen can partially surround the opening to the vaginal orifice .
The hymen can be ruptured with strenuous physical exercise , penile–vaginal intercourse , and childbirth .
The Bartholin ’ s glands and the lesser vestibular glands ( located near the clitoris ) secrete mucus , which keeps the vestibular area moist .
The vagina is home to a normal population of microorganisms that help to protect against infection by pathogenic bacteria , yeast , or other organisms that can enter the vagina .
In a healthy woman , the most predominant type of vaginal bacteria is from the genus Lactobacillus .
This family of beneficial bacterial flora secretes lactic acid , and thus protects the vagina by maintaining an acidic pH ( below 4.5 ) .
Potential pathogens are less likely to survive in these acidic conditions .
Lactic acid , in combination with other vaginal secretions , makes the vagina a self-cleansing organ .
However , douching—or washing out the vagina with fluid—can disrupt the normal balance of healthy microorganisms , and actually increase a woman ’ s risk for infections and irritation .
Indeed , the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists recommend that women do not douche , and that they allow the vagina to maintain its normal healthy population of protective microbial flora .
The ovaries are the female gonads ( see Figure 27.9 ) .
Paired ovals , they are each about 2 to 3 cm in length , about the size of an almond .
The ovaries are located within the pelvic cavity , and are supported by the mesovarium , an extension of the peritoneum that connects the ovaries to the broad ligament .
Extending from the mesovarium itself is the suspensory ligament that contains the ovarian blood and lymph vessels .
Finally , the ovary itself is attached to the uterus via the ovarian ligament .
The ovary comprises an outer covering of cuboidal epithelium called the ovarian surface epithelium that is superficial to a dense connective tissue covering called the tunica albuginea .
Beneath the tunica albuginea is the cortex , or outer portion , of the organ .
The cortex is composed of a tissue framework called the ovarian stroma that forms the bulk of the adult ovary .
Oocytes develop within the outer layer of this stroma , each surrounded by supporting cells .
This grouping of an oocyte and its supporting cells is called a follicle .
The growth and development of ovarian follicles will be described shortly .
Beneath the cortex lies the inner ovarian medulla , the site of blood vessels , lymph vessels , and the nerves of the ovary .
You will learn more about the overall anatomy of the female reproductive system at the end of this section .
The ovarian cycle is a set of predictable changes in a female ’ s oocytes and ovarian follicles .
During a woman ’ s reproductive years , it is a roughly 28-day cycle that can be correlated with , but is not the same as , the menstrual cycle ( discussed shortly ) .
The cycle includes two interrelated processes : oogenesis ( the production of female gametes ) and folliculogenesis ( the growth and development of ovarian follicles ) .
Gametogenesis in females is called oogenesis .
The process begins with the ovarian stem cells , or oogonia ( Figure 27.11 ) .
Oogonia are formed during fetal development , and divide via mitosis , much like spermatogonia in the testis .
Unlike spermatogonia , however , oogonia form primary oocytes in the fetal ovary prior to birth .
These primary oocytes are then arrested in this stage of meiosis I , only to resume it years later , beginning at puberty and continuing until the woman is near menopause ( the cessation of a woman ’ s reproductive functions ) .
The number of primary oocytes present in the ovaries declines from one to two million in an infant , to approximately 400,000 at puberty , to zero by the end of menopause .
The initiation of ovulation —the release of an oocyte from the ovary—marks the transition from puberty into reproductive maturity for women .
From then on , throughout a woman ’ s reproductive years , ovulation occurs approximately once every 28 days .
Just prior to ovulation , a surge of luteinizing hormone triggers the resumption of meiosis in a primary oocyte .
This initiates the transition from primary to secondary oocyte .
However , as you can see in Figure 27.11 , this cell division does not result in two identical cells .
Instead , the cytoplasm is divided unequally , and one daughter cell is much larger than the other .
This larger cell , the secondary oocyte , eventually leaves the ovary during ovulation .
The smaller cell , called the first polar body , may or may not complete meiosis and produce second polar bodies ; in either case , it eventually disintegrates .
Therefore , even though oogenesis produces up to four cells , only one survives .
How does the diploid secondary oocyte become an ovum —the haploid female gamete ?
Meiosis of a secondary oocyte is completed only if a sperm succeeds in penetrating its barriers .
Meiosis II then resumes , producing one haploid ovum that , at the instant of fertilization by a ( haploid ) sperm , becomes the first diploid cell of the new offspring ( a zygote ) .
Thus , the ovum can be thought of as a brief , transitional , haploid stage between the diploid oocyte and diploid zygote .
The larger amount of cytoplasm contained in the female gamete is used to supply the developing zygote with nutrients during the period between fertilization and implantation into the uterus .
Interestingly , sperm contribute only DNA at fertilization —not cytoplasm .
Therefore , the cytoplasm and all of the cytoplasmic organelles in the developing embryo are of maternal origin .
This includes mitochondria , which contain their own DNA .
Scientific research in the 1980s determined that mitochondrial DNA was maternally inherited , meaning that you can trace your mitochondrial DNA directly to your mother , her mother , and so on back through your female ancestors .
When we talk about human DNA , we ’ re usually referring to nuclear DNA ; that is , the DNA coiled into chromosomal bundles in the nucleus of our cells .
We inherit half of our nuclear DNA from our father , and half from our mother .
However , mitochondrial DNA ( mtDNA ) comes only from the mitochondria in the cytoplasm of the fat ovum we inherit from our mother .
She received her mtDNA from her mother , who got it from her mother , and so on .
Each of our cells contains approximately 1700 mitochondria , with each mitochondrion packed with mtDNA containing approximately 37 genes .
Mutations ( changes ) in mtDNA occur spontaneously in a somewhat organized pattern at regular intervals in human history .
By analyzing these mutational relationships , researchers have been able to determine that we can all trace our ancestry back to one woman who lived in Africa about 200,000 years ago .
Scientists have given this woman the biblical name Eve , although she is not , of course , the first Homo sapiens female .
More precisely , she is our most recent common ancestor through matrilineal descent .
This doesn ’ t mean that everyone ’ s mtDNA today looks exactly like that of our ancestral Eve .
Because of the spontaneous mutations in mtDNA that have occurred over the centuries , researchers can map different “ branches ” off of the “ main trunk ” of our mtDNA family tree .
Your mtDNA might have a pattern of mutations that aligns more closely with one branch , and your neighbor ’ s may align with another branch .
Still , all branches eventually lead back to Eve .
But what happened to the mtDNA of all of the other Homo sapiens females who were living at the time of Eve ?
Researchers explain that , over the centuries , their female descendants died childless or with only male children , and thus , their maternal line—and its mtDNA—ended .
Again , ovarian follicles are oocytes and their supporting cells .
They grow and develop in a process called folliculogenesis , which typically leads to ovulation of one follicle approximately every 28 days , along with death to multiple other follicles .
The death of ovarian follicles is called atresia , and can occur at any point during follicular development .
Recall that , a female infant at birth will have one to two million oocytes within her ovarian follicles , and that this number declines throughout life until menopause , when no follicles remain .
As you ’ ll see next , follicles progress from primordial , to primary , to secondary and tertiary stages prior to ovulation—with the oocyte inside the follicle remaining as a primary oocyte until right before ovulation .
Folliculogenesis begins with follicles in a resting state .
These small primordial follicles are present in newborn females and are the prevailing follicle type in the adult ovary ( Figure 27.12 ) .
Primordial follicles have only a single flat layer of support cells , called granulosa cells , that surround the oocyte , and they can stay in this resting state for years—some until right before menopause .
After puberty , a few primordial follicles will respond to a recruitment signal each day , and will join a pool of immature growing follicles called primary follicles .
Primary follicles start with a single layer of granulosa cells , but the granulosa cells then become active and transition from a flat or squamous shape to a rounded , cuboidal shape as they increase in size and proliferate .
As the granulosa cells divide , the follicles—now called secondary follicles ( see Figure 27.12 ) —increase in diameter , adding a new outer layer of connective tissue , blood vessels , and theca cells —cells that work with the granulosa cells to produce estrogens .
Within the growing secondary follicle , the primary oocyte now secretes a thin acellular membrane called the zona pellucida that will play a critical role in fertilization .
A thick fluid , called follicular fluid , that has formed between the granulosa cells also begins to collect into one large pool , or antrum .
Follicles in which the antrum has become large and fully formed are considered tertiary follicles ( or antral follicles ) .
Several follicles reach the tertiary stage at the same time , and most of these will undergo atresia .
The one that does not die will continue to grow and develop until ovulation , when it will expel its secondary oocyte surrounded by several layers of granulosa cells from the ovary .
Keep in mind that most follicles don ’ t make it to this point .
In fact , roughly 99 percent of the follicles in the ovary will undergo atresia , which can occur at any stage of folliculogenesis .
The process of development that we have just described , from primordial follicle to early tertiary follicle , takes approximately two months in humans .
The final stages of development of a small cohort of tertiary follicles , ending with ovulation of a secondary oocyte , occur over a course of approximately 28 days .
These changes are regulated by many of the same hormones that regulate the male reproductive system , including GnRH , LH , and FSH .
As in men , the hypothalamus produces GnRH , a hormone that signals the anterior pituitary gland to produce the gonadotropins FSH and LH ( Figure 27.13 ) .
These gonadotropins leave the pituitary and travel through the bloodstream to the ovaries , where they bind to receptors on the granulosa and theca cells of the follicles .
FSH stimulates the follicles to grow ( hence its name of follicle-stimulating hormone ) , and the five or six tertiary follicles expand in diameter .
The release of LH also stimulates the granulosa and theca cells of the follicles to produce the sex steroid hormone estradiol , a type of estrogen .
This phase of the ovarian cycle , when the tertiary follicles are growing and secreting estrogen , is known as the follicular phase .
The more granulosa and theca cells a follicle has ( that is , the larger and more developed it is ) , the more estrogen it will produce in response to LH stimulation .
As a result of these large follicles producing large amounts of estrogen , systemic plasma estrogen concentrations increase .
Following a classic negative feedback loop , the high concentrations of estrogen will stimulate the hypothalamus and pituitary to reduce the production of GnRH , LH , and FSH .
Because the large tertiary follicles require FSH to grow and survive at this point , this decline in FSH caused by negative feedback leads most of them to die ( atresia ) .
Typically only one follicle , now called the dominant follicle , will survive this reduction in FSH , and this follicle will be the one that releases an oocyte .
Scientists have studied many factors that lead to a particular follicle becoming dominant : size , the number of granulosa cells , and the number of FSH receptors on those granulosa cells all contribute to a follicle becoming the one surviving dominant follicle .
When only the one dominant follicle remains in the ovary , it again begins to secrete estrogen .
It produces more estrogen than all of the developing follicles did together before the negative feedback occurred .
It produces so much estrogen that the normal negative feedback doesn ’ t occur .
Instead , these extremely high concentrations of systemic plasma estrogen trigger a regulatory switch in the anterior pituitary that responds by secreting large amounts of LH and FSH into the bloodstream ( see Figure 27.13 ) .
The positive feedback loop by which more estrogen triggers release of more LH and FSH only occurs at this point in the cycle .
It is this large burst of LH ( called the LH surge ) that leads to ovulation of the dominant follicle .
The LH surge induces many changes in the dominant follicle , including stimulating the resumption of meiosis of the primary oocyte to a secondary oocyte .
As noted earlier , the polar body that results from unequal cell division simply degrades .
The LH surge also triggers proteases ( enzymes that cleave proteins ) to break down structural proteins in the ovary wall on the surface of the bulging dominant follicle .
This degradation of the wall , combined with pressure from the large , fluid-filled antrum , results in the expulsion of the oocyte surrounded by granulosa cells into the peritoneal cavity .
This release is ovulation .
In the next section , you will follow the ovulated oocyte as it travels toward the uterus , but there is one more important event that occurs in the ovarian cycle .
The surge of LH also stimulates a change in the granulosa and theca cells that remain in the follicle after the oocyte has been ovulated .
This change is called luteinization ( recall that the full name of LH is luteinizing hormone ) , and it transforms the collapsed follicle into a new endocrine structure called the corpus luteum , a term meaning “ yellowish body ” ( see Figure 27.12 ) .
Instead of estrogen , the luteinized granulosa and theca cells of the corpus luteum begin to produce large amounts of the sex steroid hormone progesterone , a hormone that is critical for the establishment and maintenance of pregnancy .
Progesterone triggers negative feedback at the hypothalamus and pituitary , which keeps GnRH , LH , and FSH secretions low , so no new dominant follicles develop at this time .
The post-ovulatory phase of progesterone secretion is known as the luteal phase of the ovarian cycle .
If pregnancy does not occur within 10 to 12 days , the corpus luteum will stop secreting progesterone and degrade into the corpus albicans , a nonfunctional “ whitish body ” that will disintegrate in the ovary over a period of several months .
During this time of reduced progesterone secretion , FSH and LH are once again stimulated , and the follicular phase begins again with a new cohort of early tertiary follicles beginning to grow and secrete estrogen .
The uterine tubes ( also called fallopian tubes or oviducts ) serve as the conduit of the oocyte from the ovary to the uterus ( Figure 27.14 ) .
Each of the two uterine tubes is close to , but not directly connected to , the ovary and divided into sections .
The isthmus is the narrow medial end of each uterine tube that is connected to the uterus .
The wide distal infundibulum flares out with slender , finger-like projections called fimbriae .
The middle region of the tube , called the ampulla , is where fertilization often occurs .
The uterine tubes also have three layers : an outer serosa , a middle smooth muscle layer , and an inner mucosal layer .
In addition to its mucus-secreting cells , the inner mucosa contains ciliated cells that beat in the direction of the uterus , producing a current that will be critical to move the oocyte .
Following ovulation , the secondary oocyte surrounded by a few granulosa cells is released into the peritoneal cavity .
The nearby uterine tube , either left or right , receives the oocyte .
Unlike sperm , oocytes lack flagella , and therefore can not move on their own .
So how do they travel into the uterine tube and toward the uterus ?
High concentrations of estrogen that occur around the time of ovulation induce contractions of the smooth muscle along the length of the uterine tube .
These contractions occur every 4 to 8 seconds , and the result is a coordinated movement that sweeps the surface of the ovary and the pelvic cavity .
Current flowing toward the uterus is generated by coordinated beating of the cilia that line the outside and lumen of the length of the uterine tube .
These cilia beat more strongly in response to the high estrogen concentrations that occur around the time of ovulation .
As a result of these mechanisms , the oocyte–granulosa cell complex is pulled into the interior of the tube .
Once inside , the muscular contractions and beating cilia move the oocyte slowly toward the uterus .
When fertilization does occur , sperm typically meet the egg while it is still moving through the ampulla .
Watch this video ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/ovulation ) to observe ovulation and its initiation in response to the release of FSH and LH from the pituitary gland .
What specialized structures help guide the oocyte from the ovary into the uterine tube ?
If the oocyte is successfully fertilized , the resulting zygote will begin to divide into two cells , then four , and so on , as it makes its way through the uterine tube and into the uterus .
There , it will implant and continue to grow .
If the egg is not fertilized , it will simply degrade—either in the uterine tube or in the uterus , where it may be shed with the next menstrual period .
The open-ended structure of the uterine tubes can have significant health consequences if bacteria or other contagions enter through the vagina and move through the uterus , into the tubes , and then into the pelvic cavity .
If this is left unchecked , a bacterial infection ( sepsis ) could quickly become life-threatening .
The spread of an infection in this manner is of special concern when unskilled practitioners perform abortions in non-sterile conditions .
Sepsis is also associated with sexually transmitted bacterial infections , especially gonorrhea and chlamydia .
These increase a woman ’ s risk for pelvic inflammatory disease ( PID ) , infection of the uterine tubes or other reproductive organs .
Even when resolved , PID can leave scar tissue in the tubes , leading to infertility .
Watch this series of videos ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/oocyte ) to look at the movement of the oocyte through the ovary .
The cilia in the uterine tube promote movement of the oocyte .
What would likely occur if the cilia were paralyzed at the time of ovulation ?
The uterus is the muscular organ that nourishes and supports the growing embryo ( see Figure 27.14 ) .
Its average size is approximately 5 cm wide by 7 cm long ( approximately 2 in by 3 in ) when a female is not pregnant .
It has three sections .
The portion of the uterus superior to the opening of the uterine tubes is called the fundus .
The middle section of the uterus is called the body of uterus ( or corpus ) .
The cervix is the narrow inferior portion of the uterus that projects into the vagina .
The cervix produces mucus secretions that become thin and stringy under the influence of high systemic plasma estrogen concentrations , and these secretions can facilitate sperm movement through the reproductive tract .
Several ligaments maintain the position of the uterus within the abdominopelvic cavity .
The broad ligament is a fold of peritoneum that serves as a primary support for the uterus , extending laterally from both sides of the uterus and attaching it to the pelvic wall .
The round ligament attaches to the uterus near the uterine tubes , and extends to the labia majora .
Finally , the uterosacral ligament stabilizes the uterus posteriorly by its connection from the cervix to the pelvic wall .
The wall of the uterus is made up of three layers .
The most superficial layer is the serous membrane , or perimetrium , which consists of epithelial tissue that covers the exterior portion of the uterus .
The middle layer , or myometrium , is a thick layer of smooth muscle responsible for uterine contractions .
Anteriorly directed myometrial contractions also occur near the time of ovulation , and are thought to possibly facilitate the transport of sperm through the female reproductive tract .
The innermost layer of the uterus is called the endometrium .
The endometrium contains a connective tissue lining , the lamina propria , which is covered by epithelial tissue that lines the lumen .
Structurally , the endometrium consists of two layers : the stratum basalis and the stratum functionalis ( the basal and functional layers ) .
The stratum basalis layer is part of the lamina propria and is adjacent to the myometrium ; this layer does not shed during menses .
In contrast , the thicker stratum functionalis layer contains the glandular portion of the lamina propria and the endothelial tissue that lines the uterine lumen .
It is the stratum functionalis that grows and thickens in response to increased levels of estrogen and progesterone .
In the luteal phase of the menstrual cycle , special branches off of the uterine artery called spiral arteries supply the thickened stratum functionalis .
This inner functional layer provides the proper site of implantation for the fertilized egg , and—should fertilization not occur—it is only the stratum functionalis layer of the endometrium that sheds during menstruation .
Recall that during the follicular phase of the ovarian cycle , the tertiary follicles are growing and secreting estrogen .
At the same time , the stratum functionalis of the endometrium is thickening to prepare for a potential implantation .
The postovulatory increase in progesterone , which characterizes the luteal phase , is key for maintaining a thick stratum functionalis .
As long as a functional corpus luteum is present in the ovary , the endometrial lining is prepared for implantation .
Indeed , if an embryo implants , signals are sent to the corpus luteum to continue secreting progesterone to maintain the endometrium , and thus maintain the pregnancy .
If an embryo does not implant , no signal is sent to the corpus luteum and it degrades , ceasing progesterone production and ending the luteal phase .
Without progesterone , the endometrium thins and , under the influence of prostaglandins , the spiral arteries of the endometrium constrict and rupture , preventing oxygenated blood from reaching the endometrial tissue .
As a result , endometrial tissue dies and blood , pieces of the endometrial tissue , and white blood cells are shed through the vagina during menstruation , or the menses .
The first menses after puberty , called menarche , can occur either before or after the first ovulation .
The timing of the menstrual cycle starts with the first day of menses , referred to as day one of a woman ’ s period .
Cycle length is determined by counting the days between the onset of bleeding in two subsequent cycles .
Because the average length of a woman ’ s menstrual cycle is 28 days , this is the time period used to identify the timing of events in the cycle .
However , the length of the menstrual cycle varies among women , and even in the same woman from one cycle to the next , typically from 21 to 32 days .
Just as the hormones produced by the granulosa and theca cells of the ovary “ drive ” the follicular and luteal phases of the ovarian cycle , they also control the three distinct phases of the menstrual cycle .
These are the menses phase , the proliferative phase , and the secretory phase .
The menses phase of the menstrual cycle is the phase during which the lining is shed ; that is , the days that the woman menstruates .
Although it averages approximately five days , the menses phase can last from 2 to 7 days , or longer .
As shown in Figure 27.15 , the menses phase occurs during the early days of the follicular phase of the ovarian cycle , when progesterone , FSH , and LH levels are low .
Recall that progesterone concentrations decline as a result of the degradation of the corpus luteum , marking the end of the luteal phase .
This decline in progesterone triggers the shedding of the stratum functionalis of the endometrium .
Once menstrual flow ceases , the endometrium begins to proliferate again , marking the beginning of the proliferative phase of the menstrual cycle ( see Figure 27.15 ) .
It occurs when the granulosa and theca cells of the tertiary follicles begin to produce increased amounts of estrogen .
These rising estrogen concentrations stimulate the endometrial lining to rebuild .
Recall that the high estrogen concentrations will eventually lead to a decrease in FSH as a result of negative feedback , resulting in atresia of all but one of the developing tertiary follicles .
The switch to positive feedback—which occurs with the elevated estrogen production from the dominant follicle—then stimulates the LH surge that will trigger ovulation .
In a typical 28-day menstrual cycle , ovulation occurs on day 14 .
Ovulation marks the end of the proliferative phase as well as the end of the follicular phase .
In addition to prompting the LH surge , high estrogen levels increase the uterine tube contractions that facilitate the pick-up and transfer of the ovulated oocyte .
High estrogen levels also slightly decrease the acidity of the vagina , making it more hospitable to sperm .
In the ovary , the luteinization of the granulosa cells of the collapsed follicle forms the progesteroneproducing corpus luteum , marking the beginning of the luteal phase of the ovarian cycle .
In the uterus , progesterone from the corpus luteum begins the secretory phase of the menstrual cycle , in which the endometrial lining prepares for implantation ( see Figure 27.15 ) .
Over the next 10 to 12 days , the endometrial glands secrete a fluid rich in glycogen .
If fertilization has occurred , this fluid will nourish the ball of cells now developing from the zygote .
At the same time , the spiral arteries develop to provide blood to the thickened stratum functionalis .
If no pregnancy occurs within approximately 10 to 12 days , the corpus luteum will degrade into the corpus albicans .
Levels of both estrogen and progesterone will fall , and the endometrium will grow thinner .
Prostaglandins will be secreted that cause constriction of the spiral arteries , reducing oxygen supply .
The endometrial tissue will die , resulting in menses—or the first day of the next cycle .
Research over many years has confirmed that cervical cancer is most often caused by a sexually transmitted infection with human papillomavirus ( HPV ) .
There are over 100 related viruses in the HPV family , and the characteristics of each strain determine the outcome of the infection .
In all cases , the virus enters body cells and uses its own genetic material to take over the host cell ’ s metabolic machinery and produce more virus particles .
HPV infections are common in both men and women .
Indeed , a recent study determined that 42.5 percent of females had HPV at the time of testing .
These women ranged in age from 14 to 59 years and differed in race , ethnicity , and number of sexual partners .
Of note , the prevalence of HPV infection was 53.8 percent among women aged 20 to 24 years , the age group with the highest infection rate .
HPV strains are classified as high or low risk according to their potential to cause cancer .
Though most HPV infections do not cause disease , the disruption of normal cellular functions in the low-risk forms of HPV can cause the male or female human host to develop genital warts .
Often , the body is able to clear an HPV infection by normal immune responses within 2 years .
However , the more serious , high-risk infection by certain types of HPV can result in cancer of the cervix ( Figure 27.16 ) .
Infection with either of the cancer-causing variants HPV 16 or HPV 18 has been linked to more than 70 percent of all cervical cancer diagnoses .
Although even these high-risk HPV strains can be cleared from the body over time , infections persist in some individuals .
If this happens , the HPV infection can influence the cells of the cervix to develop precancerous changes .
The risk of developing cervical cancer is doubled with cigarette smoking .
When the high-risk types of HPV enter a cell , two viral proteins are used to neutralize proteins that the host cells use as checkpoints in the cell cycle .
The best studied of these proteins is p53 .
In a normal cell , p53 detects DNA damage in the cell ’ s genome and either halts the progression of the cell cycle—allowing time for DNA repair to occur—or initiates apoptosis .
Both of these processes prevent the accumulation of mutations in a cell ’ s genome .
High-risk HPV can neutralize p53 , keeping the cell in a state in which fast growth is possible and impairing apoptosis , allowing mutations to accumulate in the cellular DNA .
The prevalence of cervical cancer in the United States is very low because of regular screening exams called pap smears .
Pap smears sample cells of the cervix , allowing the detection of abnormal cells .
If pre-cancerous cells are detected , there are several highly effective techniques that are currently in use to remove them before they pose a danger .
However , women in developing countries often do not have access to regular pap smears .
As a result , these women account for as many as 80 percent of the cases of cervical cancer worldwide .
In 2006 , the first vaccine against the high-risk types of HPV was approved .
There are now two HPV vaccines available : Gardasil and Cervarix .
Whereas these vaccines were initially only targeted for women , because HPV is sexually transmitted , both men and women require vaccination for this approach to achieve its maximum efficacy .
A recent study suggests that the HPV vaccine has cut the rates of HPV infection by the four targeted strains at least in half .
Unfortunately , the high cost of manufacturing the vaccine is currently limiting access to many women worldwide .
Whereas the breasts are located far from the other female reproductive organs , they are considered accessory organs of the female reproductive system .
The function of the breasts is to supply milk to an infant in a process called lactation .
The external features of the breast include a nipple surrounded by a pigmented areola ( Figure 27.17 ) , whose coloration may deepen during pregnancy .
The areola is typically circular and can vary in size from 25 to 100 mm in diameter .
The areolar region is characterized by small , raised areolar glands that secrete lubricating fluid during lactation to protect the nipple from chafing .
When a baby nurses , or draws milk from the breast , the entire areolar region is taken into the mouth .
Breast milk is produced by the mammary glands , which are modified sweat glands .
The milk itself exits the breast through the nipple via 15 to 20 lactiferous ducts that open on the surface of the nipple .
These lactiferous ducts each extend to a lactiferous sinus that connects to a glandular lobe within the breast itself that contains groups of milk-secreting cells in clusters called alveoli ( see Figure 27.17 ) .
The clusters can change in size depending on the amount of milk in the alveolar lumen .
Once milk is made in the alveoli , stimulated myoepithelial cells that surround the alveoli contract to push the milk to the lactiferous sinuses .
From here , the baby can draw milk through the lactiferous ducts by suckling .
The lobes themselves are surrounded by fat tissue , which determines the size of the breast ; breast size differs between individuals and does not affect the amount of milk produced .
Supporting the breasts are multiple bands of connective tissue called suspensory ligaments that connect the breast tissue to the dermis of the overlying skin .
During the normal hormonal fluctuations in the menstrual cycle , breast tissue responds to changing levels of estrogen and progesterone , which can lead to swelling and breast tenderness in some individuals , especially during the secretory phase .
If pregnancy occurs , the increase in hormones leads to further development of the mammary tissue and enlargement of the breasts .
Birth control pills take advantage of the negative feedback system that regulates the ovarian and menstrual cycles to stop ovulation and prevent pregnancy .
Typically they work by providing a constant level of both estrogen and progesterone , which negatively feeds back onto the hypothalamus and pituitary , thus preventing the release of FSH and LH .
Without FSH , the follicles do not mature , and without the LH surge , ovulation does not occur .
Although the estrogen in birth control pills does stimulate some thickening of the endometrial wall , it is reduced compared with a normal cycle and is less likely to support implantation .
Some birth control pills contain 21 active pills containing hormones , and 7 inactive pills ( placebos ) .
The decline in hormones during the week that the woman takes the placebo pills triggers menses , although it is typically lighter than a normal menstrual flow because of the reduced endometrial thickening .
Newer types of birth control pills have been developed that deliver low-dose estrogens and progesterone for the entire cycle ( these are meant to be taken 365 days a year ) , and menses never occurs .
While some women prefer to have the proof of a lack of pregnancy that a monthly period provides , menstruation every 28 days is not required for health reasons , and there are no reported adverse effects of not having a menstrual period in an otherwise healthy individual .
It is important , therefore , that the woman follow the directions on the birth control pill package to successfully prevent pregnancy .
Female fertility ( the ability to conceive ) peaks when women are in their twenties , and is slowly reduced until a women reaches 35 years of age .
After that time , fertility declines more rapidly , until it ends completely at the end of menopause .
Menopause is the cessation of the menstrual cycle that occurs as a result of the loss of ovarian follicles and the hormones that they produce .
A woman is considered to have completed menopause if she has not menstruated in a full year .
After that point , she is considered postmenopausal .
The average age for this change is consistent worldwide at between 50 and 52 years of age , but it can normally occur in a woman ’ s forties , or later in her fifties .
Poor health , including smoking , can lead to earlier loss of fertility and earlier menopause .
As a woman reaches the age of menopause , depletion of the number of viable follicles in the ovaries due to atresia affects the hormonal regulation of the menstrual cycle .
During the years leading up to menopause , there is a decrease in the levels of the hormone inhibin , which normally participates in a negative feedback loop to the pituitary to control the production of FSH .
The menopausal decrease in inhibin leads to an increase in FSH .
The presence of FSH stimulates more follicles to grow and secrete estrogen .
Because small , secondary follicles also respond to increases in FSH levels , larger numbers of follicles are stimulated to grow ; however , most undergo atresia and die .
Eventually , this process leads to the depletion of all follicles in the ovaries , and the production of estrogen falls off dramatically .
It is primarily the lack of estrogens that leads to the symptoms of menopause .
The earliest changes occur during the menopausal transition , often referred to as peri-menopause , when a women ’ s cycle becomes irregular but does not stop entirely .
Although the levels of estrogen are still nearly the same as before the transition , the level of progesterone produced by the corpus luteum is reduced .
This decline in progesterone can lead to abnormal growth , or hyperplasia , of the endometrium .
This condition is a concern because it increases the risk of developing endometrial cancer .
Two harmless conditions that can develop during the transition are uterine fibroids , which are benign masses of cells , and irregular bleeding .
As estrogen levels change , other symptoms that occur are hot flashes and night sweats , trouble sleeping , vaginal dryness , mood swings , difficulty focusing , and thinning of hair on the head along with the growth of more hair on the face .
Depending on the individual , these symptoms can be entirely absent , moderate , or severe .
After menopause , lower amounts of estrogens can lead to other changes .
Cardiovascular disease becomes as prevalent in women as in men , possibly because estrogens reduce the amount of cholesterol in the blood vessels .
When estrogen is lacking , many women find that they suddenly have problems with high cholesterol and the cardiovascular issues that accompany it .
Osteoporosis is another problem because bone density decreases rapidly in the first years after menopause .
The reduction in bone density leads to a higher incidence of fractures .
Hormone therapy ( HT ) , which employs medication ( synthetic estrogens and progestins ) to increase estrogen and progestin levels , can alleviate some of the symptoms of menopause .
In 2002 , the Women ’ s Health Initiative began a study to observe women for the long-term outcomes of hormone replacement therapy over 8.5 years .
However , the study was prematurely terminated after 5.2 years because of evidence of a higher than normal risk of breast cancer in patients taking estrogen-only HT .
The potential positive effects on cardiovascular disease were also not realized in the estrogen-only patients .
The results of other hormone replacement studies over the last 50 years , including a 2012 study that followed over 1,000 menopausal women for 10 years , have shown cardiovascular benefits from estrogen and no increased risk for cancer .
Some researchers believe that the age group tested in the 2002 trial may have been too old to benefit from the therapy , thus skewing the results .
In the meantime , intense debate and study of the benefits and risks of replacement therapy is ongoing .
Reproductive development continues in utero , but there is little change in the reproductive system between infancy and puberty .
Females are considered the “ fundamental ” sex—that is , without much chemical prompting , all fertilized eggs would develop into females .
To become a male , an individual must be exposed to the cascade of factors initiated by a single gene on the male Y chromosome .
This is called the SRY ( S ex-determining R egion of the Y chromosome ) .
Because females do not have a Y chromosome , they do not have the SRY gene .
Without a functional SRY gene , an individual will be female .
In both male and female embryos , the same group of cells has the potential to develop into either the male or female gonads ; this tissue is considered bipotential .
The SRY gene actively recruits other genes that begin to develop the testes , and suppresses genes that are important in female development .
As part of this SRY -prompted cascade , germ cells in the bipotential gonads differentiate into spermatogonia .
Without SRY , different genes are expressed , oogonia form , and primordial follicles develop in the primitive ovary .
Soon after the formation of the testis , the Leydig cells begin to secrete testosterone .
Testosterone can influence tissues that are bipotential to become male reproductive structures .
For example , with exposure to testosterone , cells that could become either the glans penis or the glans clitoris form the glans penis .
Without testosterone , these same cells differentiate into the clitoris .
Not all tissues in the reproductive tract are bipotential .
The internal reproductive structures ( for example the uterus , uterine tubes , and part of the vagina in females ; and the epididymis , ductus deferens , and seminal vesicles in males ) form from one of two rudimentary duct systems in the embryo .
For proper reproductive function in the adult , one set of these ducts must develop properly , and the other must degrade .
In males , secretions from sustentacular cells trigger a degradation of the female duct , called the Müllerian duct .
At the same time , testosterone secretion stimulates growth of the male tract , the Wolffian duct .
Without such sustentacular cell secretion , the Müllerian duct will develop ; without testosterone , the Wolffian duct will degrade .
Thus , the developing offspring will be female .
For more information and a figure of differentiation of the gonads , seek additional content on fetal development .
A baby ’ s gender is determined at conception , and the different genitalia of male and female fetuses develop from the same tissues in the embryo .
View this animation ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/fetus ) to see a comparison of the development of structures of the female and male reproductive systems in a growing fetus .
Where are the testes located for most of gestational time ?
Puberty is the stage of development at which individuals become sexually mature .
Though the outcomes of puberty for boys and girls are very different , the hormonal control of the process is very similar .
In addition , though the timing of these events varies between individuals , the sequence of changes that occur is predictable for male and female adolescents .
The first changes begin around the age of eight or nine when the production of LH becomes detectable .
The release of LH occurs primarily at night during sleep and precedes the physical changes of puberty by several years .
In pre-pubertal children , the sensitivity of the negative feedback system in the hypothalamus and pituitary is very high .
This means that very low concentrations of androgens or estrogens will negatively feed back onto the hypothalamus and pituitary , keeping the production of GnRH , LH , and FSH low .
As an individual approaches puberty , two changes in sensitivity occur .
The first is a decrease of sensitivity in the hypothalamus and pituitary to negative feedback , meaning that it takes increasingly larger concentrations of sex steroid hormones to stop the production of LH and FSH .
The second change in sensitivity is an increase in sensitivity of the gonads to the FSH and LH signals , meaning the gonads of adults are more responsive to gonadotropins than are the gonads of children .
As a result of these two changes , the levels of LH and FSH slowly increase and lead to the enlargement and maturation of the gonads , which in turn leads to secretion of higher levels of sex hormones and the initiation of spermatogenesis and folliculogenesis .
In addition to age , multiple factors can affect the age of onset of puberty , including genetics , environment , and psychological stress .
Some studies indicate a link between puberty onset and the amount of stored fat in an individual .
This effect is more pronounced in girls , but has been documented in both sexes .
Body fat , corresponding with secretion of the hormone leptin by adipose cells , appears to have a strong role in determining menarche .
This may reflect to some extent the high metabolic costs of gestation and lactation .
In girls who are lean and highly active , such as gymnasts , there is often a delay in the onset of puberty .
Different sex steroid hormone concentrations between the sexes also contribute to the development and function of secondary sexual characteristics .
Examples of secondary sexual characteristics are listed in Table 27.1 .
As a girl reaches puberty , typically the first change that is visible is the development of the breast tissue .
This is followed by the growth of axillary and pubic hair .
A growth spurt normally starts at approximately age 9 to 11 , and may last two years or more .
During this time , a girl ’ s height can increase 3 inches a year .
The next step in puberty is menarche , the start of menstruation .
In boys , the growth of the testes is typically the first physical sign of the beginning of puberty , which is followed by growth and pigmentation of the scrotum and growth of the penis .
The next step is the growth of hair , including armpit , pubic , chest , and facial hair .
Testosterone stimulates the growth of the larynx and thickening and lengthening of the vocal folds , which causes the voice to drop in pitch .
The first fertile ejaculations typically appear at approximately 15 years of age , but this age can vary widely across individual boys .
Unlike the early growth spurt observed in females , the male growth spurt occurs toward the end of puberty , at approximately age 11 to 13 , and a boy ’ s height can increase as much as 4 inches a year .
In some males , pubertal development can continue through the early 20s .
The dramatic changes of fertilization , embryonic development , and fetal development are followed by remarkable adaptations of the newborn to life outside the womb .
An offspring ’ s normal development depends upon the appropriate synthesis of structural and functional proteins .
This , in turn , is governed by the genetic material inherited from the parental egg and sperm , as well as environmental factors .
Because each of these reproductive cells is a haploid cell containing half of the genetic material needed to form a human being , their combination forms a diploid cell .
This new single cell , called a zygote , contains all of the genetic material needed to form a human—half from the mother and half from the father .
Fertilization is a numbers game .
During ejaculation , hundreds of millions of sperm ( spermatozoa ) are released into the vagina .
Almost immediately , millions of these sperm are overcome by the acidity of the vagina ( approximately pH 3.8 ) , and millions more may be blocked from entering the uterus by thick cervical mucus .
Of those that do enter , thousands are destroyed by phagocytic uterine leukocytes .
Thus , the race into the uterine tubes , which is the most typical site for sperm to encounter the oocyte , is reduced to a few thousand contenders .
Their journey—thought to be facilitated by uterine contractions—usually takes from 30 minutes to 2 hours .
If the sperm do not encounter an oocyte immediately , they can survive in the uterine tubes for another 3–5 days .
Thus , fertilization can still occur if intercourse takes place a few days before ovulation .
In comparison , an oocyte can survive independently for only approximately 24 hours following ovulation .
Intercourse more than a day after ovulation will therefore usually not result in fertilization .
During the journey , fluids in the female reproductive tract prepare the sperm for fertilization through a process called capacitation , or priming .
The fluids improve the motility of the spermatozoa .
Sperm must undergo the process of capacitation in order to have the “ capacity ” to fertilize an oocyte .
If they reach the oocyte before capacitation is complete , they will be unable to penetrate the oocyte ’ s thick outer layer of cells .
Upon ovulation , the oocyte released by the ovary is swept into—and along—the uterine tube .
Fertilization must occur in the distal uterine tube because an unfertilized oocyte can not survive the 72-hour journey to the uterus .
As you will recall from your study of the oogenesis , this oocyte ( specifically a secondary oocyte ) is surrounded by two protective layers .
The corona radiata is an outer layer of follicular ( granulosa ) cells that form around a developing oocyte in the ovary and remain with it upon ovulation .
The underlying zona pellucida ( pellucid = “ transparent ” ) is a transparent , but thick , glycoprotein membrane that surrounds the cell ’ s plasma membrane .
As it is swept along the distal uterine tube , the oocyte encounters the surviving capacitated sperm , which stream toward it in response to chemical attractants released by the cells of the corona radiata .
To reach the oocyte itself , the sperm must penetrate the two protective layers .
The sperm first burrow through the cells of the corona radiata .
Then , upon contact with the zona pellucida , the sperm bind to receptors in the zona pellucida .
This initiates a process called the acrosomal reaction in which the enzyme-filled “ cap ” of the sperm , called the acrosome , releases its stored digestive enzymes .
These enzymes clear a path through the zona pellucida that allows sperm to reach the oocyte .
Finally , a single sperm makes contact with sperm-binding receptors on the oocyte ’ s plasma membrane ( Figure 28.2 ) .
The plasma membrane of that sperm then fuses with the oocyte ’ s plasma membrane , and the head and mid-piece of the “ winning ” sperm enter the oocyte interior .
How do sperm penetrate the corona radiata ?
Some sperm undergo a spontaneous acrosomal reaction , which is an acrosomal reaction not triggered by contact with the zona pellucida .
The digestive enzymes released by this reaction digest the extracellular matrix of the corona radiata .
As you can see , the first sperm to reach the oocyte is never the one to fertilize it .
Rather , hundreds of sperm cells must undergo the acrosomal reaction , each helping to degrade the corona radiata and zona pellucida until a path is created to allow one sperm to contact and fuse with the plasma membrane of the oocyte .
If you consider the loss of millions of sperm between entry into the vagina and degradation of the zona pellucida , you can understand why a low sperm count can cause male infertility .
When the first sperm fuses with the oocyte , the oocyte deploys two mechanisms to prevent polyspermy , which is penetration by more than one sperm .
This is critical because if more than one sperm were to fertilize the oocyte , the resulting zygote would be a triploid organism with three sets of chromosomes .
This is incompatible with life .
The first mechanism is the fast block , which involves a near instantaneous change in sodium ion permeability upon binding of the first sperm , depolarizing the oocyte plasma membrane and preventing the fusion of additional sperm cells .
The fast block sets in almost immediately and lasts for about a minute , during which time an influx of calcium ions following sperm penetration triggers the second mechanism , the slow block .
In this process , referred to as the cortical reaction , cortical granules sitting immediately below the oocyte plasma membrane fuse with the membrane and release zonal inhibiting proteins and mucopolysaccharides into the space between the plasma membrane and the zona pellucida .
Zonal inhibiting proteins cause the release of any other attached sperm and destroy the oocyte ’ s sperm receptors , thus preventing any more sperm from binding .
The mucopolysaccharides then coat the nascent zygote in an impenetrable barrier that , together with hardened zona pellucida , is called a fertilization membrane .
Recall that at the point of fertilization , the oocyte has not yet completed meiosis ; all secondary oocytes remain arrested in metaphase of meiosis II until fertilization .
Only upon fertilization does the oocyte complete meiosis .
The unneeded complement of genetic material that results is stored in a second polar body that is eventually ejected .
At this moment , the oocyte has become an ovum , the female haploid gamete .
The two haploid nuclei derived from the sperm and oocyte and contained within the egg are referred to as pronuclei .
They decondense , expand , and replicate their DNA in preparation for mitosis .
The pronuclei then migrate toward each other , their nuclear envelopes disintegrate , and the maleand femalederived genetic material intermingles .
This step completes the process of fertilization and results in a single-celled diploid zygote with all the genetic instructions it needs to develop into a human .
Most of the time , a woman releases a single egg during an ovulation cycle .
However , in approximately 1 percent of ovulation cycles , two eggs are released and both are fertilized .
Two zygotes form , implant , and develop , resulting in the birth of dizygotic ( or fraternal ) twins .
Because dizygotic twins develop from two eggs fertilized by two sperm , they are no more identical than siblings born at different times .
Much less commonly , a zygote can divide into two separate offspring during early development .
This results in the birth of monozygotic ( or identical ) twins .
Although the zygote can split as early as the two-cell stage , splitting occurs most commonly during the early blastocyst stage , with roughly 70–100 cells present .
These two scenarios are distinct from each other , in that the twin embryos that separated at the two-cell stage will have individual placentas , whereas twin embryos that form from separation at the blastocyst stage will share a placenta and a chorionic cavity .
IVF , which stands for in vitro fertilization , is an assisted reproductive technology .
In vitro , which in Latin translates to “ in glass , ” refers to a procedure that takes place outside of the body .
There are many different indications for IVF .
For example , a woman may produce normal eggs , but the eggs can not reach the uterus because the uterine tubes are blocked or otherwise compromised .
A man may have a low sperm count , low sperm motility , sperm with an unusually high percentage of morphological abnormalities , or sperm that are incapable of penetrating the zona pellucida of an egg .
A typical IVF procedure begins with egg collection .
A normal ovulation cycle produces only one oocyte , but the number can be boosted significantly ( to 10–20 oocytes ) by administering a short course of gonadotropins .
The course begins with follicle-stimulating hormone ( FSH ) analogs , which support the development of multiple follicles , and ends with a luteinizing hormone ( LH ) analog that triggers ovulation .
Right before the ova would be released from the ovary , they are harvested using ultrasound-guided oocyte retrieval .
In this procedure , ultrasound allows a physician to visualize mature follicles .
The ova are aspirated ( sucked out ) using a syringe .
In parallel , sperm are obtained from the male partner or from a sperm bank .
The sperm are prepared by washing to remove seminal fluid because seminal fluid contains a peptide , FPP ( or , fertilization promoting peptide ) , that—in high concentrations—prevents capacitation of the sperm .
The sperm sample is also concentrated , to increase the sperm count per milliliter .
Next , the eggs and sperm are mixed in a petri dish .
The ideal ratio is 75,000 sperm to one egg .
If there are severe problems with the sperm—for example , the count is exceedingly low , or the sperm are completely nonmotile , or incapable of binding to or penetrating the zona pellucida—a sperm can be injected into an egg .
This is called intracytoplasmic sperm injection ( ICSI ) .
The embryos are then incubated until they either reach the eight-cell stage or the blastocyst stage .
In the United States , fertilized eggs are typically cultured to the blastocyst stage because this results in a higher pregnancy rate .
Finally , the embryos are transferred to a woman ’ s uterus using a plastic catheter ( tube ) .
Figure 28.3 illustrates the steps involved in IVF .
IVF is a relatively new and still evolving technology , and until recently it was necessary to transfer multiple embryos to achieve a good chance of a pregnancy .
Today , however , transferred embryos are much more likely to implant successfully , so countries that regulate the IVF industry cap the number of embryos that can be transferred per cycle at two .
This reduces the risk of multiple-birth pregnancies .
The rate of success for IVF is correlated with a woman ’ s age .
More than 40 percent of women under 35 succeed in giving birth following IVF , but the rate drops to a little over 10 percent in women over 40 .
Go to this site ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/fertilization ) to view resources covering various aspects of fertilization , including movies and animations showing sperm structure and motility , ovulation , and fertilization .
The period of time required for full development of a fetus in utero is referred to as gestation ( gestare = “ to carry ” or “ to bear ” ) .
It can be subdivided into distinct gestational periods .
The first 2 weeks of prenatal development are referred to as the pre-embryonic stage .
A developing human is referred to as an embryo during weeks 3–8 , and a fetus from the ninth week of gestation until birth .
In this section , we ’ ll cover the pre-embryonic and embryonic stages of development , which are characterized by cell division , migration , and differentiation .
By the end of the embryonic period , all of the organ systems are structured in rudimentary form , although the organs themselves are either nonfunctional or only semifunctional .
Following fertilization , the zygote and its associated membranes , together referred to as the conceptus , continue to be projected toward the uterus by peristalsis and beating cilia .
During its journey to the uterus , the zygote undergoes five or six rapid mitotic cell divisions .
Although each cleavage results in more cells , it does not increase the total volume of the conceptus ( Figure 28.4 ) .
Each daughter cell produced by cleavage is called a blastomere ( blastos = “ germ , ” in the sense of a seed or sprout ) .
Approximately 3 days after fertilization , a 16-cell conceptus reaches the uterus .
The cells that had been loosely grouped are now compacted and look more like a solid mass .
The name given to this structure is the morula ( morula = “ little mulberry ” ) .
Once inside the uterus , the conceptus floats freely for several more days .
It continues to divide , creating a ball of approximately 100 cells , and consuming nutritive endometrial secretions called uterine milk while the uterine lining thickens .
The ball of now tightly bound cells starts to secrete fluid and organize themselves around a fluid-filled cavity , the blastocoel .
At this developmental stage , the conceptus is referred to as a blastocyst .
Within this structure , a group of cells forms into an inner cell mass , which is fated to become the embryo .
The cells that form the outer shell are called trophoblasts ( trophe = “ to feed ” or “ to nourish ” ) .
These cells will develop into the chorionic sac and the fetal portion of the placenta ( the organ of nutrient , waste , and gas exchange between mother and the developing offspring ) .
The inner mass of embryonic cells is totipotent during this stage , meaning that each cell has the potential to differentiate into any cell type in the human body .
Totipotency lasts for only a few days before the cells ’ fates are set as being the precursors to a specific lineage of cells .
As the blastocyst forms , the trophoblast excretes enzymes that begin to degrade the zona pellucida .
In a process called “ hatching , ” the conceptus breaks free of the zona pellucida in preparation for implantation .
View this time-lapse movie ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/conceptus ) of a conceptus starting at day 3 .
What is the first structure you see ?
At what point in the movie does the blastocoel first appear ?
What event occurs at the end of the movie ?
At the end of the first week , the blastocyst comes in contact with the uterine wall and adheres to it , embedding itself in the uterine lining via the trophoblast cells .
Thus begins the process of implantation , which signals the end of the pre-embryonic stage of development ( Figure 28.5 ) .
Implantation can be accompanied by minor bleeding .
The blastocyst typically implants in the fundus of the uterus or on the posterior wall .
However , if the endometrium is not fully developed and ready to receive the blastocyst , the blastocyst will detach and find a better spot .
A significant percentage ( 50–75 percent ) of blastocysts fail to implant ; when this occurs , the blastocyst is shed with the endometrium during menses .
The high rate of implantation failure is one reason why pregnancy typically requires several ovulation cycles to achieve .
When implantation succeeds and the blastocyst adheres to the endometrium , the superficial cells of the trophoblast fuse with each other , forming the syncytiotrophoblast , a multinucleated body that digests endometrial cells to firmly secure the blastocyst to the uterine wall .
In response , the uterine mucosa rebuilds itself and envelops the blastocyst ( Figure 28.6 ) .
The trophoblast secretes human chorionic gonadotropin ( hCG ) , a hormone that directs the corpus luteum to survive , enlarge , and continue producing progesterone and estrogen to suppress menses .
These functions of hCG are necessary for creating an environment suitable for the developing embryo .
As a result of this increased production , hCG accumulates in the maternal bloodstream and is excreted in the urine .
Implantation is complete by the middle of the second week .
Just a few days after implantation , the trophoblast has secreted enough hCG for an at-home urine pregnancy test to give a positive result .
Most of the time an embryo implants within the body of the uterus in a location that can support growth and development .
However , in one to two percent of cases , the embryo implants either outside the uterus ( an ectopic pregnancy ) or in a region of uterus that can create complications for the pregnancy .
If the embryo implants in the inferior portion of the uterus , the placenta can potentially grow over the opening of the cervix , a condition call placenta previa .
In the vast majority of ectopic pregnancies , the embryo does not complete its journey to the uterus and implants in the uterine tube , referred to as a tubal pregnancy .
Once in the abdominal cavity , an embryo can implant into any well-vascularized structure—the rectouterine cavity ( Douglas ’ pouch ) , the mesentery of the intestines , and the greater omentum are some common sites .
Tubal pregnancies can be caused by scar tissue within the tube following a sexually transmitted bacterial infection .
The scar tissue impedes the progress of the embryo into the uterus—in some cases “ snagging ” the embryo and , in other cases , blocking the tube completely .
Approximately one half of tubal pregnancies resolve spontaneously .
Implantation in a uterine tube causes bleeding , which appears to stimulate smooth muscle contractions and expulsion of the embryo .
In the remaining cases , medical or surgical intervention is necessary .
If an ectopic pregnancy is detected early , the embryo ’ s development can be arrested by the administration of the cytotoxic drug methotrexate , which inhibits the metabolism of folic acid .
If diagnosis is late and the uterine tube is already ruptured , surgical repair is essential .
Even if the embryo has successfully found its way to the uterus , it does not always implant in an optimal location ( the fundus or the posterior wall of the uterus ) .
Placenta previa can result if an embryo implants close to the internal os of the uterus ( the internal opening of the cervix ) .
As the fetus grows , the placenta can partially or completely cover the opening of the cervix ( Figure 28.7 ) .
Although it occurs in only 0.5 percent of pregnancies , placenta previa is the leading cause of antepartum hemorrhage ( profuse vaginal bleeding after week 24 of pregnancy but prior to childbirth ) .
During the second week of development , with the embryo implanted in the uterus , cells within the blastocyst start to organize into layers .
Some grow to form the extra-embryonic membranes needed to support and protect the growing embryo : the amnion , the yolk sac , the allantois , and the chorion .
At the beginning of the second week , the cells of the inner cell mass form into a two-layered disc of embryonic cells , and a space—the amniotic cavity —opens up between it and the trophoblast ( Figure 28.8 ) .
Cells from the upper layer of the disc ( the epiblast ) extend around the amniotic cavity , creating a membranous sac that forms into the amnion by the end of the second week .
The amnion fills with amniotic fluid and eventually grows to surround the embryo .
Early in development , amniotic fluid consists almost entirely of a filtrate of maternal plasma , but as the kidneys of the fetus begin to function at approximately the eighth week , they add urine to the volume of amniotic fluid .
Floating within the amniotic fluid , the embryo—and later , the fetus—is protected from trauma and rapid temperature changes .
It can move freely within the fluid and can prepare for swallowing and breathing out of the uterus .
On the ventral side of the embryonic disc , opposite the amnion , cells in the lower layer of the embryonic disk ( the hypoblast ) extend into the blastocyst cavity and form a yolk sac .
The yolk sac supplies some nutrients absorbed from the trophoblast and also provides primitive blood circulation to the developing embryo for the second and third week of development .
When the placenta takes over nourishing the embryo at approximately week 4 , the yolk sac has been greatly reduced in size and its main function is to serve as the source of blood cells and germ cells ( cells that will give rise to gametes ) .
During week 3 , a finger-like outpocketing of the yolk sac develops into the allantois , a primitive excretory duct of the embryo that will become part of the urinary bladder .
Together , the stalks of the yolk sac and allantois establish the outer structure of the umbilical cord .
The last of the extra-embryonic membranes is the chorion , which is the one membrane that surrounds all others .
The development of the chorion will be discussed in more detail shortly , as it relates to the growth and development of the placenta .
As the third week of development begins , the two-layered disc of cells becomes a three-layered disc through the process of gastrulation , during which the cells transition from totipotency to multipotency .
The embryo , which takes the shape of an oval-shaped disc , forms an indentation called the primitive streak along the dorsal surface of the epiblast .
A node at the caudal or “ tail ” end of the primitive streak emits growth factors that direct cells to multiply and migrate .
Cells migrate toward and through the primitive streak and then move laterally to create two new layers of cells .
The first layer is the endoderm , a sheet of cells that displaces the hypoblast and lies adjacent to the yolk sac .
The second layer of cells fills in as the middle layer , or mesoderm .
The cells of the epiblast that remain ( not having migrated through the primitive streak ) become the ectoderm ( Figure 28.9 ) .
Each of these germ layers will develop into specific structures in the embryo .
Whereas the ectoderm and endoderm form tightly connected epithelial sheets , the mesodermal cells are less organized and exist as a loosely connected cell community .
The ectoderm gives rise to cell lineages that differentiate to become the central and peripheral nervous systems , sensory organs , epidermis , hair , and nails .
Mesodermal cells ultimately become the skeleton , muscles , connective tissue , heart , blood vessels , and kidneys .
The endoderm goes on to form the epithelial lining of the gastrointestinal tract , liver , and pancreas , as well as the lungs ( Figure 28.10 ) .
During the first several weeks of development , the cells of the endometrium—referred to as decidual cells—nourish the nascent embryo .
During prenatal weeks 4–12 , the developing placenta gradually takes over the role of feeding the embryo , and the decidual cells are no longer needed .
The mature placenta is composed of tissues derived from the embryo , as well as maternal tissues of the endometrium .
The placenta connects to the conceptus via the umbilical cord , which carries deoxygenated blood and wastes from the fetus through two umbilical arteries ; nutrients and oxygen are carried from the mother to the fetus through the single umbilical vein .
The umbilical cord is surrounded by the amnion , and the spaces within the cord around the blood vessels are filled with Wharton ’ s jelly , a mucous connective tissue .
The maternal portion of the placenta develops from the deepest layer of the endometrium , the decidua basalis .
To form the embryonic portion of the placenta , the syncytiotrophoblast and the underlying cells of the trophoblast ( cytotrophoblast cells ) begin to proliferate along with a layer of extraembryonic mesoderm cells .
These form the chorionic membrane , which envelops the entire conceptus as the chorion .
The chorionic membrane forms finger-like structures called chorionic villi that burrow into the endometrium like tree roots , making up the fetal portion of the placenta .
The cytotrophoblast cells perforate the chorionic villi , burrow farther into the endometrium , and remodel maternal blood vessels to augment maternal blood flow surrounding the villi .
Meanwhile , fetal mesenchymal cells derived from the mesoderm fill the villi and differentiate into blood vessels , including the three umbilical blood vessels that connect the embryo to the developing placenta ( Figure 28.11 ) .
The placenta develops throughout the embryonic period and during the first several weeks of the fetal period ; placentation is complete by weeks 14–16 .
As a fully developed organ , the placenta provides nutrition and excretion , respiration , and endocrine function ( Table 28.1 and Figure 28.12 ) .
It receives blood from the fetus through the umbilical arteries .
Capillaries in the chorionic villi filter fetal wastes out of the blood and return clean , oxygenated blood to the fetus through the umbilical vein .
Nutrients and oxygen are transferred from maternal blood surrounding the villi through the capillaries and into the fetal bloodstream .
Some substances move across the placenta by simple diffusion .
Oxygen , carbon dioxide , and any other lipid-soluble substances take this route .
Other substances move across by facilitated diffusion .
This includes water-soluble glucose .
The fetus has a high demand for amino acids and iron , and those substances are moved across the placenta by active transport .
Maternal and fetal blood does not commingle because blood cells can not move across the placenta .
This separation prevents the mother ’ s cytotoxic T cells from reaching and subsequently destroying the fetus , which bears “ non-self ” antigens .
Further , it ensures the fetal red blood cells do not enter the mother ’ s circulation and trigger antibody development ( if they carry “ non-self ” antigens ) —at least until the final stages of pregnancy or birth .
This is the reason that , even in the absence of preventive treatment , an Rh mother doesn ’ t develop antibodies that could cause hemolytic disease in her first Rh fetus .
Although blood cells are not exchanged , the chorionic villi provide ample surface area for the two-way exchange of substances between maternal and fetal blood .
The rate of exchange increases throughout gestation as the villi become thinner and increasingly branched .
The placenta is permeable to lipid-soluble fetotoxic substances : alcohol , nicotine , barbiturates , antibiotics , certain pathogens , and many other substances that can be dangerous or fatal to the developing embryo or fetus .
For these reasons , pregnant women should avoid fetotoxic substances .
Alcohol consumption by pregnant women , for example , can result in a range of abnormalities referred to as fetal alcohol spectrum disorders ( FASD ) .
These include organ and facial malformations , as well as cognitive and behavioral disorders .
Following gastrulation , rudiments of the central nervous system develop from the ectoderm in the process of neurulation ( Figure 28.13 ) .
Specialized neuroectodermal tissues along the length of the embryo thicken into the neural plate .
During the fourth week , tissues on either side of the plate fold upward into a neural fold .
The two folds converge to form the neural tube .
The tube lies atop a rod-shaped , mesoderm-derived notochord , which eventually becomes the nucleus pulposus of intervertebral discs .
Block-like structures called somites form on either side of the tube , eventually differentiating into the axial skeleton , skeletal muscle , and dermis .
During the fourth and fifth weeks , the anterior neural tube dilates and subdivides to form vesicles that will become the brain structures .
Folate , one of the B vitamins , is important to the healthy development of the neural tube .
A deficiency of maternal folate in the first weeks of pregnancy can result in neural tube defects , including spina bifida—a birth defect in which spinal tissue protrudes through the newborn ’ s vertebral column , which has failed to completely close .
A more severe neural tube defect is anencephaly , a partial or complete absence of brain tissue .
The embryo , which begins as a flat sheet of cells , begins to acquire a cylindrical shape through the process of embryonic folding ( Figure 28.14 ) .
The embryo folds laterally and again at either end , forming a C-shape with distinct head and tail ends .
The embryo envelops a portion of the yolk sac , which protrudes with the umbilical cord from what will become the abdomen .
The folding essentially creates a tube , called the primitive gut , that is lined by the endoderm .
The amniotic sac , which was sitting on top of the flat embryo , envelops the embryo as it folds .
Within the first 8 weeks of gestation , a developing embryo establishes the rudimentary structures of all of its organs and tissues from the ectoderm , mesoderm , and endoderm .
This process is called organogenesis .
Like the central nervous system , the heart also begins its development in the embryo as a tube-like structure , connected via capillaries to the chorionic villi .
Cells of the primitive tube-shaped heart are capable of electrical conduction and contraction .
The heart begins beating in the beginning of the fourth week , although it does not actually pump embryonic blood until a week later , when the oversized liver has begun producing red blood cells .
( This is a temporary responsibility of the embryonic liver that the bone marrow will assume during fetal development . )
During weeks 4–5 , the eye pits form , limb buds become apparent , and the rudiments of the pulmonary system are formed .
During the sixth week , uncontrolled fetal limb movements begin to occur .
The gastrointestinal system develops too rapidly for the embryonic abdomen to accommodate it , and the intestines temporarily loop into the umbilical cord .
Paddle-shaped hands and feet develop fingers and toes by the process of apoptosis ( programmed cell death ) , which causes the tissues between the fingers to disintegrate .
By week 7 , the facial structure is more complex and includes nostrils , outer ears , and lenses ( Figure 28.15 ) .
By the eighth week , the head is nearly as large as the rest of the embryo ’ s body , and all major brain structures are in place .
The external genitalia are apparent , but at this point , male and female embryos are indistinguishable .
Bone begins to replace cartilage in the embryonic skeleton through the process of ossification .
By the end of the embryonic period , the embryo is approximately 3 cm ( 1.2 in ) from crown to rump and weighs approximately 8 g ( 0.25 oz ) .
This 30-week period of development is marked by continued cell growth and differentiation , which fully develop the structures and functions of the immature organ systems formed during the embryonic period .
The completion of fetal development results in a newborn who , although still immature in many ways , is capable of survival outside the womb .
Sexual differentiation does not begin until the fetal period , during weeks 9–12 .
Embryonic males and females , though genetically distinguishable , are morphologically identical ( Figure 28.16 ) .
Bipotential gonads , or gonads that can develop into male or female sexual organs , are connected to a central cavity called the cloaca via Müllerian ducts and Wolffian ducts .
( The cloaca is an extension of the primitive gut . )
Several events lead to sexual differentiation during this period .
During male fetal development , the bipotential gonads become the testes and associated epididymis .
The Müllerian ducts degenerate .
The Wolffian ducts become the vas deferens , and the cloaca becomes the urethra and rectum .
During female fetal development , the bipotential gonads develop into ovaries .
The Wolffian ducts degenerate .
The Müllerian ducts become the uterine tubes and uterus , and the cloaca divides and develops into a vagina , a urethra , and a rectum .
During prenatal development , the fetal circulatory system is integrated with the placenta via the umbilical cord so that the fetus receives both oxygen and nutrients from the placenta .
However , after childbirth , the umbilical cord is severed , and the newborn ’ s circulatory system must be reconfigured .
When the heart first forms in the embryo , it exists as two parallel tubes derived from mesoderm and lined with endothelium , which then fuse together .
As the embryo develops into a fetus , the tube-shaped heart folds and further differentiates into the four chambers present in a mature heart .
Unlike a mature cardiovascular system , however , the fetal cardiovascular system also includes circulatory shortcuts , or shunts .
A shunt is an anatomical ( or sometimes surgical ) diversion that allows blood flow to bypass immature organs such as the lungs and liver until childbirth .
The placenta provides the fetus with necessary oxygen and nutrients via the umbilical vein .
( Remember that veins carry blood toward the heart .
In this case , the blood flowing to the fetal heart is oxygenated because it comes from the placenta .
The respiratory system is immature and can not yet oxygenate blood on its own . )
From the umbilical vein , the oxygenated blood flows toward the inferior vena cava , all but bypassing the immature liver , via the ductus venosus shunt ( Figure 28.17 ) .
The liver receives just a trickle of blood , which is all that it needs in its immature , semifunctional state .
Blood flows from the inferior vena cava to the right atrium , mixing with fetal venous blood along the way .
Although the fetal liver is semifunctional , the fetal lungs are nonfunctional .
The fetal circulation therefore bypasses the lungs by shifting some of the blood through the foramen ovale , a shunt that directly connects the right and left atria and avoids the pulmonary trunk altogether .
Most of the rest of the blood is pumped to the right ventricle , and from there , into the pulmonary trunk , which splits into pulmonary arteries .
However , a shunt within the pulmonary artery , the ductus arteriosus , diverts a portion of this blood into the aorta .
This ensures that only a small volume of oxygenated blood passes through the immature pulmonary circuit , which has only minor metabolic requirements .
Blood vessels of uninflated lungs have high resistance to flow , a condition that encourages blood to flow to the aorta , which presents much lower resistance .
The oxygenated blood moves through the foramen ovale into the left atrium , where it mixes with the now deoxygenated blood returning from the pulmonary circuit .
This blood then moves into the left ventricle , where it is pumped into the aorta .
Some of this blood moves through the coronary arteries into the myocardium , and some moves through the carotid arteries to the brain .
The descending aorta carries partially oxygenated and partially deoxygenated blood into the lower regions of the body .
It eventually passes into the umbilical arteries through branches of the internal iliac arteries .
The deoxygenated blood collects waste as it circulates through the fetal body and returns to the umbilical cord .
Thus , the two umbilical arteries carry blood low in oxygen and high in carbon dioxide and fetal wastes .
This blood is filtered through the placenta , where wastes diffuse into the maternal circulation .
Oxygen and nutrients from the mother diffuse into the placenta and from there into the fetal blood , and the process repeats .
During weeks 9–12 of fetal development , the brain continues to expand , the body elongates , and ossification continues .
Fetal movements are frequent during this period , but are jerky and not well-controlled .
The bone marrow begins to take over the process of erythrocyte production—a task that the liver performed during the embryonic period .
The liver now secretes bile .
The fetus circulates amniotic fluid by swallowing it and producing urine .
The eyes are well-developed by this stage , but the eyelids are fused shut .
The fingers and toes begin to develop nails .
By the end of week 12 , the fetus measures approximately 9 cm ( 3.5 in ) from crown to rump .
Weeks 13–16 are marked by sensory organ development .
The eyes move closer together ; blinking motions begin , although the eyes remain sealed shut .
The lips exhibit sucking motions .
The ears move upward and lie flatter against the head .
The scalp begins to grow hair .
The excretory system is also developing : the kidneys are well-formed , and meconium , or fetal feces , begins to accumulate in the intestines .
Meconium consists of ingested amniotic fluid , cellular debris , mucus , and bile .
During approximately weeks 16–20 , as the fetus grows and limb movements become more powerful , the mother may begin to feel quickening , or fetal movements .
However , space restrictions limit these movements and typically force the growing fetus into the “ fetal position , ” with the arms crossed and the legs bent at the knees .
Sebaceous glands coat the skin with a waxy , protective substance called vernix caseosa that protects and moisturizes the skin and may provide lubrication during childbirth .
A silky hair called lanugo also covers the skin during weeks 17–20 , but it is shed as the fetus continues to grow .
Extremely premature infants sometimes exhibit residual lanugo .
Developmental weeks 21–30 are characterized by rapid weight gain , which is important for maintaining a stable body temperature after birth .
The bone marrow completely takes over erythrocyte synthesis , and the axons of the spinal cord begin to be myelinated , or coated in the electrically insulating glial cell sheaths that are necessary for efficient nervous system functioning .
( The process of myelination is not completed until adolescence . )
During this period , the fetus grows eyelashes .
The eyelids are no longer fused and can be opened and closed .
The lungs begin producing surfactant , a substance that reduces surface tension in the lungs and assists proper lung expansion after birth .
In male fetuses , the testes descend into the scrotum near the end of this period .
The fetus at 30 weeks measures 28 cm ( 11 in ) from crown to rump and exhibits the approximate body proportions of a full-term newborn , but still is much leaner .
Visit this site ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/pregstages ) for a summary of the stages of pregnancy , as experienced by the mother , and view the stages of development of the fetus throughout gestation .
At what point in fetal development can a regular heartbeat be detected ?
The fetus continues to lay down subcutaneous fat from week 31 until birth .
The added fat fills out the hypodermis , and the skin transitions from red and wrinkled to soft and pink .
Lanugo is shed , and the nails grow to the tips of the fingers and toes .
Immediately before birth , the average crown-to-rump length is 35.5–40.5 cm ( 14–16 in ) , and the fetus weighs approximately 2.5–4 kg ( 5.5–8.8 lbs ) .
Once born , the newborn is no longer confined to the fetal position , so subsequent measurements are made from head-to-toe instead of from crown-to-rump .
At birth , the average length is approximately 51 cm ( 20 in ) .
Throughout the second half of gestation , the fetal intestines accumulate a tarry , greenish black meconium .
The newborn ’ s first stools consist almost entirely of meconium ; they later transition to seedy yellow stools or slightly formed tan stools as meconium is cleared and replaced with digested breast milk or formula , respectively .
Unlike these later stools , meconium is sterile ; it is devoid of bacteria because the fetus is in a sterile environment and has not consumed any breast milk or formula .
Typically , an infant does not pass meconium until after birth .
However , in 5–20 percent of births , the fetus has a bowel movement in utero , which can cause major complications in the newborn .
The passage of meconium in the uterus signals fetal distress , particularly fetal hypoxia ( i.e. , oxygen deprivation ) .
This may be caused by maternal drug abuse ( especially tobacco or cocaine ) , maternal hypertension , depletion of amniotic fluid , long labor or difficult birth , or a defect in the placenta that prevents it from delivering adequate oxygen to the fetus .
Meconium passage is typically a complication of full-term or post-term newborns because it is rarely passed before 34 weeks of gestation , when the gastrointestinal system has matured and is appropriately controlled by nervous system stimuli .
Fetal distress can stimulate the vagus nerve to trigger gastrointestinal peristalsis and relaxation of the anal sphincter .
Notably , fetal hypoxic stress also induces a gasping reflex , increasing the likelihood that meconium will be inhaled into the fetal lungs .
Although meconium is a sterile substance , it interferes with the antibiotic properties of the amniotic fluid and makes the newborn and mother more vulnerable to bacterial infections at birth and during the perinatal period .
Specifically , inflammation of the fetal membranes , inflammation of the uterine lining , or neonatal sepsis ( infection in the newborn ) may occur .
Meconium also irritates delicate fetal skin and can cause a rash .
The first sign that a fetus has passed meconium usually does not come until childbirth , when the amniotic sac ruptures .
Normal amniotic fluid is clear and watery , but amniotic fluid in which meconium has been passed is stained greenish or yellowish .
Antibiotics given to the mother may reduce the incidence of maternal bacterial infections , but it is critical that meconium is aspirated from the newborn before the first breath .
Under these conditions , an obstetrician will extensively aspirate the infant ’ s airways as soon as the head is delivered , while the rest of the infant ’ s body is still inside the birth canal .
Aspiration of meconium with the first breath can result in labored breathing , a barrel-shaped chest , or a low Apgar score .
An obstetrician can identify meconium aspiration by listening to the lungs with a stethoscope for a coarse rattling sound .
Blood gas tests and chest X-rays of the infant can confirm meconium aspiration .
Inhaled meconium after birth could obstruct a newborn ’ s airways leading to alveolar collapse , interfere with surfactant function by stripping it from the lungs , or cause pulmonary inflammation or hypertension .
Any of these complications will make the newborn much more vulnerable to pulmonary infection , including pneumonia .
Because it is easier to remember the first day of the last menstrual period ( LMP ) than to estimate the date of conception , obstetricians set the due date as 284 days ( approximately 40.5 weeks ) from the LMP .
This assumes that conception occurred on day 14 of the woman ’ s cycle , which is usually a good approximation .
The 40 weeks of an average pregnancy are usually discussed in terms of three trimesters , each approximately 13 weeks .
During the second and third trimesters , the pre-pregnancy uterus—about the size of a fist—grows dramatically to contain the fetus , causing a number of anatomical changes in the mother ( Figure 28.18 ) .
Virtually all of the effects of pregnancy can be attributed in some way to the influence of hormones—particularly estrogens , progesterone , and hCG .
During weeks 7–12 from the LMP , the pregnancy hormones are primarily generated by the corpus luteum .
Progesterone secreted by the corpus luteum stimulates the production of decidual cells of the endometrium that nourish the blastocyst before placentation .
As the placenta develops and the corpus luteum degenerates during weeks 12–17 , the placenta gradually takes over as the endocrine organ of pregnancy .
The placenta converts weak androgens secreted by the maternal and fetal adrenal glands to estrogens , which are necessary for pregnancy to progress .
Estrogen levels climb throughout the pregnancy , increasing 30-fold by childbirth .
Estrogens have the following actions : They suppress FSH and LH production , effectively preventing ovulation .
( This function is the biological basis of hormonal birth control pills . )
They induce the growth of fetal tissues and are necessary for the maturation of the fetal lungs and liver .
They promote fetal viability by regulating progesterone production and triggering fetal synthesis of cortisol , which helps with the maturation of the lungs , liver , and endocrine organs such as the thyroid gland and adrenal gland .
They stimulate maternal tissue growth , leading to uterine enlargement and mammary duct expansion and branching .
Relaxin , another hormone secreted by the corpus luteum and then by the placenta , helps prepare the mother ’ s body for childbirth .
It increases the elasticity of the symphysis pubis joint and pelvic ligaments , making room for the growing fetus and allowing expansion of the pelvic outlet for childbirth .
Relaxin also helps dilate the cervix during labor .
The placenta takes over the synthesis and secretion of progesterone throughout pregnancy as the corpus luteum degenerates .
Like estrogen , progesterone suppresses FSH and LH .
It also inhibits uterine contractions , protecting the fetus from preterm birth .
This hormone decreases in late gestation , allowing uterine contractions to intensify and eventually progress to true labor .
The placenta also produces hCG .
In addition to promoting survival of the corpus luteum , hCG stimulates the male fetal gonads to secrete testosterone , which is essential for the development of the male reproductive system .
The anterior pituitary enlarges and ramps up its hormone production during pregnancy , raising the levels of thyrotropin , prolactin , and adrenocorticotropic hormone ( ACTH ) .
Thyrotropin , in conjunction with placental hormones , increases the production of thyroid hormone , which raises the maternal metabolic rate .
This can markedly augment a pregnant woman ’ s appetite and cause hot flashes .
Prolactin stimulates enlargement of the mammary glands in preparation for milk production .
ACTH stimulates maternal cortisol secretion , which contributes to fetal protein synthesis .
In addition to the pituitary hormones , increased parathyroid levels mobilize calcium from maternal bones for fetal use .
The second and third trimesters of pregnancy are associated with dramatic changes in maternal anatomy and physiology .
The most obvious anatomical sign of pregnancy is the dramatic enlargement of the abdominal region , coupled with maternal weight gain .
This weight results from the growing fetus as well as the enlarged uterus , amniotic fluid , and placenta .
Additional breast tissue and dramatically increased blood volume also contribute to weight gain ( Table 28.2 ) .
Surprisingly , fat storage accounts for only approximately 2.3 kg ( 5 lbs ) in a normal pregnancy and serves as a reserve for the increased metabolic demand of breastfeeding .
During the first trimester , the mother does not need to consume additional calories to maintain a healthy pregnancy .
However , a weight gain of approximately 0.45 kg ( 1 lb ) per month is common .
During the second and third trimesters , the mother ’ s appetite increases , but it is only necessary for her to consume an additional 300 calories per day to support the growing fetus .
Most women gain approximately 0.45 kg ( 1 lb ) per week .
As the woman ’ s body adapts to pregnancy , characteristic physiologic changes occur .
These changes can sometimes prompt symptoms often referred to collectively as the common discomforts of pregnancy .
Nausea and vomiting , sometimes triggered by an increased sensitivity to odors , are common during the first few weeks to months of pregnancy .
This phenomenon is often referred to as “ morning sickness , ” although the nausea may persist all day .
The source of pregnancy nausea is thought to be the increased circulation of pregnancy-related hormones , specifically circulating estrogen , progesterone , and hCG .
Decreased intestinal peristalsis may also contribute to nausea .
By about week 12 of pregnancy , nausea typically subsides .
A common gastrointestinal complaint during the later stages of pregnancy is gastric reflux , or heartburn , which results from the upward , constrictive pressure of the growing uterus on the stomach .
The same decreased peristalsis that may contribute to nausea in early pregnancy is also thought to be responsible for pregnancy-related constipation as pregnancy progresses .
The downward pressure of the uterus also compresses the urinary bladder , leading to frequent urination .
The problem is exacerbated by increased urine production .
In addition , the maternal urinary system processes both maternal and fetal wastes , further increasing the total volume of urine .
Blood volume increases substantially during pregnancy , so that by childbirth , it exceeds its preconception volume by 30 percent , or approximately 1–2 liters .
The greater blood volume helps to manage the demands of fetal nourishment and fetal waste removal .
In conjunction with increased blood volume , the pulse and blood pressure also rise moderately during pregnancy .
As the fetus grows , the uterus compresses underlying pelvic blood vessels , hampering venous return from the legs and pelvic region .
As a result , many pregnant women develop varicose veins or hemorrhoids .
During the second half of pregnancy , the respiratory minute volume ( volume of gas inhaled or exhaled by the lungs per minute ) increases by 50 percent to compensate for the oxygen demands of the fetus and the increased maternal metabolic rate .
The growing uterus exerts upward pressure on the diaphragm , decreasing the volume of each inspiration and potentially causing shortness of breath , or dyspnea .
During the last several weeks of pregnancy , the pelvis becomes more elastic , and the fetus descends lower in a process called lightening .
This typically ameliorates dyspnea .
The respiratory mucosa swell in response to increased blood flow during pregnancy , leading to nasal congestion and nose bleeds , particularly when the weather is cold and dry .
Humidifier use and increased fluid intake are often recommended to counteract congestion .
The dermis stretches extensively to accommodate the growing uterus , breast tissue , and fat deposits on the thighs and hips .
Torn connective tissue beneath the dermis can cause striae ( stretch marks ) on the abdomen , which appear as red or purple marks during pregnancy that fade to a silvery white color in the months after childbirth .
An increase in melanocyte-stimulating hormone , in conjunction with estrogens , darkens the areolae and creates a line of pigment from the umbilicus to the pubis called the linea nigra ( Figure 28.19 ) .
As a pregnancy progresses into its final weeks , several physiological changes occur in response to hormones that trigger labor .
First , recall that progesterone inhibits uterine contractions throughout the first several months of pregnancy .
As the pregnancy enters its seventh month , progesterone levels plateau and then drop .
Estrogen levels , however , continue to rise in the maternal circulation ( Figure 28.20 ) .
The increasing ratio of estrogen to progesterone makes the myometrium ( the uterine smooth muscle ) more sensitive to stimuli that promote contractions ( because progesterone no longer inhibits them ) .
Moreover , in the eighth month of pregnancy , fetal cortisol rises , which boosts estrogen secretion by the placenta and further overpowers the uterine-calming effects of progesterone .
Some women may feel the result of the decreasing levels of progesterone in late pregnancy as weak and irregular peristaltic Braxton Hicks contractions , also called false labor .
These contractions can often be relieved with rest or hydration .
A common sign that labor will be short is the so-called “ bloody show. ” During pregnancy , a plug of mucus accumulates in the cervical canal , blocking the entrance to the uterus .
Approximately 1–2 days prior to the onset of true labor , this plug loosens and is expelled , along with a small amount of blood .
Meanwhile , the posterior pituitary has been boosting its secretion of oxytocin , a hormone that stimulates the contractions of labor .
At the same time , the myometrium increases its sensitivity to oxytocin by expressing more receptors for this hormone .
As labor nears , oxytocin begins to stimulate stronger , more painful uterine contractions , which—in a positive feedback loop—stimulate the secretion of prostaglandins from fetal membranes .
Like oxytocin , prostaglandins also enhance uterine contractile strength .
The fetal pituitary also secretes oxytocin , which increases prostaglandins even further .
Finally , stretching of the myometrium and cervix by a full-term fetus in the vertex ( head-down ) position is regarded as a stimulant to uterine contractions .
The sum of these changes initiates the regular contractions known as true labor , which become more powerful and more frequent with time .
The pain of labor is attributed to myometrial hypoxia during uterine contractions .
The process of childbirth can be divided into three stages : cervical dilation , expulsion of the newborn , and afterbirth ( Figure 28.21 ) .
For vaginal birth to occur , the cervix must dilate fully to 10 cm in diameter—wide enough to deliver the newborn ’ s head .
The dilation stage is the longest stage of labor and typically takes 6–12 hours .
However , it varies widely and may take minutes , hours , or days , depending in part on whether the mother has given birth before ; in each subsequent labor , this stage tends to be shorter .
True labor progresses in a positive feedback loop in which uterine contractions stretch the cervix , causing it to dilate and efface , or become thinner .
Cervical stretching induces reflexive uterine contractions that dilate and efface the cervix further .
In addition , cervical dilation boosts oxytocin secretion from the pituitary , which in turn triggers more powerful uterine contractions .
When labor begins , uterine contractions may occur only every 3–30 minutes and last only 20–40 seconds ; however , by the end of this stage , contractions may occur as frequently as every 1.5–2 minutes and last for a full minute .
Each contraction sharply reduces oxygenated blood flow to the fetus .
For this reason , it is critical that a period of relaxation occur after each contraction .
Fetal distress , measured as a sustained decrease or increase in the fetal heart rate , can result from severe contractions that are too powerful or lengthy for oxygenated blood to be restored to the fetus .
Such a situation can be cause for an emergency birth with vacuum , forceps , or surgically by Caesarian section .
The amniotic membranes rupture before the onset of labor in about 12 percent of women ; they typically rupture at the end of the dilation stage in response to excessive pressure from the fetal head entering the birth canal .
The expulsion stage begins when the fetal head enters the birth canal and ends with birth of the newborn .
It typically takes up to 2 hours , but it can last longer or be completed in minutes , depending in part on the orientation of the fetus .
The vertex presentation known as the occiput anterior vertex is the most common presentation and is associated with the greatest ease of vaginal birth .
The fetus faces the maternal spinal cord and the smallest part of the head ( the posterior aspect called the occiput ) exits the birth canal first .
In fewer than 5 percent of births , the infant is oriented in the breech presentation , or buttocks down .
In a complete breech , both legs are crossed and oriented downward .
In a frank breech presentation , the legs are oriented upward .
Before the 1960s , it was common for breech presentations to be delivered vaginally .
Today , most breech births are accomplished by Caesarian section .
Vaginal birth is associated with significant stretching of the vaginal canal , the cervix , and the perineum .
Until recent decades , it was routine procedure for an obstetrician to numb the perineum and perform an episiotomy , an incision in the posterior vaginal wall and perineum .
The perineum is now more commonly allowed to tear on its own during birth .
Both an episiotomy and a perineal tear need to be sutured shortly after birth to ensure optimal healing .
Although suturing the jagged edges of a perineal tear may be more difficult than suturing an episiotomy , tears heal more quickly , are less painful , and are associated with less damage to the muscles around the vagina and rectum .
Upon birth of the newborn ’ s head , an obstetrician will aspirate mucus from the mouth and nose before the newborn ’ s first breath .
Once the head is birthed , the rest of the body usually follows quickly .
The umbilical cord is then double-clamped , and a cut is made between the clamps .
This completes the second stage of childbirth .
The delivery of the placenta and associated membranes , commonly referred to as the afterbirth , marks the final stage of childbirth .
After expulsion of the newborn , the myometrium continues to contract .
This movement shears the placenta from the back of the uterine wall .
It is then easily delivered through the vagina .
Continued uterine contractions then reduce blood loss from the site of the placenta .
Delivery of the placenta marks the beginning of the postpartum period—the period of approximately 6 weeks immediately following childbirth during which the mother ’ s body gradually returns to a nonpregnant state .
If the placenta does not birth spontaneously within approximately 30 minutes , it is considered retained , and the obstetrician may attempt manual removal .
If this is not successful , surgery may be required .
It is important that the obstetrician examines the expelled placenta and fetal membranes to ensure that they are intact .
If fragments of the placenta remain in the uterus , they can cause postpartum hemorrhage .
Uterine contractions continue for several hours after birth to return the uterus to its pre-pregnancy size in a process called involution , which also allows the mother ’ s abdominal organs to return to their pre-pregnancy locations .
Breastfeeding facilitates this process .
Although postpartum uterine contractions limit blood loss from the detachment of the placenta , the mother does experience a postpartum vaginal discharge called lochia .
This is made up of uterine lining cells , erythrocytes , leukocytes , and other debris .
Thick , dark , lochia rubra ( red lochia ) typically continues for 2–3 days , and is replaced by lochia serosa , a thinner , pinkish form that continues until about the tenth postpartum day .
After this period , a scant , creamy , or watery discharge called lochia alba ( white lochia ) may continue for another 1–2 weeks .
In the womb , the fetus was snuggled in a soft , warm , dark , and quiet world .
The placenta provided nutrition and oxygen continuously .
Suddenly , the contractions of labor and vaginal childbirth forcibly squeeze the fetus through the birth canal , limiting oxygenated blood flow during contractions and shifting the skull bones to accommodate the small space .
After birth , the newborn ’ s system must make drastic adjustments to a world that is colder , brighter , and louder , and where he or she will experience hunger and thirst .
The neonatal period ( neo= “ new ” ; -natal = “ birth ” ) spans the first to the thirtieth day of life outside of the uterus .
Although the fetus “ practices ” breathing by inhaling amniotic fluid in utero , there is no air in the uterus and thus no true opportunity to breathe .
( There is also no need to breathe because the placenta supplies the fetus with all the oxygenated blood it needs . )
During gestation , the partially collapsed lungs are filled with amniotic fluid and exhibit very little metabolic activity .
Several factors stimulate newborns to take their first breath at birth .
First , labor contractions temporarily constrict umbilical blood vessels , reducing oxygenated blood flow to the fetus and elevating carbon dioxide levels in the blood .
High carbon dioxide levels cause acidosis and stimulate the respiratory center in the brain , triggering the newborn to take a breath .
The first breath typically is taken within 10 seconds of birth , after mucus is aspirated from the infant ’ s mouth and nose .
The first breaths inflate the lungs to nearly full capacity and dramatically decrease lung pressure and resistance to blood flow , causing a major circulatory reconfiguration .
Pulmonary alveoli open , and alveolar capillaries fill with blood .
Amniotic fluid in the lungs drains or is absorbed , and the lungs immediately take over the task of the placenta , exchanging carbon dioxide for oxygen by the process of respiration .
The process of clamping and cutting the umbilical cord collapses the umbilical blood vessels .
Natural occlusion has occurred when the umbilical cord is no longer pulsating .
For the most part , the collapsed vessels atrophy and become fibrotic remnants , existing in the mature circulatory system as ligaments of the abdominal wall and liver .
The ductus venosus degenerates to become the ligamentum venosum beneath the liver .
Only the proximal sections of the two umbilical arteries remain functional , taking on the role of supplying blood to the upper part of the bladder ( Figure 28.22 ) .
The newborn ’ s first breath is vital to initiate the transition from the fetal to the neonatal circulatory pattern .
Inflation of the lungs decreases blood pressure throughout the pulmonary system , as well as in the right atrium and ventricle .
In response to this pressure change , the flow of blood temporarily reverses direction through the foramen ovale , moving from the left to the right atrium , and blocking the shunt with two flaps of tissue .
Within 1 year , the tissue flaps usually fuse over the shunt , turning the foramen ovale into the fossa ovalis .
The ductus arteriosus constricts as a result of increased oxygen concentration , and becomes the ligamentum arteriosum .
Closing of the ductus arteriosus ensures that all blood pumped to the pulmonary circuit will be oxygenated by the newly functional neonatal lungs .
The fetus floats in warm amniotic fluid that is maintained at a temperature of approximately 98.6°F with very little fluctuation .
Birth exposes newborns to a cooler environment in which they have to regulate their own body temperature .
Newborns have a higher ratio of surface area to volume than adults .
This means that their body has less volume throughout which to produce heat , and more surface area from which to lose heat .
As a result , newborns produce heat more slowly and lose it more quickly .
Newborns also have immature musculature that limits their ability to generate heat by shivering .
Moreover , their nervous systems are underdeveloped , so they can not quickly constrict superficial blood vessels in response to cold .
They also have little subcutaneous fat for insulation .
All these factors make it harder for newborns to maintain their body temperature .
Newborns , however , do have a special method for generating heat : nonshivering thermogenesis , which involves the breakdown of brown adipose tissue , or brown fat , which is distributed over the back , chest , and shoulders .
Brown fat differs from the more familiar white fat in two ways : It is highly vascularized .
This allows for faster delivery of oxygen , which leads to faster cellular respiration .
It is packed with a special type of mitochondria that are able to engage in cellular respiration reactions that produce less ATP and more heat than standard cellular respiration reactions .
The breakdown of brown fat occurs automatically upon exposure to cold , so it is an important heat regulator in newborns .
During fetal development , the placenta secretes inhibitors that prevent metabolism of brown adipose fat and promote its accumulation in preparation for birth .
In adults , the gastrointestinal tract harbors bacterial flora—trillions of bacteria that aid in digestion , produce vitamins , and protect from the invasion or replication of pathogens .
In stark contrast , the fetal intestine is sterile .
The first consumption of breast milk or formula floods the neonatal gastrointestinal tract with beneficial bacteria that begin to establish the bacterial flora .
The fetal kidneys filter blood and produce urine , but the neonatal kidneys are still immature and inefficient at concentrating urine .
Therefore , newborns produce very dilute urine , making it particularly important for infants to obtain sufficient fluids from breast milk or formula .
In the minutes following birth , a newborn must undergo dramatic systemic changes to be able to survive outside the womb .
An obstetrician , midwife , or nurse can estimate how well a newborn is doing by obtaining an Apgar score .
The Apgar score was introduced in 1952 by the anesthesiologist Dr. Virginia Apgar as a method to assess the effects on the newborn of anesthesia given to the laboring mother .
Healthcare providers now use it to assess the general wellbeing of the newborn , whether or not analgesics or anesthetics were used .
Five criteria—skin color , heart rate , reflex , muscle tone , and respiration—are assessed , and each criterion is assigned a score of 0 , 1 , or 2 .
Scores are taken at 1 minute after birth and again at 5 minutes after birth .
Each time that scores are taken , the five scores are added together .
High scores ( out of a possible 10 ) indicate the baby has made the transition from the womb well , whereas lower scores indicate that the baby may be in distress .
The technique for determining an Apgar score is quick and easy , painless for the newborn , and does not require any instruments except for a stethoscope .
Poor scores for either of these measurements may indicate the need for immediate medical attention to resuscitate or stabilize the newborn .
In general , any score lower than 7 at the 5-minute mark indicates that medical assistance may be needed .
A total score below 5 indicates an emergency situation .
Normally , a newborn will get an intermediate score of 1 for some of the Apgar criteria and will progress to a 2 by the 5-minute assessment .
Scores of 8 or above are normal .
Breast milk provides ideal nutrition and passive immunity for the infant , encourages mild uterine contractions to return the uterus to its pre-pregnancy size ( i.e. , involution ) , and induces a substantial metabolic increase in the mother , consuming the fat reserves stored during pregnancy .
Mammary glands are modified sweat glands .
The non-pregnant and non-lactating female breast is composed primarily of adipose and collagenous tissue , with mammary glands making up a very minor proportion of breast volume .
The mammary gland is composed of milk-transporting lactiferous ducts , which expand and branch extensively during pregnancy in response to estrogen , growth hormone , cortisol , and prolactin .
Moreover , in response to progesterone , clusters of breast alveoli bud from the ducts and expand outward toward the chest wall .
Breast alveoli are balloon-like structures lined with milk-secreting cuboidal cells , or lactocytes , that are surrounded by a net of contractile myoepithelial cells .
Milk is secreted from the lactocytes , fills the alveoli , and is squeezed into the ducts .
Clusters of alveoli that drain to a common duct are called lobules ; the lactating female has 12–20 lobules organized radially around the nipple .
Milk drains from lactiferous ducts into lactiferous sinuses that meet at 4 to 18 perforations in the nipple , called nipple pores .
The small bumps of the areola ( the darkened skin around the nipple ) are called Montgomery glands .
They secrete oil to cleanse the nipple opening and prevent chapping and cracking of the nipple during breastfeeding .
The pituitary hormone prolactin is instrumental in the establishment and maintenance of breast milk supply .
It also is important for the mobilization of maternal micronutrients for breast milk .
Near the fifth week of pregnancy , the level of circulating prolactin begins to increase , eventually rising to approximately 10–20 times the pre-pregnancy concentration .
We noted earlier that , during pregnancy , prolactin and other hormones prepare the breasts anatomically for the secretion of milk .
The level of prolactin plateaus in late pregnancy , at a level high enough to initiate milk production .
However , estrogen , progesterone , and other placental hormones inhibit prolactinmediated milk synthesis during pregnancy .
It is not until the placenta is expelled that this inhibition is lifted and milk production commences .
After childbirth , the baseline prolactin level drops sharply , but it is restored for a 1-hour spike during each feeding to stimulate the production of milk for the next feeding .
With each prolactin spike , estrogen and progesterone also increase slightly .
When the infant suckles , sensory nerve fibers in the areola trigger a neuroendocrine reflex that results in milk secretion from lactocytes into the alveoli .
The posterior pituitary releases oxytocin , which stimulates myoepithelial cells to squeeze milk from the alveoli so it can drain into the lactiferous ducts , collect in the lactiferous sinuses , and discharge through the nipple pores .
It takes less than 1 minute from the time when an infant begins suckling ( the latent period ) until milk is secreted ( the let-down ) .
Figure 28.23 summarizes the positive feedback loop of the let-down reflex .
The prolactin-mediated synthesis of milk changes with time .
Frequent milk removal by breastfeeding ( or pumping ) will maintain high circulating prolactin levels for several months .
However , even with continued breastfeeding , baseline prolactin will decrease over time to its pre-pregnancy level .
In addition to prolactin and oxytocin , growth hormone , cortisol , parathyroid hormone , and insulin contribute to lactation , in part by facilitating the transport of maternal amino acids , fatty acids , glucose , and calcium to breast milk .
In the final weeks of pregnancy , the alveoli swell with colostrum , a thick , yellowish substance that is high in protein but contains less fat and glucose than mature breast milk ( Table 28.3 ) .
Before childbirth , some women experience leakage of colostrum from the nipples .
In contrast , mature breast milk does not leak during pregnancy and is not secreted until several days after childbirth .
Colostrum is secreted during the first 48–72 hours postpartum .
Only a small volume of colostrum is produced—approximately 3 ounces in a 24-hour period—but it is sufficient for the newborn in the first few days of life .
Colostrum is rich with immunoglobulins , which confer gastrointestinal , and also likely systemic , immunity as the newborn adjusts to a nonsterile environment .
After about the third postpartum day , the mother secretes transitional milk that represents an intermediate between mature milk and colostrum .
This is followed by mature milk from approximately postpartum day 10 ( see Table 28.3 ) .
As you can see in the accompanying table , cow ’ s milk is not a substitute for breast milk .
It contains less lactose , less fat , and more protein and minerals .
Moreover , the proteins in cow ’ s milk are difficult for an infant ’ s immature digestive system to metabolize and absorb .
The first few weeks of breastfeeding may involve leakage , soreness , and periods of milk engorgement as the relationship between milk supply and infant demand becomes established .
Once this period is complete , the mother will produce approximately 1.5 liters of milk per day for a single infant , and more if she has twins or triplets .
As the infant goes through growth spurts , the milk supply constantly adjusts to accommodate changes in demand .
A woman can continue to lactate for years , but once breastfeeding is stopped for approximately 1 week , any remaining milk will be reabsorbed ; in most cases , no more will be produced , even if suckling or pumping is resumed .
Mature milk changes from the beginning to the end of a feeding .
The early milk , called foremilk , is watery , translucent , and rich in lactose and protein .
Its purpose is to quench the infant ’ s thirst .
Hindmilk is delivered toward the end of a feeding .
It is opaque , creamy , and rich in fat , and serves to satisfy the infant ’ s appetite .
During the first days of a newborn ’ s life , it is important for meconium to be cleared from the intestines and for bilirubin to be kept low in the circulation .
Recall that bilirubin , a product of erythrocyte breakdown , is processed by the liver and secreted in bile .
It enters the gastrointestinal tract and exits the body in the stool .
Breast milk has laxative properties that help expel meconium from the intestines and clear bilirubin through the excretion of bile .
A high concentration of bilirubin in the blood causes jaundice .
Some degree of jaundice is normal in newborns , but a high level of bilirubin—which is neurotoxic—can cause brain damage .
Newborns , who do not yet have a fully functional blood–brain barrier , are highly vulnerable to the bilirubin circulating in the blood .
Indeed , hyperbilirubinemia , a high level of circulating bilirubin , is the most common condition requiring medical attention in newborns .
Newborns with hyperbilirubinemia are treated with phototherapy because UV light helps to break down the bilirubin quickly .
But what makes each newborn unique ?
The answer lies , of course , in the DNA in the sperm and oocyte that combined to produce that first diploid cell , the human zygote .
Each human body cell has a full complement of DNA stored in 23 pairs of chromosomes .
Figure 28.24 shows the pairs in a systematic arrangement called a karyotype .
Among these is one pair of chromosomes , called the sex chromosomes , that determines the sex of the individual ( XX in females , XY in males ) .
The remaining 22 chromosome pairs are called autosomal chromosomes .
Each of these chromosomes carries hundreds or even thousands of genes , each of which codes for the assembly of a particular protein—that is , genes are “ expressed ” as proteins .
An individual ’ s complete genetic makeup is referred to as his or her genotype .
The characteristics that the genes express , whether they are physical , behavioral , or biochemical , are a person ’ s phenotype .
You inherit one chromosome in each pair—a full complement of 23—from each parent .
This occurs when the sperm and oocyte combine at the moment of your conception .
Homologous chromosomes—those that make up a complementary pair—have genes for the same characteristics in the same location on the chromosome .
Because one copy of a gene , an allele , is inherited from each parent , the alleles in these complementary pairs may vary .
Take for example an allele that encodes for dimples .
A child may inherit the allele encoding for dimples on the chromosome from the father and the allele that encodes for smooth skin ( no dimples ) on the chromosome from the mother .
Although a person can have two identical alleles for a single gene ( a homozygous state ) , it is also possible for a person to have two different alleles ( a heterozygous state ) .
The two alleles can interact in several different ways .
The expression of an allele can be dominant , for which the activity of this gene will mask the expression of a nondominant , or recessive , allele .
Sometimes dominance is complete ; at other times , it is incomplete .
In some cases , both alleles are expressed at the same time in a form of expression known as codominance .
In the simplest scenario , a single pair of genes will determine a single heritable characteristic .
However , it is quite common for multiple genes to interact to confer a feature .
For instance , eight or more genes—each with their own alleles—determine eye color in humans .
Moreover , although any one person can only have two alleles corresponding to a given gene , more than two alleles commonly exist in a population .
This phenomenon is called multiple alleles .
For example , there are three different alleles that encode ABO blood type ; these are designated I , I , and i .
Over 100 years of theoretical and experimental genetics studies , and the more recent sequencing and annotation of the human genome , have helped scientists to develop a better understanding of how an individual ’ s genotype is expressed as their phenotype .
This body of knowledge can help scientists and medical professionals to predict , or at least estimate , some of the features that an offspring will inherit by examining the genotypes or phenotypes of the parents .
One important application of this knowledge is to identify an individual ’ s risk for certain heritable genetic disorders .
However , most diseases have a multigenic pattern of inheritance and can also be affected by the environment , so examining the genotypes or phenotypes of a person ’ s parents will provide only limited information about the risk of inheriting a disease .
Only for a handful of single-gene disorders can genetic testing allow clinicians to calculate the probability with which a child born to the two parents tested may inherit a specific disease .
Our contemporary understanding of genetics rests on the work of a nineteenth-century monk .
Working in the mid-1800s , long before anyone knew about genes or chromosomes , Gregor Mendel discovered that garden peas transmit their physical characteristics to subsequent generations in a discrete and predictable fashion .
When he mated , or crossed , two purebreeding pea plants that differed by a certain characteristic , the first-generation offspring all looked like one of the parents .
For instance , when he crossed tall and dwarf pure-breeding pea plants , all of the offspring were tall .
Mendel called tallness dominant because it was expressed in offspring when it was present in a purebred parent .
He called dwarfism recessive because it was masked in the offspring if one of the purebred parents possessed the dominant characteristic .
Note that tallness and dwarfism are variations on the characteristic of height .
Mendel called such a variation a trait .
We now know that these traits are the expression of different alleles of the gene encoding height .
Mendel performed thousands of crosses in pea plants with differing traits for a variety of characteristics .
And he repeatedly came up with the same results—among the traits he studied , one was always dominant , and the other was always recessive .
( Remember , however , that this dominant–recessive relationship between alleles is not always the case ; some alleles are codominant , and sometimes dominance is incomplete . )
Using his understanding of dominant and recessive traits , Mendel tested whether a recessive trait could be lost altogether in a pea lineage or whether it would resurface in a later generation .
By crossing the second-generation offspring of purebred parents with each other , he showed that the latter was true : recessive traits reappeared in third-generation plants in a ratio of 3:1 ( three offspring having the dominant trait and one having the recessive trait ) .
Mendel then proposed that characteristics such as height were determined by heritable “ factors ” that were transmitted , one from each parent , and inherited in pairs by offspring .
In the language of genetics , Mendel ’ s theory applied to humans says that if an individual receives two dominant alleles , one from each parent , the individual ’ s phenotype will express the dominant trait .
If an individual receives two recessive alleles , then the recessive trait will be expressed in the phenotype .
Individuals who have two identical alleles for a given gene , whether dominant or recessive , are said to be homozygous for that gene ( homo= “ same ” ) .
Conversely , an individual who has one dominant allele and one recessive allele is said to be heterozygous for that gene ( hetero= “ different ” or “ other ” ) .
In this case , the dominant trait will be expressed , and the individual will be phenotypically identical to an individual who possesses two dominant alleles for the trait .
It is common practice in genetics to use capital and lowercase letters to represent dominant and recessive alleles .
Using Mendel ’ s pea plants as an example , if a tall pea plant is homozygous , it will possess two tall alleles ( TT ) .
A dwarf pea plant must be homozygous because its dwarfism can only be expressed when two recessive alleles are present ( tt ) .
A heterozygous pea plant ( Tt ) would be tall and phenotypically indistinguishable from a tall homozygous pea plant because of the dominant tall allele .
Mendel deduced that a 3:1 ratio of dominant to recessive would be produced by the random segregation of heritable factors ( genes ) when crossing two heterozygous pea plants .
In other words , for any given gene , parents are equally likely to pass down either one of their alleles to their offspring in a haploid gamete , and the result will be expressed in a dominant–recessive pattern if both parents are heterozygous for the trait .
Because of the random segregation of gametes , the laws of chance and probability come into play when predicting the likelihood of a given phenotype .
Consider a cross between an individual with two dominant alleles for a trait ( AA ) and an individual with two recessive alleles for the same trait ( aa ) .
All of the parental gametes from the dominant individual would be A , and all of the parental gametes from the recessive individual would be a ( Figure 28.25 ) .
All of the offspring of that second generation , inheriting one allele from each parent , would have the genotype Aa , and the probability of expressing the phenotype of the dominant allele would be 4 out of 4 , or 100 percent .
This seems simple enough , but the inheritance pattern gets interesting when the second-generation Aa individuals are crossed .
In this generation , 50 percent of each parent ’ s gametes are A and the other 50 percent are a .
By Mendel ’ s principle of random segregation , the possible combinations of gametes that the offspring can receive are AA , Aa , aA ( which is the same as Aa ) , and aa .
Because segregation and fertilization are random , each offspring has a 25 percent chance of receiving any of these combinations .
The genotypic ratio for this inheritance pattern is 1:2:1 .
However , we have already established that AA and Aa ( and aA ) individuals all express the dominant trait ( i.e. , share the same phenotype ) , and can therefore be combined into one group .
The result is Mendel ’ s third-generation phenotype ratio of 3:1 .
Mendel ’ s observation of pea plants also included many crosses that involved multiple traits , which prompted him to formulate the principle of independent assortment .
The law states that the members of one pair of genes ( alleles ) from a parent will sort independently from other pairs of genes during the formation of gametes .
Applied to pea plants , that means that the alleles associated with the different traits of the plant , such as color , height , or seed type , will sort independently of one another .
This holds true except when two alleles happen to be located close to one other on the same chromosome .
Independent assortment provides for a great degree of diversity in offspring .
Mendelian genetics represent the fundamentals of inheritance , but there are two important qualifiers to consider when applying Mendel ’ s findings to inheritance studies in humans .
First , as we ’ ve already noted , not all genes are inherited in a dominant–recessive pattern .
Although all diploid individuals have two alleles for every gene , allele pairs may interact to create several types of inheritance patterns , including incomplete dominance and codominance .
Secondly , Mendel performed his studies using thousands of pea plants .
He was able to identify a 3:1 phenotypic ratio in second-generation offspring because his large sample size overcame the influence of variability resulting from chance .
In contrast , no human couple has ever had thousands of children .
If we know that a man and woman are both heterozygous for a recessive genetic disorder , we would predict that one in every four of their children would be affected by the disease .
In real life , however , the influence of chance could change that ratio significantly .
For example , if a man and a woman are both heterozygous for cystic fibrosis , a recessive genetic disorder that is expressed only when the individual has two defective alleles , we would expect one in four of their children to have cystic fibrosis .
However , it is entirely possible for them to have seven children , none of whom is affected , or for them to have two children , both of whom are affected .
For each individual child , the presence or absence of a single gene disorder depends on which alleles that child inherits from his or her parents .
In the case of cystic fibrosis , the disorder is recessive to the normal phenotype .
However , a genetic abnormality may be dominant to the normal phenotype .
When the dominant allele is located on one of the 22 pairs of autosomes ( nonsex chromosomes ) , we refer to its inheritance pattern as autosomal dominant .
An example of an autosomal dominant disorder is neurofibromatosis type I , a disease that induces tumor formation within the nervous system that leads to skin and skeletal deformities .
Consider a couple in which one parent is heterozygous for this disorder ( and who therefore has neurofibromatosis ) , Nn , and one parent is homozygous for the normal gene , nn .
The heterozygous parent would have a 50 percent chance of passing the dominant allele for this disorder to his or her offspring , and the homozygous parent would always pass the normal allele .
Therefore , four possible offspring genotypes are equally likely to occur : Nn , Nn , nn , and nn .
That is , every child of this couple would have a 50 percent chance of inheriting neurofibromatosis .
This inheritance pattern is shown in Figure 28.26 , in a form called a Punnett square , named after its creator , the British geneticist Reginald Punnett .
Other genetic diseases that are inherited in this pattern are achondroplastic dwarfism , Marfan syndrome , and Huntington ’ s disease .
Because autosomal dominant disorders are expressed by the presence of just one gene , an individual with the disorder will know that he or she has at least one faulty gene .
The expression of the disease may manifest later in life , after the childbearing years , which is the case in Huntington ’ s disease ( discussed in more detail later in this section ) .
When a genetic disorder is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , the disorder corresponds to the recessive phenotype .
Heterozygous individuals will not display symptoms of this disorder , because their unaffected gene will compensate .
Such an individual is called a carrier .
Carriers for an autosomal recessive disorder may never know their genotype unless they have a child with the disorder .
An example of an autosomal recessive disorder is cystic fibrosis ( CF ) , which we introduced earlier .
CF is characterized by the chronic accumulation of a thick , tenacious mucus in the lungs and digestive tract .
Decades ago , children with CF rarely lived to adulthood .
With advances in medical technology , the average lifespan in developed countries has increased into middle adulthood .
CF is a relatively common disorder that occurs in approximately 1 in 2000 Caucasians .
A child born to two CF carriers would have a 25 percent chance of inheriting the disease .
This is the same 3:1 dominant : recessive ratio that Mendel observed in his pea plants would apply here .
The pattern is shown in Figure 28.27 , using a diagram that tracks the likely incidence of an autosomal recessive disorder on the basis of parental genotypes .
On the other hand , a child born to a CF carrier and someone with two unaffected alleles would have a 0 percent probability of inheriting CF , but would have a 50 percent chance of being a carrier .
Other examples of autosome recessive genetic illnesses include the blood disorder sickle-cell anemia , the fatal neurological disorder Tay–Sachs disease , and the metabolic disorder phenylketonuria .
An X-linked transmission pattern involves genes located on the X chromosome of the 23rd pair ( Figure 28.28 ) .
Recall that a male has one X and one Y chromosome .
When a father transmits a Y chromosome , the child is male , and when he transmits an X chromosome , the child is female .
A mother can transmit only an X chromosome , as both her sex chromosomes are X chromosomes .
When an abnormal allele for a gene that occurs on the X chromosome is dominant over the normal allele , the pattern is described as X-linked dominant .
This is the case with vitamin D–resistant rickets : an affected father would pass the disease gene to all of his daughters , but none of his sons , because he donates only the Y chromosome to his sons ( see Figure 28.28a ) .
If it is the mother who is affected , all of her children—male or female—would have a 50 percent chance of inheriting the disorder because she can only pass an X chromosome on to her children ( see Figure 28.28b ) .
For an affected female , the inheritance pattern would be identical to that of an autosomal dominant inheritance pattern in which one parent is heterozygous and the other is homozygous for the normal gene .
X-linked recessive inheritance is much more common because females can be carriers of the disease yet still have a normal phenotype .
Diseases transmitted by X-linked recessive inheritance include color blindness , the blood-clotting disorder hemophilia , and some forms of muscular dystrophy .
For an example of X-linked recessive inheritance , consider parents in which the mother is an unaffected carrier and the father is normal .
None of the daughters would have the disease because they receive a normal gene from their father .
However , they have a 50 percent chance of receiving the disease gene from their mother and becoming a carrier .
In contrast , 50 percent of the sons would be affected ( Figure 28.29 ) .
With X-linked recessive diseases , males either have the disease or are genotypically normal—they can not be carriers .
Females , however , can be genotypically normal , a carrier who is phenotypically normal , or affected with the disease .
A daughter can inherit the gene for an X-linked recessive illness when her mother is a carrier or affected , or her father is affected .
The daughter will be affected by the disease only if she inherits an X-linked recessive gene from both parents .
As you can imagine , X-linked recessive disorders affect many more males than females .
For example , color blindness affects at least 1 in 20 males , but only about 1 in 400 females .
Not all genetic disorders are inherited in a dominant–recessive pattern .
In incomplete dominance , the offspring express a heterozygous phenotype that is intermediate between one parent ’ s homozygous dominant trait and the other parent ’ s homozygous recessive trait .
An example of this can be seen in snapdragons when red-flowered plants and white-flowered plants are crossed to produce pink-flowered plants .
In humans , incomplete dominance occurs with one of the genes for hair texture .
When one parent passes a curly hair allele ( the incompletely dominant allele ) and the other parent passes a straighthair allele , the effect on the offspring will be intermediate , resulting in hair that is wavy .
Codominance is characterized by the equal , distinct , and simultaneous expression of both parents ’ different alleles .
This pattern differs from the intermediate , blended features seen in incomplete dominance .
A classic example of codominance in humans is ABO blood type .
People are blood type A if they have an allele for an enzyme that facilitates the production of surface antigen A on their erythrocytes .
This allele is designated I .
In the same manner , people are blood type B if they express an enzyme for the production of surface antigen B .
People who have alleles for both enzymes ( I and I ) produce both surface antigens A and B .
As a result , they are blood type AB .
Because the effect of both alleles ( or enzymes ) is observed , we say that the I and I alleles are codominant .
There is also a third allele that determines blood type .
This allele ( i ) produces a nonfunctional enzyme .
People who have two i alleles do not produce either A or B surface antigens : they have type O blood .
If a person has I and i alleles , the person will have blood type A .
Notice that it does not make any difference whether a person has two I alleles or one I and one i allele .
In both cases , the person is blood type A .
Because I masks i , we say that I is dominant to i .
Table 28.4 summarizes the expression of blood type .
Certain combinations of alleles can be lethal , meaning they prevent the individual from developing in utero , or cause a shortened life span .
In recessive lethal inheritance patterns , a child who is born to two heterozygous ( carrier ) parents and who inherited the faulty allele from both would not survive .
An example of this is Tay–Sachs , a fatal disorder of the nervous system .
In this disorder , parents with one copy of the allele for the disorder are carriers .
If they both transmit their abnormal allele , their offspring will develop the disease and will die in childhood , usually before age 5 .
Dominant lethal inheritance patterns are much more rare because neither heterozygotes nor homozygotes survive .
Of course , dominant lethal alleles that arise naturally through mutation and cause miscarriages or stillbirths are never transmitted to subsequent generations .
However , some dominant lethal alleles , such as the allele for Huntington ’ s disease , cause a shortened life span but may not be identified until after the person reaches reproductive age and has children .
Huntington ’ s disease causes irreversible nerve cell degeneration and death in 100 percent of affected individuals , but it may not be expressed until the individual reaches middle age .
In this way , dominant lethal alleles can be maintained in the human population .
Individuals with a family history of Huntington ’ s disease are typically offered genetic counseling , which can help them decide whether or not they wish to be tested for the faulty gene .
A mutation is a change in the sequence of DNA nucleotides that may or may not affect a person ’ s phenotype .
Mutations can arise spontaneously from errors during DNA replication , or they can result from environmental insults such as radiation , certain viruses , or exposure to tobacco smoke or other toxic chemicals .
Because genes encode for the assembly of proteins , a mutation in the nucleotide sequence of a gene can change amino acid sequence and , consequently , a protein ’ s structure and function .
Spontaneous mutations occurring during meiosis are thought to account for many spontaneous abortions ( miscarriages ) .
Sometimes a genetic disease is not caused by a mutation in a gene , but by the presence of an incorrect number of chromosomes .
For example , Down syndrome is caused by having three copies of chromosome 21 .
This is known as trisomy 21 .
The most common cause of trisomy 21 is chromosomal nondisjunction during meiosis .
The frequency of nondisjunction events appears to increase with age , so the frequency of bearing a child with Down syndrome increases in women over 36 .
The age of the father matters less because nondisjunction is much less likely to occur in a sperm than in an egg .
Whereas Down syndrome is caused by having three copies of a chromosome , Turner syndrome is caused by having just one copy of the X chromosome .
This is known as monosomy .
The affected child is always female .
Women with Turner syndrome are sterile because their sexual organs do not mature .
Given the intricate orchestration of gene expression , cell migration , and cell differentiation during prenatal development , it is amazing that the vast majority of newborns are healthy and free of major birth defects .
A genetic counselor can interpret a couple ’ s family history and estimate the risks to their future offspring .
For many genetic diseases , a DNA test can determine whether a person is a carrier .
For instance , carrier status for Fragile X , an X-linked disorder associated with mental retardation , or for cystic fibrosis can be determined with a simple blood draw to obtain DNA for testing .
A genetic counselor can educate a couple about the implications of such a test and help them decide whether to undergo testing .
For chromosomal disorders , the available testing options include a blood test , amniocentesis ( in which amniotic fluid is tested ) , and chorionic villus sampling ( in which tissue from the placenta is tested ) .
Each of these has advantages and drawbacks .
A genetic counselor can also help a couple cope with the news that either one or both partners is a carrier of a genetic illness , or that their unborn child has been diagnosed with a chromosomal disorder or other birth defect .
To become a genetic counselor , one needs to complete a 4-year undergraduate program and then obtain a Master of Science in Genetic Counseling from an accredited university .
Board certification is attained after passing examinations by the American Board of Genetic Counseling .
Genetic counselors are essential professionals in many branches of medicine , but there is a particular demand for preconception and prenatal genetic counselors .
Visit the National Society of Genetic Counselors website ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/gencounselor1 ) for more information about genetic counselors .
Visit the American Board of Genetic Counselors , Inc. , website ( http : //openstaxcollege.org/l/gencounselor2 ) for more information about genetic counselors .
