Heat and temperature are important concepts for each of us , every day .
How we dress in the morning depends on whether the day is hot or cold , and most of what we do requires energy that ultimately comes from the Sun .
The study of heat and temperature is part of an area of physics known as thermodynamics .
The laws of thermodynamics govern the flow of energy throughout the universe .
They are studied in all areas of science and engineering , from chemistry to biology to environmental science .
In this chapter , we explore heat and temperature .
It is not always easy to distinguish these terms .
Heat is the flow of energy from one object to another .
This flow of energy is caused by a difference in temperature .
The transfer of heat can change temperature , as can work , another kind of energy transfer that is central to thermodynamics .
We return to these basic ideas several times throughout the next four chapters , and you will see that they affect everything from the behavior of atoms and molecules to cooking to our weather on Earth to the life cycles of stars .
Heat is familiar to all of us .
We can feel heat entering our bodies from the summer Sun or from hot coffee or tea after a winter stroll .
We can also feel heat leaving our bodies as we feel the chill of night or the cooling effect of sweat after exercise .
What is heat ?
How do we define it and how is it related to temperature ?
What are the effects of heat and how does it flow from place to place ?
We will find that , in spite of the richness of the phenomena , a small set of underlying physical principles unites these subjects and ties them to other fields .
We start by examining temperature and how to define and measure it .
The concept of temperature has evolved from the common concepts of hot and cold .
The scientific definition of temperature explains more than our senses of hot and cold .
As you may have already learned , many physical quantities are defined solely in terms of how they are observed or measured , that is , they are defined operationally .
Temperature is operationally defined as the quantity of what we measure with a thermometer .
As we will see in detail in a later chapter on the kinetic theory of gases , temperature is proportional to the average kinetic energy of translation , a fact that provides a more physical definition .
Differences in temperature maintain the transfer of heat , or heat transfe r , throughout the universe .
Heat transfer is the movement of energy from one place or material to another as a result of a difference in temperature .
( You will learn more about heat transfer later in this chapter . )
An important concept related to temperature is thermal equilibrium .
Two objects are in thermal equilibrium if they are in close contact that allows either to gain energy from the other , but nevertheless , no net energy is transferred between them .
Even when not in contact , they are in thermal equilibrium if , when they are placed in contact , no net energy is transferred between them .
If two objects remain in contact for a long time , they typically come to equilibrium .
In other words , two objects in thermal equilibrium do not exchange energy .
Experimentally , if object A is in equilibrium with object B , and object B is in equilibrium with object C , then ( as you may have already guessed ) object A is in equilibrium with object C .
That statement of transitivity is called the zeroth law of thermodynamics .
( The number “ zeroth ” was suggested by British physicist Ralph Fowler in the 1930s .
The first , second , and third laws of thermodynamics were already named and numbered then .
The zeroth law had seldom been stated , but it needs to be discussed before the others , so Fowler gave it a smaller number . )
Consider the case where A is a thermometer .
The zeroth law tells us that if A reads a certain temperature when in equilibrium with B , and it is then placed in contact with C , it will not exchange energy with C ; therefore , its temperature reading will remain the same .
In other words , if two objects are in thermal equilibrium , they have the same temperature .
A thermometer measures its own temperature .
It is through the concepts of thermal equilibrium and the zeroth law of thermodynamics that we can say that a thermometer measures the temperature of something else , and to make sense of the statement that two objects are at the same temperature .
Then we can say that a system is in thermal equilibrium with itself if all parts of it are at the same temperature .
( We will return to the definition of a thermodynamic system in the chapter on the first law of thermodynamics . )
Any physical property that depends consistently and reproducibly on temperature can be used as the basis of a thermometer .
For example , volume increases with temperature for most substances .
This property is the basis for the common alcohol thermometer and the original mercury thermometers .
Other properties used to measure temperature include electrical resistance , color , and the emission of infrared radiation .
Thermometers measure temperature according to well-defined scales of measurement .
The three most common temperature scales are Fahrenheit , Celsius , and Kelvin .
Temperature scales are created by identifying two reproducible temperatures .
The freezing and boiling temperatures of water at standard atmospheric pressure are commonly used .
On the Celsius scale , the freezing point of water is and the boiling point is The unit of temperature on this scale is the degree Celsius .
The Fahrenheit scale ( still the most frequently used for common purposes in the United States ) has the freezing point of water at and the boiling point at Its unit is the degree Fahrenheit .
You can see that 100 Celsius degrees span the same range as 180 Fahrenheit degrees .
Experiments confirm the existence of such a temperature , called absolute zero .
An absolute temperature scale is one whose zero point is absolute zero .
Such scales are convenient in science because several physical quantities , such as the volume of an ideal gas , are directly related to absolute temperature .
The Kelvin scale is the absolute temperature scale that is commonly used in science .
The SI temperature unit is the kelvin , which is abbreviated K ( not accompanied by a degree sign ) .
Thus 0 K is absolute zero .
The freezing and boiling points of water are 273.15 K and 373.15 K , respectively .
Therefore , temperature differences are the same in units of kelvins and degrees Celsius , or The relationships between the three common temperature scales are shown in .
Temperatures on these scales can be converted using the equations in .
To convert between Fahrenheit and Kelvin , convert to Celsius as an intermediate step .
“ Room temperature ” is generally defined in physics to be .
( a ) What is room temperature in ?
( b ) What is it in K ?
To answer these questions , all we need to do is choose the correct conversion equations and substitute the known values .
To convert from to , use the equation Substitute the known value into the equation and solve : Similarly , we find that .
The Kelvin scale is part of the SI system of units , so its actual definition is more complicated than the one given above .
First , it is not defined in terms of the freezing and boiling points of water , but in terms of the triple point .
The triple point is the unique combination of temperature and pressure at which ice , liquid water , and water vapor can coexist stably .
As will be discussed in the section on phase changes , the coexistence is achieved by lowering the pressure and consequently the boiling point to reach the freezing point .
The triple-point temperature is defined as 273.16 K. This definition has the advantage that although the freezing temperature and boiling temperature of water depend on pressure , there is only one triple-point temperature .
Second , even with two points on the scale defined , different thermometers give somewhat different results for other temperatures .
Therefore , a standard thermometer is required .
Metrologists ( experts in the science of measurement ) have chosen the constant-volume gas thermometer for this purpose .
A vessel of constant volume filled with gas is subjected to temperature changes , and the measured temperature is proportional to the change in pressure .
Using “ TP ” to represent the triple point , The results depend somewhat on the choice of gas , but the less dense the gas in the bulb , the better the results for different gases agree .
If the results are extrapolated to zero density , the results agree quite well , with zero pressure corresponding to a temperature of absolute zero .
Constant-volume gas thermometers are big and come to equilibrium slowly , so they are used mostly as standards to calibrate other thermometers .
Visit this to learn more about the constant-volume gas thermometer .
The expansion of alcohol in a thermometer is one of many commonly encountered examples of thermal expansion , which is the change in size or volume of a given system as its temperature changes .
The most visible example is the expansion of hot air .
When air is heated , it expands and becomes less dense than the surrounding air , which then exerts an ( upward ) force on the hot air and makes steam and smoke rise , hot air balloons float , and so forth .
The same behavior happens in all liquids and gases , driving natural heat transfer upward in homes , oceans , and weather systems , as we will discuss in an upcoming section .
Solids also undergo thermal expansion .
Railroad tracks and bridges , for example , have expansion joints to allow them to freely expand and contract with temperature changes , as shown in .
What is the underlying cause of thermal expansion ?
As previously mentioned , an increase in temperature means an increase in the kinetic energy of individual atoms .
In a solid , unlike in a gas , the molecules are held in place by forces from neighboring molecules ; as we saw in , the forces can be modeled as in harmonic springs described by the Lennard-Jones potential .
shows that such potentials are asymmetrical in that the potential energy increases more steeply when the molecules get closer to each other than when they get farther away .
Thus , at a given kinetic energy , the distance moved is greater when neighbors move away from each other than when they move toward each other .
The result is that increased kinetic energy ( increased temperature ) increases the average distance between molecules—the substance expands .
For most substances under ordinary conditions , it is an excellent approximation that there is no preferred direction ( that is , the solid is “ isotropic ” ) , and an increase in temperature increases the solid ’ s size by a certain fraction in each dimension .
Therefore , if the solid is free to expand or contract , its proportions stay the same ; only its overall size changes .
As is nearly constant and also very small , for practical purposes , we use the linear approximation : lists representative values of the coefficient of linear expansion .
As noted earlier , is the same whether it is expressed in units of degrees Celsius or kelvins ; thus , may have units of or 1/K with the same value in either case .
Approximating as a constant is quite accurate for small changes in temperature and sufficient for most practical purposes , even for large changes in temperature .
We examine this approximation more closely in the next example .
Thermal expansion is exploited in the bimetallic strip .
This device can be used as a thermometer if the curving strip is attached to a pointer on a scale .
It can also be used to automatically close or open a switch at a certain temperature , as in older or analog thermostats .
The main span of San Francisco ’ s Golden Gate Bridge is 1275 m long at its coldest .
The bridge is exposed to temperatures ranging from to .
What is its change in length between these temperatures ?
Assume that the bridge is made entirely of steel .
Use the equation for linear thermal expansion to calculate the change in length , .
Use the coefficient of linear expansion for steel from , and note that the change in temperature is Substitute all of the known values into the equation to solve for : Although not large compared with the length of the bridge , this change in length is observable .
It is generally spread over many expansion joints so that the expansion at each joint is small .
Unconstrained objects expand in all dimensions , as illustrated in .
That is , their areas and volumes , as well as their lengths , increase with temperature .
Because the proportions stay the same , holes and container volumes also get larger with temperature .
If you cut a hole in a metal plate , the remaining material will expand exactly as it would if the piece you removed were still in place .
The piece would get bigger , so the hole must get bigger too .
For small temperature changes , the change in area is given by where is the change in area is the change in temperature , and is the coefficient of linear expansion , which varies slightly with temperature .
( The derivation of this equation is analogous to that of the more important equation for three dimensions , below . )
The relationship between volume and temperature volume expansion .
As you can show in , .
This equation is usually written as is given by , where is the coefficient of Note that the values of in are equal to except for rounding .
Volume expansion is defined for liquids , but linear and area expansion are not , as a liquid ’ s changes in linear dimensions and area depend on the shape of its container .
Thus , shows liquids ’ values of but not .
In general , objects expand with increasing temperature .
Water is the most important exception to this rule .
Water does expand with increasing temperature ( its density decreases ) at temperatures greater than .
However , it is densest at and expands with decreasing temperature between and , as shown in .
A striking effect of this phenomenon is the freezing of water in a pond .
When water near the surface cools down to it is denser than the remaining water and thus sinks to the bottom .
This “ turnover ” leaves a layer of warmer water near the surface , which is then cooled .
However , if the temperature in the surface layer drops below , that water is less dense than the water below , and thus stays near the top .
As a result , the pond surface can freeze over .
The layer of ice insulates the liquid water below it from low air temperatures .
Fish and other aquatic life can survive in water beneath ice , due to this unusual characteristic of water .
Suppose your 60.0-L -gal ) steel gasoline tank is full of gas that is cool because it has just been pumped from an underground reservoir .
Now , both the tank and the gasoline have a temperature of How much gasoline has spilled by the time they warm to ?
The tank and gasoline increase in volume , but the gasoline increases more , so the amount spilled is the difference in their volume changes .
We can use the equation for volume expansion to calculate the change in volume of the gasoline and of the tank .
( The gasoline tank can be treated as solid steel . )
( Note that the original volumes are equal . )
This amount is significant , particularly for a 60.0-L tank .
The effect is so striking because the gasoline and steel expand quickly .
The rate of change in thermal properties is discussed later in this chapter .
If you try to cap the tank tightly to prevent overflow , you will find that it leaks anyway , either around the cap or by bursting the tank .
Tightly constricting the expanding gas is equivalent to compressing it , and both liquids and solids resist compression with extremely large forces .
To avoid rupturing rigid containers , these containers have air gaps , which allow them to expand and contract without stressing them .
Check Your Understanding Does a given reading on a gasoline gauge indicate more gasoline in cold weather or in hot weather , or does the temperature not matter ?
If you change the temperature of an object while preventing it from expanding or contracting , the object is subjected to stress that is compressive if the object would expand in the absence of constraint and tensile if it would contract .
This stress resulting from temperature changes is known as thermal stress .
It can be quite large and can cause damage .
To avoid this stress , engineers may design components so they can expand and contract freely .
For instance , in highways , gaps are deliberately left between blocks to prevent thermal stress from developing .
When no gaps can be left , engineers must consider thermal stress in their designs .
Thus , the reinforcing rods in concrete are made of steel because steel ’ s coefficient of linear expansion is nearly equal to that of concrete .
To calculate the thermal stress in a rod whose ends are both fixed rigidly , we can think of the stress as developing in two steps .
First , let the ends be free to expand ( or contract ) and find the expansion ( or contraction ) .
Second , find the stress necessary to compress ( or extend ) the rod to its original length by the methods you studied in on static equilibrium and elasticity .
In other words , the of the thermal expansion equals the of the elastic distortion ( except that the signs are opposite ) .
Concrete blocks are laid out next to each other on a highway without any space between them , so they can not expand .
The construction crew did the work on a winter day when the temperature was .
Find the stress in the blocks on a hot summer day when the temperature is .
The compressive Young ’ s modulus of concrete is .
According to the chapter on static equilibrium and elasticity , the stress F / A is given by where Y is the Young ’ s modulus of the material—concrete , in this case .
In thermal expansion , We combine these two equations by noting that the two are equal , as stated above .
Because we are not given or A , we can obtain a numerical answer only if they both cancel out .
We substitute the thermal-expansion equation into the elasticity equation to get and as we hoped , has canceled and A appears only in F / A , the notation for the quantity we are calculating .
Now we need only insert the numbers : The ultimate compressive strength of concrete is the ultimate shear strength of concrete is only so the blocks are unlikely to break .
However , so some might chip off .
Check Your Understanding Two objects A and B have the same dimensions and are constrained identically .
A is made of a material with a higher thermal expansion coefficient than B .
If the objects are heated identically , will A feel a greater stress than B ?
We have seen in previous chapters that energy is one of the fundamental concepts of physics .
Heat is a type of energy transfer that is caused by a temperature difference , and it can change the temperature of an object .
As we learned earlier in this chapter , heat transfer is the movement of energy from one place or material to another as a result of a difference in temperature .
Heat transfer is fundamental to such everyday activities as home heating and cooking , as well as many industrial processes .
It also forms a basis for the topics in the remainder of this chapter .
We also introduce the concept of internal energy , which can be increased or decreased by heat transfer .
We discuss another way to change the internal energy of a system , namely doing work on it .
Thus , we are beginning the study of the relationship of heat and work , which is the basis of engines and refrigerators and the central topic ( and origin of the name ) of thermodynamics .
A thermal system has internal energy ( also called thermal energy ) , which is the sum of the mechanical energies of its molecules .
A system ’ s internal energy is proportional to its temperature .
No work is done by either object because no force acts through a distance ( as we discussed in ) .
These observations reveal that heat is energy transferred spontaneously due to a temperature difference .
shows an example of heat transfer .
The meaning of “ heat ” in physics is different from its ordinary meaning .
For example , in conversation , we may say “ the heat was unbearable , ” but in physics , we would say that the temperature was high .
Heat is a form of energy flow , whereas temperature is not .
Incidentally , humans are sensitive to heat flow rather than to temperature .
Since heat is a form of energy , its SI unit is the joule ( J ) .
Another common unit of energy often used for heat is the calorie ( cal ) , defined as the energy needed to change the temperature of 1.00 g of water by —specifically , between and , since there is a slight temperature dependence .
Also commonly used is the kilocalorie ( kcal ) , which is the energy needed to change the temperature of 1.00 kg of water by .
Since mass is most often specified in kilograms , the kilocalorie is convenient .
Confusingly , food calories ( sometimes called “ big calories , ” abbreviated Cal ) are actually kilocalories , a fact not easily determined from package labeling .
It is also possible to change the temperature of a substance by doing work , which transfers energy into or out of a system .
This realization helped establish that heat is a form of energy .
James Prescott Joule ( 1818–1889 ) performed many experiments to establish the mechanical equivalent of heat — the work needed to produce the same effects as heat transfer .
In the units used for these two quantities , the value for this equivalence is We consider this equation to represent the conversion between two units of energy .
( Other numbers that you may see refer to calories defined for temperature ranges other than to . )
shows one of Joule ’ s most famous experimental setups for demonstrating that work and heat can produce the same effects and measuring the mechanical equivalent of heat .
It helped establish the principle of conservation of energy .
Gravitational potential energy ( U ) was converted into kinetic energy ( K ) , and then randomized by viscosity and turbulence into increased average kinetic energy of atoms and molecules in the system , producing a temperature increase .
Joule ’ s contributions to thermodynamics were so significant that the SI unit of energy was named after him .
Increasing internal energy by heat transfer gives the same result as increasing it by doing work .
Temperature and internal energy are state variables .
To sum up this paragraph , heat and work are not state variables .
Incidentally , increasing the internal energy of a system does not necessarily increase its temperature .
As we ’ ll see in the next section , the temperature does not change when a substance changes from one phase to another .
An example is the melting of ice , which can be accomplished by adding heat or by doing frictional work , as when an ice cube is rubbed against a rough surface .
We have noted that heat transfer often causes temperature change .
Experiments show that with no phase change and no work done on or by the system , the transferred heat is typically directly proportional to the change in temperature and to the mass of the system , to a good approximation .
( Below we show how to handle situations where the approximation is not valid . )
The constant of proportionality depends on the substance and its phase , which may be gas , liquid , or solid .
We omit discussion of the fourth phase , plasma , because although it is the most common phase in the universe , it is rare and short-lived on Earth .
We can understand the experimental facts by noting that the transferred heat is the change in the internal energy , which is the total energy of the molecules .
Under typical conditions , the total kinetic energy of the molecules is a constant fraction of the internal energy ( for reasons and with exceptions that we ’ ll see in the next chapter ) .
The average kinetic energy of a molecule is proportional to the absolute temperature .
Therefore , the change in internal energy of a system is typically proportional to the change in temperature and to the number of molecules , N .
Mathematically , The dependence on the substance results in large part from the different masses of atoms and molecules .
We are considering its heat capacity in terms of its mass , but as we will see in the next chapter , in some cases , heat capacities per molecule are similar for different substances .
The dependence on substance and phase also results from differences in the potential energy associated with interactions between atoms and molecules .
A practical approximation for the relationship between heat transfer and temperature change is : where Q is the symbol for heat transfer ( “ quantity of heat ” ) , m is the mass of the substance , and is the change in temperature .
The symbol c stands for the specific heat ( also called “ specific heat capacity ” ) and depends on the material and phase .
The specific heat is numerically equal to the amount of heat necessary to change the temperature of kg of mass by .
The SI unit for specific heat is or .
( Recall that the temperature change is the same in units of kelvin and degrees Celsius . )
Values of specific heat must generally be measured , because there is no simple way to calculate them precisely .
lists representative values of specific heat for various substances .
In fact , water has one of the largest specific heats of any material , which is important for sustaining life on Earth .
The specific heats of gases depend on what is maintained constant during the heating—typically either the volume or the pressure .
In the table , the first specific heat value for each gas is measured at constant volume , and the second ( in parentheses ) is measured at constant pressure .
We will return to this topic in the chapter on the kinetic theory of gases .
In general , specific heat also depends on temperature .
Thus , a precise definition of c for a substance must be given in terms of an infinitesimal change in temperature .
To do this , we note that and replace with d : Except for gases , the temperature and volume dependence of the specific heat of most substances is weak at normal temperatures .
Therefore , we will generally take specific heats to be constant at the values given in the table .
A 0.500-kg aluminum pan on a stove and 0.250 L of water in it are heated from to .
( a ) How much heat is required ?
What percentage of the heat is used to raise the temperature of ( b ) the pan and ( c ) the water ?
We can assume that the pan and the water are always at the same temperature .
When you put the pan on the stove , the temperature of the water and that of the pan are increased by the same amount .
We use the equation for the heat transfer for the given temperature change and mass of water and aluminum .
The specific heat values for water and aluminum are given in .
Calculate the temperature difference : Calculate the mass of water .
Because the density of water is , 1 L of water has a mass of 1 kg , and the mass of 0.250 L of water is .
Calculate the heat transferred to the water .
Use the specific heat of water in : Calculate the heat transferred to the aluminum .
Use the specific heat for aluminum in : Find the total transferred heat : In this example , the heat transferred to the container is a significant fraction of the total transferred heat .
Although the mass of the pan is twice that of the water , the specific heat of water is over four times that of aluminum .
Therefore , it takes a bit more than twice as much heat to achieve the given temperature change for the water as for the aluminum pan .
illustrates a temperature rise caused by doing work .
( The result is the same as if the same amount of energy had been added with a blowtorch instead of mechanically . )
Truck brakes used to control speed on a downhill run do work , converting gravitational potential energy into increased internal energy ( higher temperature ) of the brake material .
This conversion prevents the gravitational potential energy from being converted into kinetic energy of the truck .
Since the mass of the truck is much greater than that of the brake material absorbing the energy , the temperature increase may occur too fast for sufficient heat to transfer from the brakes to the environment ; in other words , the brakes may overheat .
Calculate the temperature increase of 10 kg of brake material with an average specific heat of if the material retains 10 % of the energy from a 10,000-kg truck descending 75.0 m ( in vertical displacement ) at a constant speed .
We calculate the gravitational potential energy ( Mgh ) that the entire truck loses in its descent , equate it to the increase in the brakes ’ internal energy , and then find the temperature increase produced in the brake material alone .
Then we calculate the temperature change from the heat transferred , using where m is the mass of the brake material .
Insert the given values to find If the truck had been traveling for some time , then just before the descent , the brake temperature would probably be higher than the ambient temperature .
The temperature increase in the descent would likely raise the temperature of the brake material very high , so this technique is not practical .
Instead , the truck would use the technique of engine braking .
A different idea underlies the recent technology of hybrid and electric cars , where mechanical energy ( kinetic and gravitational potential energy ) is converted by the brakes into electrical energy in the battery , a process called regenerative braking .
In a common kind of problem , objects at different temperatures are placed in contact with each other but isolated from everything else , and they are allowed to come into equilibrium .
A container that prevents heat transfer in or out is called a calorimeter , and the use of a calorimeter to make measurements ( typically of heat or specific heat capacity ) is called calorimetry .
We will use the term “ calorimetry problem ” to refer to any problem in which the objects concerned are thermally isolated from their surroundings .
Suppose you pour 0.250 kg of water ( about a cup ) into a 0.500-kg aluminum pan off the stove with a temperature of .
Assume no heat transfer takes place to anything else : The pan is placed on an insulated pad , and heat transfer to the air is neglected in the short time needed to reach equilibrium .
Thus , this is a calorimetry problem , even though no isolating container is specified .
Also assume that a negligible amount of water boils off .
What is the temperature when the water and pan reach thermal equilibrium ?
Originally , the pan and water are not in thermal equilibrium : The pan is at a higher temperature than the water .
Heat transfer restores thermal equilibrium once the water and pan are in contact ; it stops once thermal equilibrium between the pan and the water is achieved .
The heat lost by the pan is equal to the heat gained by the water—that is the basic principle of calorimetry .
The reason is that water has a greater specific heat than most common substances and thus undergoes a smaller temperature change for a given heat transfer .
A large body of water , such as a lake , requires a large amount of heat to increase its temperature appreciably .
This explains why the temperature of a lake stays relatively constant during the day even when the temperature change of the air is large .
However , the water temperature does change over longer times ( e.g. , summer to winter ) .
Check Your Understanding If 25 kJ is necessary to raise the temperature of a rock from how much heat is necessary to heat the rock from ?
At low temperatures , the specific heats of solids are typically proportional to .
The first understanding of this behavior was due to the Dutch physicist Peter Debye , who in 1912 , treated atomic oscillations with the quantum theory that Max Planck had recently used for radiation .
Phase transitions play an important theoretical and practical role in the study of heat flow .
In melting ( or “ fusion ” ) , a solid turns into a liquid ; the opposite process is freezing .
In evaporation , a liquid turns into a gas ; the opposite process is condensation .
A substance melts or freezes at a temperature called its melting point , and boils ( evaporates rapidly ) or condenses at its boiling point .
These temperatures depend on pressure .
High pressure favors the denser form , so typically , high pressure raises the melting point and boiling point , and low pressure lowers them .
For example , the boiling point of water is at 1.00 atm .
At higher pressure , the boiling point is higher , and at lower pressure , it is lower .
The main exception is the melting and freezing of water , discussed in the next section .
The phase of a given substance depends on the pressure and temperature .
Thus , plots of pressure versus temperature showing the phase in each region provide considerable insight into thermal properties of substances .
Such a pT graph is called a phase diagram .
shows the phase diagram for water .
Using the graph , if you know the pressure and temperature , you can determine the phase of water .
The solid curves—boundaries between phases—indicate phase transitions , that is , temperatures and pressures at which the phases coexist .
For example , the boiling point of water is at 1.00 atm .
As the pressure increases , the boiling temperature rises gradually to at a pressure of 218 atm .
A pressure cooker ( or even a covered pot ) cooks food faster than an open pot , because the water can exist as a liquid at temperatures greater than without all boiling away .
( As we ’ ll see in the next section , liquid water conducts heat better than steam or hot air . )
The boiling point curve ends at a certain point called the critical point —that is , a critical temperature , above which the liquid and gas phases can not be distinguished ; the substance is called a supercritical fluid .
At sufficiently high pressure above the critical point , the gas has the density of a liquid but does not condense .
Carbon dioxide , for example , is supercritical at all temperatures above .
Critical pressure is the pressure of the critical point .
Similarly , the curve between the solid and liquid regions in gives the melting temperature at various pressures .
For example , the melting point is at 1.00 atm , as expected .
Water has the unusual property that ice is less dense than liquid water at the melting point , so at a fixed temperature , you can change the phase from solid ( ice ) to liquid ( water ) by increasing the pressure .
That is , the melting temperature of ice falls with increased pressure , as the phase diagram shows .
For example , when a car is driven over snow , the increased pressure from the tires melts the snowflakes ; afterwards , the water refreezes and forms an ice layer .
As you learned in the earlier section on thermometers and temperature scales , the triple point is the combination of temperature and pressure at which ice , liquid water , and water vapor can coexist stably—that is , all three phases exist in equilibrium .
For water , the triple point occurs at and 611.2 Pa ; that is a more accurate calibration temperature than the melting point of water at 1.00 atm , or .
View this to see a substance at its triple point .
At pressures below that of the triple point , there is no liquid phase ; the substance can exist as either gas or solid .
For water , there is no liquid phase at pressures below 0.00600 atm .
The phase change from solid to gas is called sublimation .
You may have noticed that snow can disappear into thin air without a trace of liquid water , or that ice cubes can disappear in a freezer .
Both are examples of sublimation .
The reverse also happens : Frost can form on very cold windows without going through the liquid stage .
shows the result , as well as showing a familiar example of sublimation .
Carbon dioxide has no liquid phase at atmospheric pressure .
Solid is known as dry ice because instead of melting , it sublimes .
Its sublimation temperature at atmospheric pressure is .
Certain air fresheners use the sublimation of a solid to spread a perfume around a room .
Some solids , such as osmium tetroxide , are so toxic that they must be kept in sealed containers to prevent human exposure to their sublimation-produced vapors .
At the melting temperature , the solid and liquid phases are in equilibrium .
If heat is added , some of the solid will melt , and if heat is removed , some of the liquid will freeze .
The situation is somewhat more complex for liquid-gas equilibrium .
Generally , liquid and gas are in equilibrium at any temperature .
We call the gas phase a vapor when it exists at a temperature below the boiling temperature , as it does for water at .
Liquid in a closed container at a fixed temperature evaporates until the pressure of the gas reaches a certain value , called the vapor pressure , which depends on the gas and the temperature .
At this equilibrium , if heat is added , some of the liquid will evaporate , and if heat is removed , some of the gas will condense ; molecules either join the liquid or form suspended droplets .
If there is not enough liquid for the gas to reach the vapor pressure in the container , all the liquid eventually evaporates .
If the vapor pressure of the liquid is greater than the total ambient pressure , including that of any air ( or other gas ) , the liquid evaporates rapidly ; in other words , it boils .
Thus , the boiling point of a liquid at a given pressure is the temperature at which its vapor pressure equals the ambient pressure .
Liquid and gas phases are in equilibrium at the boiling temperature .
If a substance is in a closed container at the boiling point , then the liquid is boiling and the gas is condensing at the same rate without net change in their amounts .
For water , is the boiling point at 1.00 atm , so water and steam should exist in equilibrium under these conditions .
Why does an open pot of water at boil completely away ?
The gas surrounding an open pot is not pure water : it is mixed with air .
If pure water and steam are in a closed container at and 1.00 atm , they will coexist—but with air over the pot , there are fewer water molecules to condense , and water boils away .
Another way to see this is that at the boiling point , the vapor pressure equals the ambient pressure .
However , part of the ambient pressure is due to air , so the pressure of the steam is less than the vapor pressure at that temperature , and evaporation continues .
Incidentally , the equilibrium vapor pressure of solids is not zero , a fact that accounts for sublimation .
Check Your Understanding Explain why a cup of water ( or soda ) with ice cubes stays at even on a hot summer day .
So far , we have discussed heat transfers that cause temperature change .
However , in a phase transition , heat transfer does not cause any temperature change .
For an example of phase changes , consider the addition of heat to a sample of ice at and atmospheric pressure .
The temperature of the ice rises linearly , absorbing heat at a constant rate of until it reaches Once at this temperature , the ice begins to melt and continues until it has all melted , absorbing 333 kJ/kg of heat .
The temperature remains constant at during this phase change .
Once all the ice has melted , the temperature of the liquid water rises , absorbing heat at a new constant rate of At the water begins to boil .
The temperature again remains constant during this phase change while the water absorbs 2256 kJ/kg of heat and turns into steam .
When all the liquid has become steam , the temperature rises again , absorbing heat at a rate of .
If we started with steam and cooled it to make it condense into liquid water and freeze into ice , the process would exactly reverse , with the temperature again constant during each phase transition .
Where does the heat added during melting or boiling go , considering that the temperature does not change until the transition is complete ?
Energy is required to melt a solid , because the attractive forces between the molecules in the solid must be broken apart , so that in the liquid , the molecules can move around at comparable kinetic energies ; thus , there is no rise in temperature .
Energy is needed to vaporize a liquid for similar reasons .
Conversely , work is done by attractive forces when molecules are brought together during freezing and condensation .
That energy must be transferred out of the system , usually in the form of heat , to allow the molecules to stay together .
Thus , condensation occurs in association with cold objects—the glass in , for example .
The energy released when a liquid freezes is used by orange growers when the temperature approaches .
Growers spray water on the trees so that the water freezes and heat is released to the growing oranges .
This prevents the temperature inside the orange from dropping below freezing , which would damage the fruit .
The energy involved in a phase change depends on the number of bonds or force pairs and their strength .
The number of bonds is proportional to the number of molecules and thus to the mass of the sample .
The energy per unit mass required to change a substance from the solid phase to the liquid phase , or released when the substance changes from liquid to solid , is known as the heat of fusion .
The energy per unit mass required to change a substance from the liquid phase to the vapor phase is known as the heat of vaporization .
The strength of the forces depends on the type of molecules .
The heat Q absorbed or released in a phase change in a sample of mass m is given by where the latent heat of fusion and latent heat of vaporization are material constants that are determined experimentally .
( Latent heats are also called latent heat coefficients and heats of transformation . )
These constants are “ latent , ” or hidden , because in phase changes , energy enters or leaves a system without causing a temperature change in the system , so in effect , the energy is hidden .
lists representative values of and in kJ/kg , together with melting and boiling points .
Note that in general , .
The table shows that the amounts of energy involved in phase changes can easily be comparable to or greater than those involved in temperature changes , as and the accompanying discussion also showed .
Phase changes can have a strong stabilizing effect on temperatures that are not near the melting and boiling points , since evaporation and condensation occur even at temperatures below the boiling point .
For example , air temperatures in humid climates rarely go above approximately because most heat transfer goes into evaporating water into the air .
Similarly , temperatures in humid weather rarely fall below the dew point—the temperature where condensation occurs given the concentration of water vapor in the air—because so much heat is released when water vapor condenses .
More energy is required to evaporate water below the boiling point than at the boiling point , because the kinetic energy of water molecules at temperatures below is less than that at , so less energy is available from random thermal motions .
For example , at body temperature , evaporation of sweat from the skin requires a heat input of 2428 kJ/kg , which is about 10 % higher than the latent heat of vaporization at .
This heat comes from the skin , and this evaporative cooling effect of sweating helps reduce the body temperature in hot weather .
However , high humidity inhibits evaporation , so that body temperature might rise , while unevaporated sweat might be left on your brow .
Three ice cubes are used to chill a soda at with mass .
The ice is at and each ice cube has a mass of 6.0 g. Assume that the soda is kept in a foam container so that heat loss can be ignored and that the soda has the same specific heat as water .
Find the final temperature when all ice has melted .
The ice cubes are at the melting temperature of Heat is transferred from the soda to the ice for melting .
Melting yields water at so more heat is transferred from the soda to this water until the water plus soda system reaches thermal equilibrium .
The heat transferred to the ice is The heat given off by the soda is Since no heat is lost , as in , so that Solve for the unknown quantity : First we identify the known quantities .
The mass of ice is and the mass of soda is Then we calculate the final temperature : This example illustrates the large energies involved during a phase change .
The mass of ice is about 7 % of the mass of the soda but leads to a noticeable change in the temperature of the soda .
Although we assumed that the ice was at the freezing temperature , this is unrealistic for ice straight out of a freezer : The typical temperature is .
However , this correction makes no significant change from the result we found .
Can you explain why ?
Like solid-liquid and and liquid-vapor transitions , direct solid-vapor transitions or sublimations involve heat .
The energy transferred is given by the equation , where is the heat of sublimation , analogous to and .
The heat of sublimation at a given temperature is equal to the heat of fusion plus the heat of vaporization at that temperature .
We can now calculate any number of effects related to temperature and phase change .
In each case , it is necessary to identify which temperature and phase changes are taking place .
Keep in mind that heat transfer and work can cause both temperature and phase changes .
Examine the situation to determine that there is a change in the temperature or phase .
Is there heat transfer into or out of the system ?
When it is not obvious whether a phase change occurs or not , you may wish to first solve the problem as if there were no phase changes , and examine the temperature change obtained .
If it is sufficient to take you past a boiling or melting point , you should then go back and do the problem in steps—temperature change , phase change , subsequent temperature change , and so on .
Identify and list all objects that change temperature or phase .
Identify exactly what needs to be determined in the problem ( identify the unknowns ) .
A written list is useful .
Make a list of what is given or what can be inferred from the problem as stated ( identify the knowns ) .
If there is a temperature change , the transferred heat depends on the specific heat of the substance , and if there is a phase change , the transferred heat depends on the latent heat of the substance .
Solve the appropriate equation for the quantity to be determined ( the unknown ) .
Substitute the knowns along with their units into the appropriate equation and obtain numerical solutions complete with units .
You may need to do this in steps if there is more than one state to the process , such as a temperature change followed by a phase change .
However , in a calorimetry problem , each step corresponds to a term in the single equation .
Check the answer to see if it is reasonable .
Does it make sense ?
As an example , be certain that any temperature change does not also cause a phase change that you have not taken into account .
Check Your Understanding Why does snow often remain even when daytime temperatures are higher than the freezing temperature ?
Just as interesting as the effects of heat transfer on a system are the methods by which it occurs .
Whenever there is a temperature difference , heat transfer occurs .
It may occur rapidly , as through a cooking pan , or slowly , as through the walls of a picnic ice chest .
So many processes involve heat transfer that it is hard to imagine a situation where no heat transfer occurs .
Yet every heat transfer takes place by only three methods : Conduction is heat transfer through stationary matter by physical contact .
( The matter is stationary on a macroscopic scale—we know that thermal motion of the atoms and molecules occurs at any temperature above absolute zero . )
Heat transferred from the burner of a stove through the bottom of a pan to food in the pan is transferred by conduction .
Convection is the heat transfer by the macroscopic movement of a fluid .
This type of transfer takes place in a forced-air furnace and in weather systems , for example .
Heat transfer by radiation occurs when microwaves , infrared radiation , visible light , or another form of electromagnetic radiation is emitted or absorbed .
An obvious example is the warming of Earth by the Sun .
A less obvious example is thermal radiation from the human body .
In the illustration at the beginning of this chapter , the fire warms the snowshoers ’ faces largely by radiation .
Convection carries some heat to them , but most of the air flow from the fire is upward ( creating the familiar shape of flames ) , carrying heat to the food being cooked and into the sky .
The snowshoers wear clothes designed with low conductivity to prevent heat flow out of their bodies .
In this section , we examine these methods in some detail .
Each method has unique and interesting characteristics , but all three have two things in common : They transfer heat solely because of a temperature difference , and the greater the temperature difference , the faster the heat transfer .
mechanism of heat transfer .
Check Your Understanding Name an example from daily life ( different from the text ) for each As you walk barefoot across the living room carpet in a cold house and then step onto the kitchen tile floor , your feet feel colder on the tile .
This result is intriguing , since the carpet and tile floor are both at the same temperature .
The different sensation is explained by the different rates of heat transfer : The heat loss is faster for skin in contact with the tiles than with the carpet , so the sensation of cold is more intense .
Some materials conduct thermal energy faster than others .
shows a material that conducts heat slowly—it is a good thermal insulator , or poor heat conductor—used to reduce heat flow into and out of a house .
A molecular picture of heat conduction will help justify the equation that describes it .
shows molecules in two bodies at different temperatures , and for “ hot ” and “ cold. ” The average kinetic energy of a molecule in the hot body is higher than in the colder body .
If two molecules collide , energy transfers from the high-energy to the low-energy molecule .
In a metal , the picture would also include free valence electrons colliding with each other and with atoms , likewise transferring energy .
The cumulative effect of all collisions is a net flux of heat from the hotter body to the colder body .
Thus , the rate of heat transfer increases with increasing temperature difference If the temperatures are the same , the net heat transfer rate is zero .
Because the number of collisions increases with increasing area , heat conduction is proportional to the cross-sectional area—a second factor in the equation .
A third quantity that affects the conduction rate is the thickness of the material through which heat transfers .
shows a slab of material with a higher temperature on the left than on the right .
Heat transfers from the left to the right by a series of molecular collisions .
The greater the distance between hot and cold , the more time the material takes to transfer the same amount of heat .
All four of these quantities appear in a simple equation deduced from and confirmed by experiments .
gives representative values of thermal conductivity .
More generally , we can write where x is the coordinate in the direction of heat flow .
Since in , the power and area are constant , dT / dx is constant , and the temperature decreases linearly from to A polystyrene foam icebox has a total area of and walls with an average thickness of 2.50 cm .
The box contains ice , water , and canned beverages at The inside of the box is kept cold by melting ice .
How much ice melts in one day if the icebox is kept in the trunk of a car at ?
This question involves both heat for a phase change ( melting of ice ) and the transfer of heat by conduction .
To find the amount of ice melted , we must find the net heat transferred .
This value can be obtained by calculating the rate of heat transfer by conduction and multiplying by time .
First we identify the knowns .
for foam ; ; Then we identify the unknowns .
We need to solve for the mass of the ice , m .
We also need to solve for the net heat transferred to melt the ice , Q .
You might expect to use about a 4 kg ( 7–10 lb ) bag of ice per day .
A little extra ice is required if you add any warm food or beverages .
shows that polystyrene foam is a very poor conductor and thus a good insulator .
Other good insulators include fiberglass , wool , and goosedown feathers .
Like polystyrene foam , these all contain many small pockets of air , taking advantage of air ’ s poor thermal conductivity .
In developing insulation , the smaller the conductivity k and the larger the thickness d , the better .
Thus , the ratio d/k , called the R factor , is large for a good insulator .
The rate of conductive heat transfer is inversely proportional to R .
R factors are most commonly quoted for household insulation , refrigerators , and the like .
A couple of representative values are an R factor of 11 for 3.5-inch-thick fiberglass batts ( pieces ) of insulation and an R factor of 19 for 6.5-inchthick fiberglass batts .
In the US , walls are usually insulated with 3.5-inch batts , whereas ceilings are usually insulated with 6.5-inch batts .
In cold climates , thicker batts may be used .
Note that in , most of the best thermal conductors—silver , copper , gold , and aluminum—are also the best electrical conductors , because they contain many free electrons that can transport thermal energy .
( Diamond , an electrical insulator , conducts heat by atomic vibrations . )
Cooking utensils are typically made from good conductors , but the handles of those used on the stove are made from good insulators ( bad conductors ) .
A steel rod and an aluminum rod , each of diameter 1.00 cm and length 25.0 cm , are welded end to end .
One end of the steel rod is placed in a large tank of boiling water at , while the far end of the aluminum rod is placed in a large tank of water at .
The rods are insulated so that no heat escapes from their surfaces .
What is the temperature at the joint , and what is the rate of heat conduction through this composite rod ?
The heat that enters the steel rod from the boiling water has no place to go but through the steel rod , then through the aluminum rod , to the cold water .
Therefore , we can equate the rate of conduction through the steel to the rate of conduction through the aluminum .
We repeat the calculation with a second method , in which we use the thermal resistance R of the rod , since it simply adds when two rods are joined end to end .
( We will use a similar method in the chapter on direct-current circuits . )
Identify the knowns and convert them to SI units .
The length of each rod is the cross-sectional area of each rod is the thermal conductivity of aluminum is , the thermal conductivity of steel is , the temperature at the hot end is , and the temperature at the cold end is .
Now We know that .
We also know that and we denote that rate of heat flow by P .
Combine the equations : Thus , we can simply add R factors .
Find the from the known quantities : and Substitute these values in to find as before .
Determine for the aluminum rod ( or for the steel rod ) and use it to find T at the joint .
so , as in Solution .
If desired , check by determining for the other rod .
In practice , adding R values is common , as in calculating the R value of an insulated wall .
In the analogous situation in electronics , the resistance corresponds to AR in this problem and is additive even when the areas are unequal , as is common in electronics .
Our equation for heat conduction can be used only when the areas are equal ; otherwise , we would have a problem in three-dimensional heat flow , which is beyond our scope .
Check Your Understanding How does the rate of heat transfer by conduction change when all spatial dimensions are doubled ?
Conduction is caused by the random motion of atoms and molecules .
As such , it is an ineffective mechanism for heat transport over macroscopic distances and short times .
For example , the temperature on Earth would be unbearably cold during the night and extremely hot during the day if heat transport in the atmosphere were only through conduction .
Also , car engines would overheat unless there was a more efficient way to remove excess heat from the pistons .
The next module discusses the important heat-transfer mechanism in such situations .
In convection , thermal energy is carried by the large-scale flow of matter .
It can be divided into two types .
In forced convection , the flow is driven by fans , pumps , and the like .
A simple example is a fan that blows air past you in hot surroundings and cools you by replacing the air heated by your body with cooler air .
A more complicated example is the cooling system of a typical car , in which a pump moves coolant through the radiator and engine to cool the engine and a fan blows air to cool the radiator .
In free or natural convection , the flow is driven by buoyant forces : hot fluid rises and cold fluid sinks because density decreases as temperature increases .
The house in is kept warm by natural convection , as is the pot of water on the stove in .
Ocean currents and large-scale atmospheric circulation , which result from the buoyancy of warm air and water , transfer hot air from the tropics toward the poles and cold air from the poles toward the tropics .
( Earth ’ s rotation interacts with those flows , causing the observed eastward flow of air in the temperate zones . )
Natural convection like that of and , but acting on rock in Earth ’ s mantle , drives that are the motions that have shaped Earth ’ s surface .
Convection is usually more complicated than conduction .
Beyond noting that the convection rate is often approximately proportional to the temperature difference , we will not do any quantitative work comparable to the formula for conduction .
However , we can describe convection qualitatively and relate convection rates to heat and time .
However , air is a poor conductor .
Therefore , convection dominates heat transfer by air , and the amount of available space for airflow determines whether air transfers heat rapidly or slowly .
There is little heat transfer in a space filled with air with a small amount of other material that prevents flow .
The space between the inside and outside walls of a typical American house , for example , is about 9 cm ( 3.5 in .
) —large enough for convection to work effectively .
The addition of wall insulation prevents airflow , so heat loss ( or gain ) is decreased .
On the other hand , the gap between the two panes of a double-paned window is about 1 cm , which largely prevents convection and takes advantage of air ’ s low conductivity reduce heat loss .
Fur , cloth , and fiberglass also take advantage of the low conductivity of air by trapping it in spaces too small to support convection .
Some interesting phenomena happen when convection is accompanied by a phase change .
The combination allows us to cool off by sweating even if the temperature of the surrounding air exceeds body temperature .
Heat from the skin is required for sweat to evaporate from the skin , but without air flow , the air becomes saturated and evaporation stops .
Air flow caused by convection replaces the saturated air by dry air and evaporation continues .
The average person produces heat at the rate of about 120 W when at rest .
At what rate must water evaporate from the body to get rid of all this energy ?
( For simplicity , we assume this evaporation occurs when a person is sitting in the shade and surrounding temperatures are the same as skin temperature , eliminating heat transfer by other methods . )
Energy is needed for this phase change .
Thus , the energy loss per unit time is We divide both sides of the equation by to find that the mass evaporated per unit time is Insert the value of the latent heat from , .
This yields Evaporating about 3 g/min seems reasonable .
This would be about 180 g ( about 7 oz . )
If the air is very dry , the sweat may evaporate without even being noticed .
A significant amount of evaporation also takes place in the lungs and breathing passages .
Another important example of the combination of phase change and convection occurs when water evaporates from the oceans .
Heat is removed from the ocean when water evaporates .
If the water vapor condenses in liquid droplets as clouds form , possibly far from the ocean , heat is released in the atmosphere .
Thus , there is an overall transfer of heat from the ocean to the atmosphere .
This process is the driving power behind thunderheads , those great cumulus clouds that rise as much as 20.0 km into the stratosphere .
Water vapor carried in by convection condenses , releasing tremendous amounts of energy .
This energy causes the air to expand and rise to colder altitudes .
More condensation occurs in these regions , which in turn drives the cloud even higher .
This mechanism is an example of positive feedback , since the process reinforces and accelerates itself .
It sometimes produces violent storms , with lightning and hail .
The same mechanism drives hurricanes .
This shows convection currents in a thunderstorm , including “ rolling ” motion similar to that of boiling water .
Check Your Understanding Explain why using a fan in the summer feels refreshing .
You can feel the heat transfer from the Sun .
The space between Earth and the Sun is largely empty , so the Sun warms us without any possibility of heat transfer by convection or conduction .
Similarly , you can sometimes tell that the oven is hot without touching its door or looking inside—it may just warm you as you walk by .
In these examples , heat is transferred by radiation .
That is , the hot body emits electromagnetic waves that are absorbed by the skin .
No medium is required for electromagnetic waves to propagate .
Different names are used for electromagnetic waves of different wavelengths : radio waves , microwaves , infrared radiation , visible light , ultraviolet radiation , X-rays , and gamma rays .
The energy of electromagnetic radiation varies over a wide range , depending on the wavelength : A shorter wavelength ( or higher frequency ) corresponds to a higher energy .
Because more heat is radiated at higher temperatures , higher temperatures produce more intensity at every wavelength but especially at shorter wavelengths .
In visible light , wavelength determines color—red has the longest wavelength and violet the shortest—so a temperature change is accompanied by a color change .
For example , an electric heating element on a stove glows from red to orange , while the higher-temperature steel in a blast furnace glows from yellow to white .
Infrared radiation is the predominant form radiated by objects cooler than the electric element and the steel .
The radiated energy as a function of wavelength depends on its intensity , which is represented in by the height of the distribution .
( explains more about the electromagnetic spectrum , and discusses why the decrease in wavelength corresponds to an increase in energy . )
The rate of heat transfer by radiation also depends on the object ’ s color .
Black is the most effective , and white is the least effective .
On a clear summer day , black asphalt in a parking lot is hotter than adjacent gray sidewalk , because black absorbs better than gray .
The reverse is also true—black radiates better than gray .
Thus , on a clear summer night , the asphalt is colder than the gray sidewalk , because black radiates the energy more rapidly than gray .
A perfectly black object would be an ideal radiator and an ideal absorber , as it would capture all the radiation that falls on it .
In contrast , a perfectly white object or a perfect mirror would reflect all radiation , and a perfectly transparent object would transmit it all .
Such objects would not emit any radiation .
Mathematically , the color is represented by the emissivity e .
A “ blackbody ” radiator would have an , whereas a perfect reflector or transmitter would have .
For real examples , tungsten light bulb filaments have an e of about 0.5 , and carbon black ( a material used in printer toner ) has an emissivity of about 0.95 .
To see that , consider a silver object and a black object that can exchange heat by radiation and are in thermal equilibrium .
We know from experience that they will stay in equilibrium ( the result of a principle that will be discussed at length in ) .
For the black object ’ s temperature to stay constant , it must emit as much radiation as it absorbs , so it must be as good at radiating as absorbing .
Similar considerations show that the silver object must radiate as little as it absorbs .
Thus , one property , emissivity , controls both radiation and absorption .
Finally , the radiated heat is proportional to the object ’ s surface area , since every part of the surface radiates .
If you knock apart the coals of a fire , the radiation increases noticeably due to an increase in radiating surface area .
The rate of heat transfer by emitted radiation is described by the Stefan-Boltzmann law of radiation : where is the Stefan-Boltzmann constant , a combination of fundamental constants of nature ; A is the surface area of the object ; and T is its temperature in kelvins .
The proportionality to the fourth power of the absolute temperature is a remarkably strong temperature dependence .
It allows the detection of even small temperature variations .
Images called thermographs can be used medically to detect regions of abnormally high temperature in the body , perhaps indicative of disease .
Similar techniques can be used to detect heat leaks in homes , optimize performance of blast furnaces , improve comfort levels in work environments , and even remotely map Earth ’ s temperature profile .
The Stefan-Boltzmann equation needs only slight refinement to deal with a simple case of an object ’ s absorption of radiation from its surroundings .
Assuming that an object with a temperature is surrounded by an environment with uniform temperature , the net rate of heat transfer by radiation is the quantity is positive , that is , the net heat transfer is from hot to cold .
where e is the emissivity of the object alone .
In other words , it does not matter whether the surroundings are white , gray , or black : The balance of radiation into and out of the object depends on how well it emits and absorbs radiation .
When Before doing an example , we have a complication to discuss : different emissivities at different wavelengths .
If the fraction of incident radiation an object reflects is the same at all visible wavelengths , the object is gray ; if the fraction depends on the wavelength , the object has some other color .
For instance , a red or reddish object reflects red light more strongly than other visible wavelengths .
Because it absorbs less red , it radiates less red when hot .
Differential reflection and absorption of wavelengths outside the visible range have no effect on what we see , but they may have physically important effects .
Skin is a very good absorber and emitter of infrared radiation , having an emissivity of 0.97 in the infrared spectrum .
Thus , in spite of the obvious variations in skin color , we are all nearly black in the infrared .
This high infrared emissivity is why we can so easily feel radiation on our skin .
It is also the basis for the effectiveness of night-vision scopes used by law enforcement and the military to detect human beings .
What is the rate of heat transfer by radiation of an unclothed person standing in a dark room whose ambient temperature is ?
The person has a normal skin temperature of and a surface area of The emissivity of skin is 0.97 in the infrared , the part of the spectrum where the radiation takes place .
We can solve this by using the equation for the rate of radiative heat transfer .
Indeed , we would probably expect this person to feel cold .
Clothing significantly reduces heat transfer to the environment by all mechanisms , because clothing slows down both conduction and convection , and has a lower emissivity ( especially if it is light-colored ) than skin .
The average temperature of Earth is the subject of much current discussion .
Earth is in radiative contact with both the Sun and dark space , so we can not use the equation for an environment at a uniform temperature .
Earth receives almost all its energy from radiation of the Sun and reflects some of it back into outer space .
Conversely , dark space is very cold , about 3 K , so that Earth radiates energy into the dark sky .
The rate of heat transfer from soil and grasses can be so rapid that frost may occur on clear summer evenings , even in warm latitudes .
The average temperature of Earth is determined by its energy balance .
To a first approximation , it is the temperature at which Earth radiates heat to space as fast as it receives energy from the Sun .
An important parameter in calculating the temperature of Earth is its emissivity ( e ) .
On average , it is about 0.65 , but calculation of this value is complicated by the great day-to-day variation in the highly reflective cloud coverage .
Because clouds have lower emissivity than either oceans or land masses , they reflect some of the radiation back to the surface , greatly reducing heat transfer into dark space , just as they greatly reduce heat transfer into the atmosphere during the day .
There is negative feedback ( in which a change produces an effect that opposes that change ) between clouds and heat transfer ; higher temperatures evaporate more water to form more clouds , which reflect more radiation back into space , reducing the temperature .
The often-mentioned greenhouse effect is directly related to the variation of Earth ’ s emissivity with wavelength .
The greenhouse effect is a natural phenomenon responsible for providing temperatures suitable for life on Earth and for making Venus unsuitable for human life .
Most of the infrared radiation emitted from Earth is absorbed by carbon dioxide and water in the atmosphere and then re-radiated into outer space or back to Earth .
Re-radiation back to Earth maintains its surface temperature about higher than it would be if there were no atmosphere .
( The glass walls and roof of a greenhouse increase the temperature inside by blocking convective heat losses , not radiative losses . )
The greenhouse effect is central to the discussion of global warming due to emission of carbon dioxide and methane ( and other greenhouse gases ) into Earth ’ s atmosphere from industry , transportation , and farming .
Changes in global climate could lead to more intense storms , precipitation changes ( affecting agriculture ) , reduction in rain forest biodiversity , and rising sea levels .
You can explore that takes the point of view that the atmosphere scatters ( redirects ) infrared radiation rather than absorbing it and reradiating it .
You may want to run the simulation first with no greenhouse gases in the atmosphere and then look at how adding greenhouse gases affects the infrared radiation from the Earth and the Earth ’ s temperature .
Examine the situation to determine what type of heat transfer is involved .
Identify the type ( s ) of heat transfer—conduction , convection , or radiation .
Identify exactly what needs to be determined in the problem ( identify the unknowns ) .
A written list is useful .
Make a list of what is given or what can be inferred from the problem as stated ( identify the knowns ) .
Solve the appropriate equation for the quantity to be determined ( the unknown ) .
For conduction , use the equation .
lists thermal conductivities .
For convection , determine the amount of matter moved and the equation , along with or if a substance changes phase .
For radiation , the equation gives the net heat transfer rate .
Substitute the knowns along with their units into the appropriate equation and obtain numerical solutions complete with units .
Check the answer to see if it is reasonable .
Does it make sense ?
Check Your Understanding How much greater is the rate of heat radiation when a body is at the temperature than when it is at the temperature ?
Gases are literally all around us—the air that we breathe is a mixture of gases .
Other gases include those that make breads and cakes soft , those that make drinks fizzy , and those that burn to heat many homes .
Engines and refrigerators depend on the behaviors of gases , as we will see in later chapters .
We begin by considering some macroscopic properties of gases : volume , pressure , and temperature .
The simple model of a hypothetical “ ideal gas ” describes these properties of a gas very accurately under many conditions .
We move from the ideal gas model to a more widely applicable approximation , called the Van der Waals model .
To understand gases even better , we must also look at them on the microscopic scale of molecules .
In gases , the molecules interact weakly , so the microscopic behavior of gases is relatively simple , and they serve as a good introduction to systems of many molecules .
The molecular model of gases is called the kinetic theory of gases and is one of the classic examples of a molecular model that explains everyday behavior .
In this section , we explore the thermal behavior of gases .
Our word “ gas ” comes from the Flemish word meaning “ chaos , ” first used for vapors by the seventeenth-century chemist J .
B. van Helmont .
The term was more appropriate than he knew , because gases consist of molecules moving and colliding with each other at random .
This randomness makes the connection between the microscopic and macroscopic domains simpler for gases than for liquids or solids .
How do gases differ from solids and liquids ?
Under ordinary conditions , such as those of the air around us , the difference is that the molecules of gases are much farther apart than those of solids and liquids .
Because the typical distances between molecules are large compared to the size of a molecule , as illustrated in , the forces between them are considered negligible , except when they come into contact with each other during collisions .
Also , at temperatures well above the boiling temperature , the motion of molecules is fast , and the gases expand rapidly to occupy all of the accessible volume .
In contrast , in liquids and solids , molecules are closer together , and the behavior of molecules in liquids and solids is highly constrained by the molecules ’ interactions with one another .
The macroscopic properties of such substances depend strongly on the forces between the molecules , and since many molecules are interacting , the resulting “ many-body problems ” can be extremely complicated ( see ) .
In the previous chapter , we saw one consequence of the large intermolecular spacing in gases : Gases are easily compressed .
shows that gases have larger coefficients of volume expansion than either solids or liquids .
These large coefficients mean that gases expand and contract very rapidly with temperature changes .
We also saw ( in the section on thermal expansion ) that most gases expand at the same rate or have the same coefficient of volume expansion , .
This raises a question : Why do all gases act in nearly the same way , when all the various liquids and solids have widely varying expansion rates ?
To study how the pressure , temperature , and volume of a gas relate to one another , consider what happens when you pump air into a deflated car tire .
The tire ’ s volume first increases in direct proportion to the amount of air injected , without much increase in the tire pressure .
Once the tire has expanded to nearly its full size , the tire ’ s walls limit its volume expansion .
If we continue to pump air into the tire , the pressure increases .
When the car is driven and the tires flex , their temperature increases , and therefore the pressure increases even further .
shows data from the experiments of Robert Boyle ( 1627–1691 ) , illustrating what is now called Boyle ’ s law : At constant temperature and number of molecules , the absolute pressure of a gas and its volume are inversely proportional .
( Recall from that the absolute pressure is the true pressure and the gauge pressure is the absolute pressure minus the ambient pressure , typically atmospheric pressure . )
The graph in displays this relationship as an inverse proportionality of volume to pressure .
shows experimental data illustrating what is called Charles ’ s law , after Jacques Charles ( 1746–1823 ) .
Charles ’ s law states that at constant pressure and number of molecules , the volume of a gas is proportional to its absolute temperature .
Similar is Amonton ’ s or Gay-Lussac ’ s law , which states that at constant volume and number of molecules , the pressure is proportional to the temperature .
That law is the basis of the constant-volume gas thermometer , discussed in the previous chapter .
( The histories of these laws and the appropriate credit for them are more complicated than can be discussed here . )
It is known experimentally that for gases at low density ( such that their molecules occupy a negligible fraction of the total volume ) and at temperatures well above the boiling point , these proportionalities hold to a good approximation .
Not surprisingly , with the other quantities held constant , either pressure or volume is proportional to the number of molecules .
More surprisingly , when the proportionalities are combined into a single equation , the constant of proportionality is independent of the composition of the gas .
The resulting equation for all gases applies in the limit of low density and high temperature ; it ’ s the same for oxygen as for helium or uranium hexafluoride .
A gas at that limit is called an ideal gas ; it obeys the ideal gas law , which is also called the equation of state of an ideal gas .
The ideal gas law states that where p is the absolute pressure of a gas , V is the volume it occupies , N is the number of molecules in the gas , and T is its absolute temperature .
This encompasses many practical situations .
In the next section , we ’ ll see why it ’ s independent of the type of gas .
In many situations , the ideal gas law is applied to a sample of gas with a constant number of molecules ; for instance , the gas may be in a sealed container .
If N is constant , then solving for N shows that pV / T is constant .
We can write that fact in a convenient form : where the subscripts 1 and 2 refer to any two states of the gas at different times .
Again , the temperature must be expressed in kelvin and the pressure must be absolute pressure , which is the sum of gauge pressure and atmospheric pressure .
Suppose your bicycle tire is fully inflated , with an absolute pressure of ( a gauge pressure of just under ) at a temperature of What is the pressure after its temperature has risen to on a hot day ?
Assume there are no appreciable leaks or changes in volume .
The pressure in the tire is changing only because of changes in temperature .
We know the initial pressure and the final temperature We must find the final pressure Since the number of molecules is constant , we can use the equation the initial temperature Since the volume is constant , and are the same and they divide out .
Therefore , We can then rearrange this to solve for where the temperature must be in kelvin .
Convert temperatures from degrees Celsius to kelvin Substitute the known values into the equation , The final temperature is about greater than the original temperature , so the final pressure is about greater as well .
Note that absolute pressure ( see ) and absolute temperature ( see ) must be used in the ideal gas law .
How many molecules are in a typical object , such as gas in a tire or water in a glass ?
This calculation can give us an idea of how large N typically is .
Let ’ s calculate the number of molecules in the air that a typical healthy young adult inhales in one breath , with a volume of 500 mL , at standard temperature and pressure ( STP ) , which is defined as and atmospheric pressure .
( Our young adult is apparently outside in winter . )
Because pressure , volume , and temperature are all specified , we can use the ideal gas law , N .
to find Identify the knowns .
Substitute the known values into the equation and solve for N .
N is huge , even in small volumes .
For example , of a gas at STP contains molecules .
Once again , note that our result for N is the same for all types of gases , including mixtures .
As we observed in the chapter on fluid mechanics , pascals are , so Thus , our result for N is dimensionless , a pure number that could be obtained by counting ( in principle ) rather than measuring .
As it is the number of molecules , we put “ molecules ” after the number , keeping in mind that it is an aid to communication rather than a unit .
It is often convenient to measure the amount of substance with a unit on a more human scale than molecules .
The SI unit for this purpose was developed by the Italian scientist Amedeo Avogadro ( 1776–1856 ) .
( He worked from the hypothesis that equal volumes of gas at equal pressure and temperature contain equal numbers of molecules , independent of the type of gas .
As mentioned above , this hypothesis has been confirmed when the ideal gas approximation applies . )
A mole ( abbreviated mol ) is defined as the amount of any substance that contains as many molecules as there are atoms in exactly 12 grams ( 0.012 kg ) of carbon-12 .
( Technically , we should say “ formula units , ” not “ molecules , ” but this distinction is irrelevant for our purposes . )
The number of molecules in one mole is called Avogadro ’ s number and the value of Avogadro ’ s number is now known to be We can now write , where n represents the number of moles of a substance .
Avogadro ’ s number relates the mass of an amount of substance in grams to the number of protons and neutrons in an atom or molecule ( 12 for a carbon-12 atom ) , which roughly determine its mass .
It ’ s natural to define a unit of mass such that the mass of an atom is approximately equal to its number of neutrons and protons .
The unit of that kind accepted for use with the SI is the unified atomic mass unit ( u ) , also called the dalton .
Specifically , a carbon-12 atom has a mass of exactly 12 u , so that its molar mass M in grams per mole is numerically equal to the mass of one carbon-12 atom in u .
That equality holds for any substance .
In other words , is not only the conversion from numbers of molecules to moles , but it is also the conversion from u to grams : See .
Check Your Understanding The density of air in a classroom and is .
At what pressure is the density if the temperature is kept constant ?
A very common expression of the ideal gas law uses the number of moles in a sample , n , rather than the number of molecules , N .
We start from the ideal gas law , and multiply and divide the right-hand side of the equation by Avogadro ’ s number This gives us Note that is the number of moles .
We define the universal gas constant as and obtain the ideal gas law in terms of moles .
In terms of number of moles n , the ideal gas law is written as In SI units , In other units , You can use whichever value of R is most convenient for a particular problem .
Calculate the density of dry air ( a ) under standard conditions and ( b ) in a hot air balloon at a temperature of .
Dry air is approximately and .
We are asked to find the density , or mass per cubic meter .
We can begin by finding the molar mass .
If we have a hundred molecules , of which 78 are nitrogen , 21 are oxygen , and 1 is argon , the average molecular mass is same applies to the molar mass , which therefore is , or the mass of each constituent multiplied by its percentage .
The Now we can find the number of moles per cubic meter .
We use the ideal gas law in terms of moles , with , , , and .
The calculation is the same except that we use a temperature of , which is 393 K. We can repeat the calculation in ( a ) , or simply observe that the density is proportional to the number of moles , which is inversely proportional to the temperature .
Then using the subscripts 1 for air at STP and 2 for the hot air , we have we Significance Using the methods of , is or enough to lift about 867 kg .
The mass density and molar density of air at STP , found above , are often useful numbers .
Explain how this implies that the distances between molecules in gases are on the order of 10 times greater than the size of their molecules .
The ideal gas law is closely related to energy : The units on both sides of the equation are joules .
The left-hand side of the ideal gas law equation is pV .
As mentioned in the example on the number of molecules in an ideal gas , pressure multiplied by volume has units of energy .
The energy of a gas can be changed when the gas does work as it increases in volume , something we explored in the preceding chapter , and the amount of work is related to the pressure .
This is the process that occurs in gasoline or steam engines and turbines , as we ’ ll see in the next chapter .
Examine the situation to determine that an ideal gas is involved .
Most gases are nearly ideal unless they are close to the boiling point or at pressures far above atmospheric pressure .
Make a list of what quantities are given or can be inferred from the problem as stated ( identify the known quantities ) .
Identify exactly what needs to be determined in the problem ( identify the unknown quantities ) .
A written list is useful .
Determine whether the number of molecules or the number of moles is known or asked for to decide whether to use the ideal gas law as where N is the number of molecules , or where n is the number of moles .
Convert known values into proper SI units ( K for temperature , Pa for pressure , for volume , molecules for N , and moles for n ) .
If the units of the knowns are consistent with one of the non-SI values of R , you can leave them in those units .
Be sure to use absolute temperature and absolute pressure .
Solve the ideal gas law for the quantity to be determined ( the unknown quantity ) .
You may need to take a ratio of final states to initial states to eliminate the unknown quantities that are kept fixed .
Substitute the known quantities , along with their units , into the appropriate equation and obtain numerical solutions complete with units .
Check the answer to see if it is reasonable : Does it make sense ?
We have repeatedly noted that the ideal gas law is an approximation .
How can it be improved upon ?
The van der Waals equation of state ( named after the Dutch physicist Johannes van der Waals , 1837−1923 ) improves it by taking into account two factors .
First , the attractive forces between molecules , which are stronger at higher density and reduce the pressure , are taken into account by adding to the pressure a term equal to the square of the molar density multiplied by a positive coefficient a .
Second , the volume of the molecules is represented by a positive constant b , which can be thought of as the volume of a mole of molecules .
This is subtracted from the total volume to give the remaining volume that the molecules can move in .
The constants a and b are determined experimentally for each gas .
The resulting equation is In the limit of low density ( small n ) , the a and b terms are negligible , and we have the ideal gas law , as we should for low density .
On the other hand , if is small , meaning that the molecules are very close together , the pressure must be higher to give the same nRT , as we would expect in the situation of a highly compressed gas .
However , the increase in pressure is less than that argument would suggest , because at high density the term is significant .
Since it ’ s positive , it causes a lower pressure to give the same nRT .
The van der Waals equation of state works well for most gases under a wide variety of conditions .
As we ’ ll see in the next module , it even predicts the gas-liquid transition .
We can examine aspects of the behavior of a substance by plotting a pV diagram , which is a graph of pressure versus volume .
When the substance behaves like an ideal gas , the ideal gas law describes the relationship between its pressure and volume .
On a pV diagram , it ’ s common to plot an isotherm , which is a curve showing p as a function of V with the number of molecules and the temperature fixed .
Then , for an ideal gas , For example , the volume of the gas decreases as the pressure increases .
The resulting graph is a hyperbola .
However , if we assume the van der Waals equation of state , the isotherms become more interesting , as shown in .
At high temperatures , the curves are approximately hyperbolas , representing approximately ideal behavior at various fixed temperatures .
At lower temperatures , the curves look less and less like hyperbolas—that is , the gas is not behaving ideally .
There is a critical temperature at which the curve has a point with zero slope .
Below that temperature , the curves do not decrease monotonically ; instead , they each have a “ hump , ” meaning that for a certain range of volume , increasing the volume increases the pressure .
Such behavior would be completely unphysical .
Instead , the curves are understood as describing a liquid-gas phase transition .
The oscillating part of the curve is replaced by a horizontal line , showing that as the volume increases at constant temperature , the pressure stays constant .
shows similar isotherms that are more realistic than those based on the van der Waals equation .
The steep parts of the curves to the left of the transition region show the liquid phase , which is almost incompressible—a slight decrease in volume requires a large increase in pressure .
The flat parts show the liquid-gas transition ; the blue regions that they define represent combinations of pressure and volume where liquid and gas can coexist .
The isotherms above do not go through the liquid-gas transition .
Therefore , liquid can not exist above that temperature , which is the critical temperature ( described in the chapter on temperature and heat ) .
At sufficiently low pressure above that temperature , the gas has the density of a liquid but will not condense ; the gas is said to be supercritical .
At higher pressure , it is solid .
Carbon dioxide , for example , has no liquid phase at a temperature above .
The critical pressure is the maximum pressure at which the liquid can exist .
The point on the pV diagram at the critical pressure and temperature is the critical point ( which you learned about in the chapter on temperature and heat ) .
lists representative critical temperatures and pressures .
We have examined pressure and temperature based on their macroscopic definitions .
Pressure is the force divided by the area on which the force is exerted , and temperature is measured with a thermometer .
We can gain a better understanding of pressure and temperature from the kinetic theory of gases , the theory that relates the macroscopic properties of gases to the motion of the molecules they consist of .
First , we make two assumptions about molecules in an ideal gas .
There is a very large number N of molecules , all identical and each having mass m .
The molecules obey Newton ’ s laws and are in continuous motion , which is random and isotropic , that is , the same in all directions .
In other words , we take the Van der Waals constant b , the volume of a mole of gas molecules , to be negligible compared to the volume of a mole of gas in the container .
The molecules make perfectly elastic collisions with the walls of the container and with each other .
Other forces on them , including gravity and the attractions represented by the Van der Waals constant a , are negligible ( as is necessary for the assumption of isotropy ) .
The collisions between molecules do not appear in the derivation of the ideal gas law .
They do not disturb the derivation either , since collisions between molecules moving with random velocities give new random velocities .
Furthermore , if the velocities of gas molecules in a container are initially not random and isotropic , molecular collisions are what make them random and isotropic .
We make still further assumptions that simplify the calculations but do not affect the result .
First , we let the container be a rectangular box .
Second , we begin by considering monatomic gases , those whose molecules consist of single atoms , such as helium .
Then , we can assume that the atoms have no energy except their translational kinetic energy ; for instance , they have neither rotational nor vibrational energy .
( Later , we discuss the validity of this assumption for real monatomic gases and dispense with it to consider diatomic and polyatomic gases . )
shows a collision of a gas molecule with the wall of a container , so that it exerts a force on the wall ( by Newton ’ s third law ) .
These collisions are the source of pressure in a gas .
As the number of molecules increases , the number of collisions , and thus the pressure , increases .
Similarly , if the average velocity of the molecules is higher , the gas pressure is higher .
In a sample of gas in a container , the randomness of the molecular motion causes the number of collisions of molecules with any part of the wall in a given time to fluctuate .
However , because a huge number of molecules collide with the wall in a short time , the number of collisions on the scales of time and space we measure fluctuates by only a tiny , usually unobservable fraction from the average .
We can compare this situation to that of a casino , where the outcomes of the bets are random and the casino ’ s takings fluctuate by the minute and the hour .
However , over long times such as a year , the casino ’ s takings are very close to the averages expected from the odds .
A tank of gas has enormously more molecules than a casino has bettors in a year , and the molecules make enormously more collisions in a second than a casino has bets .
A calculation of the average force exerted by molecules on the walls of the box leads us to the ideal gas law and to the connection between temperature and molecular kinetic energy .
( In fact , we will take two averages : one over time to get the average force exerted by one molecule with a given velocity , and then another average over molecules with different velocities . )
This approach was developed by Daniel Bernoulli ( 1700–1782 ) , who is best known in physics for his work on fluid flow ( hydrodynamics ) .
Remarkably , Bernoulli did this work before Dalton established the view of matter as consisting of atoms .
shows a container full of gas and an expanded view of an elastic collision of a gas molecule with a wall of the container , broken down into components .
We have assumed that a molecule is small compared with the separation of molecules in the gas , and that its interaction with other molecules can be ignored .
Under these conditions , the ideal gas law is experimentally valid .
Because we have also assumed the wall is rigid and the particles are points , the collision is elastic ( by conservation of energy—there ’ s nowhere for a particle ’ s kinetic energy to go ) .
Therefore , the molecule ’ s kinetic energy remains constant , and hence , its speed and the magnitude of its momentum remain constant as well .
This assumption is not always valid , but the results in the rest of this module are also obtained in models that let the molecules exchange energy and momentum with the wall .
There is no force between the wall and the molecule except while the molecule is touching the wall .
During the short time of the collision , the force between the molecule and wall is relatively large , but that is not the force we are looking for .
We are looking for the average force , so we take to be the average time between collisions of the given molecule with this wall , which is the time in which we expect to find one collision .
Let l represent the length of the box in the x -direction .
Then is the time the molecule would take to go across the box and back , a distance 2 l , at a speed of Thus and the expression for the force becomes This force is due to one molecule .
This gives the important result Combining this equation with gives We can get the average kinetic energy of a molecule , multiplying by 3/2 .
, from the left-hand side of the equation by dividing out N and The average kinetic energy of a molecule is directly proportional to its absolute temperature : The equation is the average kinetic energy per molecule .
Note in particular that nothing in this equation depends on the molecular mass ( or any other property ) of the gas , the pressure , or anything but the temperature .
If samples of helium and xenon gas , with very different molecular masses , are at the same temperature , the molecules have the same average kinetic energy .
The internal energy of a thermodynamic system is the sum of the mechanical energies of all of the molecules in it .
We can now give an equation for the internal energy of a monatomic ideal gas .
In such a gas , the molecules ’ only energy is their translational kinetic energy .
Therefore , denoting the internal energy by we simply have or Often we would like to use this equation in terms of moles : We can solve what is known as the root-mean-square ( rms ) speed of a molecule .
To answer this question , we have to appeal to quantum mechanics .
In quantum mechanics , rotational kinetic energy can not take on just any value ; it ’ s limited to a discrete set of values , and the smallest value is inversely proportional to the rotational inertia .
The rotational inertia of an atom is tiny because almost all of its mass is in the nucleus , which typically has a radius less than .
Thus the minimum rotational energy of an atom is much more than for any attainable temperature , and the energy available is not enough to make an atom rotate .
We will return to this point when discussing diatomic and polyatomic gases in the next section .
( a ) What is the average kinetic energy of a gas molecule at ( room temperature ) ?
( b ) Find the rms speed of a nitrogen molecule at this temperature .
Obtaining the molar mass of nitrogen from the periodic table , we find The temperature alone is sufficient for us to find the average translational kinetic energy .
Substituting the temperature into the translational kinetic energy equation gives Substituting this mass and the value for into the equation for yields Note that the average kinetic energy of the molecule is independent of the type of molecule .
The average translational kinetic energy depends only on absolute temperature .
The kinetic energy is very small compared to macroscopic energies , so that we do not feel when an air molecule is hitting our skin .
On the other hand , it is much greater than the typical difference in gravitational potential energy when a molecule moves from , say , the top to the bottom of a room , so our neglect of gravitation is justified in typical real-world situations .
The rms speed of the nitrogen molecule is surprisingly large .
These large molecular velocities do not yield macroscopic movement of air , since the molecules move in all directions with equal likelihood .
The mean free path ( the distance a molecule moves on average between collisions , discussed a bit later in this section ) of molecules in air is very small , so the molecules move rapidly but do not get very far in a second .
The high value for rms speed is reflected in the speed of sound , which is about 340 m/s at room temperature .
The higher the rms speed of air molecules , the faster sound vibrations can be transferred through the air .
The speed of sound increases with temperature and is greater in gases with small molecular masses , such as helium ( see ) .
To escape Earth ’ s gravity , an object near the top of the atmosphere ( at an altitude of 100 km ) must travel away from Earth at 11.1 km/s .
This speed is called the escape velocity .
At what temperature would helium atoms have an rms speed equal to the escape velocity ?
Identify the knowns and unknowns and determine which equations to use to solve the problem .
Identify the knowns : v is the escape velocity , 11.1 km/s .
Identify the unknowns : We need to solve for temperature , T .
We also need to solve for the mass m of the helium atom .
Determine which equations are needed .
Very few helium atoms are left in the atmosphere , but many were present when the atmosphere was formed , and more are always being created by radioactive decay ( see the chapter on nuclear physics ) .
The reason for the loss of helium atoms is that a small number of helium atoms have speeds higher than Earth ’ s escape velocity even at normal temperatures .
The speed of a helium atom changes from one collision to the next , so that at any instant , there is a small but nonzero chance that the atom ’ s speed is greater than the escape velocity .
The chance is high enough that over the lifetime of Earth , almost all the helium atoms that have been in the atmosphere have reached escape velocity at high altitudes and escaped from Earth ’ s gravitational pull .
Heavier molecules , such as oxygen , nitrogen , and water , have smaller rms speeds , and so it is much less likely that any of them will have speeds greater than the escape velocity .
In fact , the likelihood is so small that billions of years are required to lose significant amounts of heavier molecules from the atmosphere .
shows the effect of a lack of an atmosphere on the Moon .
Because the gravitational pull of the Moon is much weaker , it has lost almost its entire atmosphere .
The atmospheres of Earth and other bodies are compared in this chapter ’ s exercises .
Check Your Understanding If you consider a very small object , such as a grain of pollen , in a gas , then the number of molecules striking its surface would also be relatively small .
Would you expect the grain of pollen to experience any fluctuations in pressure due to statistical fluctuations in the number of gas molecules striking it in a given amount of time ?
The pressure a gas would create if it occupied the total volume available is called the gas ’ s partial pressure .
If two or more gases are mixed , they will come to thermal equilibrium as a result of collisions between molecules ; the process is analogous to heat conduction as described in the chapter on temperature and heat .
As we have seen from kinetic theory , when the gases have the same temperature , their molecules have the same average kinetic energy .
Thus , each gas obeys the ideal gas law separately and exerts the same pressure on the walls of a container that it would if it were alone .
Therefore , in a mixture of gases , the total pressure is the sum of partial pressures of the component gases , assuming ideal gas behavior and no chemical reactions between the components .
This law is known as Dalton ’ s law of partial pressures , after the English scientist John Dalton ( 1766–1844 ) who proposed it .
Dalton ’ s law is consistent with the fact that pressures add according to Pascal ’ s principle .
In a mixture of ideal gases in thermal equilibrium , the number of molecules of each gas is proportional to its partial pressure .
This result follows from applying the ideal gas law to each in the form Because the right-hand side is the same for any gas at a given temperature in a container of a given volume , the left-hand side is the same as well .
Partial pressure is the pressure a gas would create if it existed alone .
Dalton ’ s law states that the total pressure is the sum of the partial pressures of all of the gases present .
For any two gases ( labeled 1 and 2 ) in equilibrium in a container , An important application of partial pressure is that , in chemistry , it functions as the concentration of a gas in determining the rate of a reaction .
Here , we mention only that the partial pressure of oxygen in a person ’ s lungs is crucial to life and health .
Breathing air that has a partial pressure of oxygen below 0.16 atm can impair coordination and judgment , particularly in people not acclimated to a high elevation .
Lower partial pressures of have more serious effects ; partial pressures below 0.06 atm can be quickly fatal , and permanent damage is likely even if the person is rescued .
However , the sensation of needing to breathe , as when holding one ’ s breath , is caused much more by high concentrations of carbon dioxide in the blood than by low concentrations of oxygen .
Safety engineers give considerable attention to this danger .
Another important application of partial pressure is vapor pressure , which is the partial pressure of a vapor at which it is in equilibrium with the liquid ( or solid , in the case of sublimation ) phase of the same substance .
At any temperature , the partial pressure of the water in the air can not exceed the vapor pressure of the water at that temperature , because whenever the partial pressure reaches the vapor pressure , water condenses out of the air .
Dew is an example of this condensation .
The temperature at which condensation occurs for a sample of air is called the dew point .
It is easily measured by slowly cooling a metal ball ; the dew point is the temperature at which condensation first appears on the ball .
The vapor pressures of water at some temperatures of interest for meteorology are given in .
The relative humidity ( R.H. ) at a temperature T is defined by A relative humidity of means that the partial pressure of water is equal to the vapor pressure ; in other words , the air is saturated with water .
What is the relative humidity when the air temperature is and the dew point is ?
We simply look up the vapor pressure at the given temperature and that at the dew point and find the ratio .
R.H. is important to our comfort .
The value of is within the range of recommended for comfort indoors .
As noted in the chapter on temperature and heat , the temperature seldom falls below the dew point , because when it reaches the dew point or frost point , water condenses and releases a relatively large amount of latent heat of vaporization .
We now consider collisions explicitly .
The usual first step ( which is all we ’ ll take ) is to calculate the mean free path , the average distance a molecule travels between collisions with other molecules , and the mean free time , the average time between the collisions of a molecule .
If we assume all the molecules are spheres with a radius r , then a molecule will collide with another if their centers are within a distance 2 r of each other .
For a given particle , we say that the area of a circle with that radius , , is the “ cross-section ” for collisions .
As the particle moves , it traces a cylinder with that crosssectional area .
The mean free path is the length such that the expected number of other molecules in a cylinder of length and cross-section is 1 .
Then Find the mean free time for argon atoms Take the radius of an argon atom to be at a temperature of and a pressure of 1.00 atm .
Identify the knowns and convert into SI units .
We know the molar mass is 0.0399 kg/mol , the temperature is 273 K , the pressure is and the radius is Find the rms speed : Substitute into the equation for the mean free time : .
We can hardly compare this result with our intuition about gas molecules , but it gives us a picture of molecules colliding with extremely high frequency .
Check Your Understanding Which has a longer mean free path , liquid water or water vapor in the air ?
In the chapter on temperature and heat , we defined the specific heat capacity with the equation or .
However , the properties of an ideal gas depend directly on the number of moles in a sample , so here we define specific heat capacity in terms of the number of moles , not the mass .
Furthermore , when talking about solids and liquids , we ignored any changes in volume and pressure with changes in temperature—a good approximation for solids and liquids , but for gases , we have to make some condition on volume or pressure changes .
Here , we focus on the heat capacity with the volume held constant .
We can calculate it for an ideal gas .
We use the equation to write and substitute for Q to find , which gives the following simple result for an ideal monatomic gas : It is independent of temperature , which justifies our use of finite differences instead of a derivative .
This formula agrees well with experimental results .
The cylinder is moved outside on a hot summer day .
As the xenon comes into equilibrium by reaching the temperature of its surroundings , 180 J of heat are conducted to it through the cylinder walls .
What is the equilibrium temperature ?
Ignore the expansion of the metal cylinder .
Identify the knowns : We know the initial temperature is , the heat Q is 180 J , and the mass m of the xenon is 0.125 kg .
Identify the unknown .
We need the final temperature , so we ’ ll need .
Determine which equations are needed .
Because xenon gas is monatomic , we can use Then we need the number of moles , Substitute the known values into the equations and solve for the unknowns .
The molar mass of xenon is 131.3 g , so we obtain Therefore , the final temperature is .
Check Your Understanding Suppose 2 moles of helium gas at 200 K are mixed with 2 moles of krypton gas at 400 K in a calorimeter .
What is the final temperature ?
We would like to generalize our results to ideal gases with more than one atom per molecule .
In such systems , the molecules can have other forms of energy beside translational kinetic energy , such as rotational kinetic energy and vibrational kinetic and potential energies .
We will see that a simple rule lets us determine the average energies present in these forms and solve , from which it follows that and .
Thus , we can look at our energy of problems in much the same way as we have for monatomic gases .
In the previous section , we found that .
The same equation holds for and for from each of the three dimensions of translational motion .
Shifting to the gas as a whole , we see that the 3 in the formula also reflects those three dimensions .
We define a degree of freedom as an independent possible motion of a molecule , such as each of the three dimensions of translation .
This fact follows from a more general result , the equipartition theorem , which holds in classical ( non-quantum ) thermodynamics for systems in thermal equilibrium under technical conditions that are beyond our scope .
Here , we mention only that in a system , the energy is shared among the degrees of freedom by collisions .
as the sum of contributions of where .
The energy of a thermodynamic system in equilibrium is partitioned equally among its degrees of freedom .
Accordingly , the molar heat capacity of an ideal gas is proportional to its number of degrees of freedom , d : This result is due to the Scottish physicist James Clerk Maxwell ( 1831−1871 ) , whose name will appear several more times in this book .
For example , consider a diatomic ideal gas ( a good model for nitrogen , and oxygen , Such a gas has more degrees of freedom than a monatomic gas .
In addition to the three degrees of freedom for translation , it has two degrees of freedom for rotation perpendicular to its axis .
Furthermore , the molecule can vibrate along its axis .
This motion is often modeled by imagining a spring connecting the two atoms , and we know from simple harmonic motion that such motion has both kinetic and potential energy .
Each of these forms of energy corresponds to a degree of freedom , giving two more .
We might expect that for a diatomic gas , we should use 7 as the number of degrees of freedom ; classically , if the molecules of a gas had only translational kinetic energy , collisions between molecules would soon make them rotate and vibrate .
However , as explained in the previous module , quantum mechanics controls which degrees of freedom are active .
The result is shown in .
Both rotational and vibrational energies are limited to discrete values .
Above that temperature , the two rotational degrees of freedom begin to contribute , that is , some molecules are excited to the rotational state with the second-lowest energy .
( This temperature is much lower than that where rotations of monatomic gases contribute , because diatomic molecules have much higher rotational inertias and hence much lower rotational energies . )
From about room temperature ( a bit less than 300 K ) to about 600 K , the rotational degrees of freedom are fully active , but the vibrational ones are not , and .
Then , finally , above about 3000 K , the vibrational degrees of freedom are fully active , and as the classical theory predicted .
Polyatomic molecules typically have one additional rotational degree of freedom at room temperature , since they have comparable moments of inertia around any axis .
Thus , at room temperature , they have and at high temperature , We usually assume that gases have the theoretical room-temperature values of d .
As shown in , the results agree well with experiments for many monatomic and diatomic gases , but the agreement for triatomic gases is only fair .
The differences arise from interactions that we have ignored between and within molecules .
What about internal energy for diatomic and polyatomic gases ?
For such gases , is a function of temperature , so we do not have the kind of simple result we have for monatomic ideal gases .
The idea of equipartition leads to an estimate of the molar heat capacity of solid elements at ordinary temperatures .
We can model the atoms of a solid as attached to neighboring atoms by springs .
Analogously to the discussion of vibration in the previous module , each atom has six degrees of freedom : one kinetic and one potential for each of the x - , y - , and z -directions .
Accordingly , the molar specific heat of a metal should be 3 R .
This result , known as the Law of Dulong and Petit , works fairly well experimentally at room temperature .
( For every element , it fails at low temperatures for quantum-mechanical reasons .
Since quantum effects are particularly important for low-mass particles , the Law of Dulong and Petit already fails at room temperature for some light elements , such as beryllium and carbon .
It also fails for some heavier elements for various reasons beyond what we can cover . )
The strategy for solving these problems is the same as the one in for the effects of heat transfer .
The only new feature is that you should determine whether the case just presented—ideal gases at constant volume—applies to the problem .
( For solid elements , looking up the specific heat capacity is generally better than estimating it from the Law of Dulong and Petit . )
In the case of an ideal gas , determine the number d of degrees of freedom from the number of atoms in the gas molecule and use it to calculate ( or use to solve for d ) .
A 300-g piece of solid gallium ( a metal used in semiconductor devices ) at its melting point of only is in contact with 12.0 moles of air ( assumed diatomic ) at in an insulated container .
When the air reaches equilibrium with the gallium , 202 g of the gallium have melted .
Based on those data , what is the heat of fusion of gallium ?
Assume the volume of the air does not change and there are no other heat transfers .
We ’ ll use the equation As some of the gallium doesn ’ t melt , we know the final temperature is still the melting point .
Then the only is the heat lost as the air cools , where The only is the latent heat of fusion of the gallium , It is positive because heat flows into the gallium .
Set up the equation : Substitute the known values and solve : We solve to find that the heat of fusion of gallium is 80.2 kJ/kg .
Particles in an ideal gas all travel at relatively high speeds , but they do not travel at the same speed .
The rms speed is one kind of average , but many particles move faster and many move slower .
The actual distribution of speeds has several interesting implications for other areas of physics , as we will see in later chapters .
The motion of molecules in a gas is random in magnitude and direction for individual molecules , but a gas of many molecules has a predictable distribution of molecular speeds .
This predictable distribution of molecular speeds is known as the Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution , after its originators , who calculated it based on kinetic theory , and it has since been confirmed experimentally .
To understand this figure , we must define a distribution function of molecular speeds , since with a finite number of molecules , the probability that a molecule will have exactly a given speed is 0 .
We define the distribution function by saying that the expected number of particles with speeds between and is given by [ Since N is dimensionless , the unit of f ( v ) is seconds per meter . ]
We can write this equation conveniently in differential form : In this form , we can understand the equation as saying that the number of molecules with speeds between v and is the total number of molecules in the sample times f ( v ) times dv .
That is , the probability that a molecule ’ s speed is between v and is f ( v ) dv .
We can now quote Maxwell ’ s result , although the proof is beyond our scope .
The distribution function for speeds of particles in an ideal gas at temperature T is Let ’ s focus on the dependence on v .
The factor of means that The factors before the are a normalization constant ; they make sure that by making sure that and for small v , the curve looks like a parabola .
The factor of means that and the graph has an exponential tail , which indicates that a few molecules may move at several times the rms speed .
The interaction of these factors gives the function the single-peaked shape shown in the figure .
In a sample of nitrogen with a molar mass of 28.0 g/mol ) at a temperature of , find the ratio of the number of molecules with a speed very close to 300 m/s to the number with a speed very close to 100 m/s .
Since we ’ re looking at a small range , we can approximate the number of molecules near 100 m/s as Then the ratio we want is All we have to do is take the ratio of the two f values .
Identify the knowns and convert to SI units if necessary .
Substitute the values and solve .
shows that the curve is shifted to higher speeds at higher temperatures , with a broader range of speeds .
With only a relatively small number of molecules , the distribution of speeds fluctuates around the MaxwellBoltzmann distribution .
However , you can view this to see the essential features that more massive molecules move slower and have a narrower distribution .
Use the set-up “ 2 Gases , Random Speeds ” .
Note the display at the bottom comparing histograms of the speed distributions with the theoretical curves .
We can use a probability distribution to calculate average values by multiplying the distribution function by the quantity to be averaged and integrating the product over all possible speeds .
( This is analogous to calculating averages of discrete distributions , where you multiply each value by the number of times it occurs , add the results , and divide by the number of values .
The integral is analogous to the first two steps , and the normalization is analogous to dividing by the number of values . )
Thus the average velocity is Similarly , as in .
The most probable speed , also called the peak speed is the speed at the peak of the velocity distribution .
( In statistics it would be called the mode . )
It is less than the rms speed The most probable speed can be calculated by the more familiar method of setting the derivative of the distribution function , with respect to v , equal to 0 .
The result is which is less than In fact , the rms speed is greater than both the most probable speed and the average speed .
The peak speed provides a sometimes more convenient way to write the Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution function : In the factor , it is easy to recognize the translational kinetic energy .
Boltzmann ’ s result is The first part of this equation , with the negative exponential , is the usual way to write it .
We give the second part only to remark that in the denominator is ubiquitous in quantum as well as classical statistical mechanics .
Examine the situation to determine that it relates to the distribution of molecular speeds .
Make a list of what quantities are given or can be inferred from the problem as stated ( identify the known quantities ) .
Identify exactly what needs to be determined in the problem ( identify the unknown quantities ) .
A written list is useful .
Convert known values into proper SI units ( K for temperature , Pa for pressure , for volume , molecules for N , and moles for n ) .
In many cases , though , using R and the molar mass will be more convenient than using and the molecular mass .
Solve the appropriate equation for the ideal gas law for the quantity to be determined ( the unknown quantity ) .
Note that if you are taking a ratio of values of the distribution function , the normalization factors divide out .
Or if approximating an integral , use the method asked for in the problem .
Substitute the known quantities , along with their units , into the appropriate equation and obtain numerical solutions complete with units .
We can now gain a qualitative understanding of a puzzle about the composition of Earth ’ s atmosphere .
Hydrogen is by far the most common element in the universe , and helium is by far the second-most common .
Moreover , helium is constantly produced on Earth by radioactive decay .
Why are those elements so rare in our atmosphere ?
The answer is that gas molecules that reach speeds above Earth ’ s escape velocity , about 11 km/s , can escape from the atmosphere into space .
Because of the lower mass of hydrogen and helium molecules , they move at higher speeds than other gas molecules , such as nitrogen and oxygen .
Only a few exceed escape velocity , but far fewer heavier molecules do .
Thus , over the billions of years that Earth has existed , far more hydrogen and helium molecules have escaped from the atmosphere than other molecules , and hardly any of either is now present .
We can also now take another look at evaporative cooling , which we discussed in the chapter on temperature and heat .
Liquids , like gases , have a distribution of molecular energies .
The highest-energy molecules are those that can escape from the intermolecular attractions of the liquid .
Thus , when some liquid evaporates , the molecules left behind have a lower average energy , and the liquid has a lower temperature .
Heat is the transfer of energy due to a temperature difference between two systems .
Heat describes the process of converting from one form of energy into another .
A car engine , for example , burns gasoline .
Heat is produced when the burned fuel is chemically transformed into mostly and which are gases at the combustion temperature .
Energy is conserved in all processes , including those associated with thermodynamic systems .
The roles of heat transfer and internal energy change vary from process to process and affect how work is done by the system in that process .
We will see that the first law of thermodynamics explains that a change in the internal energy of a system comes from changes in heat or work .
Understanding the laws that govern thermodynamic processes and the relationship between the system and its surroundings is therefore paramount in gaining scientific knowledge of energy and energy consumption .
A thermodynamic system includes anything whose thermodynamic properties are of interest .
It is embedded in its surroundings or environment ; it can exchange heat with , and do work on , its environment through a boundary , which is the imagined wall that separates the system and the environment .
In reality , the immediate surroundings of the system are interacting with it directly and therefore have a much stronger influence on its behavior and properties .
For example , if we are studying a car engine , the burning gasoline inside the cylinder of the engine is the thermodynamic system ; the piston , exhaust system , radiator , and air outside form the surroundings of the system .
The boundary then consists of the inner surfaces of the cylinder and piston .
Normally , a system must have some interactions with its surroundings .
A system is called an isolated or closed system if it is completely separated from its environment—for example , a gas that is surrounded by immovable and thermally insulating walls .
In reality , a closed system does not exist unless the entire universe is treated as the system , or it is used as a model for an actual system that has minimal interactions with its environment .
Most systems are known as an open system , which can exchange energy and/or matter with its surroundings .
When we examine a thermodynamic system , we ignore the difference in behavior from place to place inside the system for a given moment .
In other words , we concentrate on the macroscopic properties of the system , which are the averages of the microscopic properties of all the molecules or entities in the system .
Any thermodynamic system is therefore treated as a continuum that has the same behavior everywhere inside .
We assume the system is in equilibrium .
You could have , for example , a temperature gradient across the system .
However , when we discuss a thermodynamic system in this chapter , we study those that have uniform properties throughout the system .
Before we can carry out any study on a thermodynamic system , we need a fundamental characterization of the system .
When we studied a mechanical system , we focused on the forces and torques on the system , and their balances dictated the mechanical equilibrium of the system .
In a similar way , we should examine the heat transfer between a thermodynamic system and its environment or between the different parts of the system , and its balance should dictate the thermal equilibrium of the system .
Intuitively , such a balance is reached if the temperature becomes the same for different objects or parts of the system in thermal contact , and the net heat transfer over time becomes zero .
Thus , when we say two objects ( a thermodynamic system and its environment , for example ) are in thermal equilibrium , we mean that they are at the same temperature , as we discussed in .
Let us consider three objects at temperatures and respectively .
How do we know whether they are in thermal equilibrium ?
The governing principle here is the zeroth law of thermodynamics , as described in on temperature and heat : If object 1 is in thermal equilibrium with objects 2 and 3 , respectively , then objects 2 and 3 must also be in thermal equilibrium .
The zeroth law of thermodynamics is equally applicable to the different parts of a closed system and requires that the temperature everywhere inside the system be the same if the system has reached a thermal equilibrium .
To simplify our discussion , we assume the system is uniform with only one type of material—for example , water in a tank .
The measurable properties of the system at least include its volume , pressure , and temperature .
The range of specific relevant variables depends upon the system .
For example , for a stretched rubber band , the relevant variables would be length , tension , and temperature .
In principle , this equation of state exists for any thermodynamic system but is not always readily available .
The forms of for many materials have been determined either experimentally or theoretically .
In the preceding chapter , we saw an example of an equation of state for an ideal gas , We have so far introduced several physical properties that are relevant to the thermodynamics of a thermodynamic system , such as its volume , pressure , and temperature .
We can separate these quantities into two generic categories .
The quantity associated with an amount of matter is an extensive variable , such as the volume and the number of moles .
The other properties of a system are intensive variables , such as the pressure and temperature .
An extensive variable doubles its value if the amount of matter in the system doubles , provided all the intensive variables remain the same .
For example , the volume or total energy of the system doubles if we double the amount of matter in the system while holding the temperature and pressure of the system unchanged .
We discussed the concepts of work and energy earlier in mechanics .
Examples and related issues of heat transfer between different objects have also been discussed in the preceding chapters .
Here , we want to expand these concepts to a thermodynamic system and its environment .
Specifically , we elaborated on the concepts of heat and heat transfer in the previous two chapters .
Here , we want to understand how work is done by or to a thermodynamic system ; how heat is transferred between a system and its environment ; and how the total energy of the system changes under the influence of the work done and heat transfer .
A force created from any source can do work by moving an object through a displacement .
Then how does a thermodynamic system do work ?
shows a gas confined to a cylinder that has a movable piston at one end .
If the gas expands against the piston , it exerts a force through a distance and does work on the piston .
If the piston compresses the gas as it is moved inward , work is also done—in this case , on the gas .
The work associated with such volume changes can be determined as follows : Let the gas pressure on the piston face be p .
Then the force on the piston due to the gas is pA , where A is the area of the face .
( We examine this idea in more detail later in this chapter . )
Only then does a well-defined mathematical relationship ( the equation of state ) exist between the pressure and volume .
This relationship can be plotted on a pV diagram of pressure versus volume , where the curve is the change of state .
We can approximate such a process as one that occurs slowly , through a series of equilibrium states .
The integral is interpreted graphically as the area under the pV curve ( the shaded area of ) .
Work done by the gas is positive for expansion and negative for compression .
Consider the two processes involving an ideal gas that are represented by paths AC and ABC in .
The first process is an isothermal expansion , with the volume of the gas changing its volume from .
This isothermal process is represented by the curve between points A and C .
The gas is kept at a constant temperature T by keeping it in thermal equilibrium with a heat reservoir at that temperature .
From and the ideal gas law , The expansion is isothermal , so T remains constant over the entire process .
Since n and R are also constant , the only variable in the integrand is V , so the work done by an ideal gas in an isothermal process is Notice that if ( expansion ) , W is positive , as expected .
The straight lines from A to B and then from B to C represent a different process .
Here , a gas at a pressure first expands isobarically ( constant pressure ) and quasi-statically from , after which it cools quasi-statically at the constant volume until its pressure drops to .
From A to B , the pressure is constant at p , so the work over this part of the path is From B to C , there is no change in volume and therefore no work is done .
The net work over the path ABC is then A comparison of the expressions for the work done by the gas in the two processes of shows that they are quite different .
This illustrates a very important property of thermodynamic work : It is path dependent .
We can not determine the work done by a system as it goes from one equilibrium state to another unless we know its thermodynamic path .
Different values of the work are associated with different paths .
Studies of a van der Waals gas require an adjustment to the ideal gas law that takes into consideration that gas molecules have a definite volume ( see ) .
One mole of a van der Waals gas has an equation of state where a and b are two parameters for a specific gas .
Suppose the gas expands isothermally and quasi-statically from volume to volume How much work is done by the gas during the expansion ?
Because the equation of state is given , we can use to express the pressure in terms of V and T .
Furthermore , temperature T is a constant under the isothermal condition , so V becomes the only changing variable under the integral .
To evaluate this integral , we must express p as a function of V .
If , however , we set and we see that the expression for work matches exactly the work done by an isothermal process for one mole of an ideal gas .
Check Your Understanding How much work is done by the gas , as given in , when it expands quasi-statically along the path ADC ?
The internal energy of a thermodynamic system is , by definition , the sum of the mechanical energies of all the molecules or entities in the system .
The kinetic energy of an individual molecule includes contributions due to its rotation and vibration , as well as its translational where is the molecule ’ s speed measured relative to the center of mass of the system .
The potential energy energy is associated only with the interactions between molecule i and the other molecules of the system .
In fact , neither the system ’ s location nor its motion is of any consequence as far as the internal energy is concerned .
The internal energy of the system is not affected by moving it from the basement to the roof of a 100-story building or by placing it on a moving train .
In an ideal monatomic gas , each molecule is a single atom .
Consequently , there is no rotational or vibrational kinetic energy .
Furthermore , there are no interatomic interactions ( collisions notwithstanding ) , so , and which we set to zero .
The internal energy is therefore due to translational kinetic energy only and From the discussion in the preceding chapter , we know that the average kinetic energy of a molecule in an ideal monatomic gas is where T is the Kelvin temperature of the gas .
Consequently , the average mechanical energy per molecule of an ideal monatomic gas is also that is , The internal energy is just the number of molecules multiplied by the average mechanical energy per molecule .
Thus for n moles of an ideal monatomic gas , Notice that the internal energy of a given quantity of an ideal monatomic gas depends on just the temperature and is completely independent of the pressure and volume of the gas .
For other systems , the internal energy can not be expressed so simply .
However , an increase in internal energy can often be associated with an increase in temperature .
We know from the zeroth law of thermodynamics that when two systems are placed in thermal contact , they eventually reach thermal equilibrium , at which point they are at the same temperature .
As an example , suppose we mix two monatomic ideal gases .
Now , the energy per molecule of an ideal monatomic gas is proportional to its temperature .
Thus , when the two gases are mixed , the molecules of the hotter gas must lose energy and the molecules of the colder gas must gain energy .
This continues until thermal equilibrium is reached , at which point , the temperature , and therefore the average translational kinetic energy per molecule , is the same for both gases .
The approach to equilibrium for real systems is somewhat more complicated than for an ideal monatomic gas .
Nevertheless , we can still say that energy is exchanged between the systems until their temperatures are the same .
Now that we have seen how to calculate internal energy , heat , and work done for a thermodynamic system undergoing change during some process , we can see how these quantities interact to affect the amount of change that can occur .
This interaction is given by the first law of thermodynamics .
British scientist and novelist C. P. Snow ( 1905–1980 ) is credited with a joke about the four laws of thermodynamics .
His humorous statement of the first law of thermodynamics is stated “ you can ’ t win , ” or in other words , you can not get more energy out of a system than you put into it .
We will see in this chapter how internal energy , heat , and work all play a role in the first law of thermodynamics .
Suppose Q represents the heat exchanged between a system and the environment , and W is the work done by or on the system .
The first law states that the change in internal energy of that system is given by .
Since added heat increases the internal energy of a system , Q is positive when it is added to the system and negative when it is removed from the system .
When a gas expands , it does work and its internal energy decreases .
Thus , W is positive when work is done by the system and negative when work is done on the system .
This sign convention is summarized in .
The first law is a statement of energy conservation .
It tells us that a system can exchange energy with its surroundings by the transmission of heat and by the performance of work .
The net energy exchanged is then equal to the change in the total mechanical energy of the molecules of the system ( i.e. , the system ’ s internal energy ) .
Thus , if a system is isolated , its internal energy must remain constant .
Although Q and W both depend on the thermodynamic path taken between two equilibrium states , their difference does not .
shows the pV diagram of a system that is making the transition from A to B repeatedly along different thermodynamic paths .
Along path 1 , the system absorbs heat and does work along path 2 , it absorbs heat and does work and so on .
The values of and may vary from path to path , but we have or That is , the change in the internal energy of the system between A and B is path independent .
In the chapter on potential energy and the conservation of energy , we encountered another path-independent quantity : the change in potential energy between two arbitrary points in space .
This change represents the negative of the work done by a conservative force between the two points .
The potential energy is a function of spatial coordinates , whereas the internal energy is a function of thermodynamic variables .
For example , we might write for the internal energy .
Functions such as internal energy and potential energy are known as state functions because their values depend solely on the state of the system .
During a thermodynamic process , a system moves from state A to state B , it is supplied with 400 J of heat and does 100 J of work .
( a ) For this transition , what is the system ’ s change in internal energy ?
( b ) If the system then moves from state B back to state A , what is its change in internal energy ?
( c ) If in moving from A to B along a different path , of work is done on the system , how much heat does it absorb ?
The first law of thermodynamics relates the internal energy change , work done by the system , and the heat transferred to the system in a simple equation .
The internal energy is a function of state and is therefore fixed at any given point regardless of how the system reaches the state .
From the first law , the change in the system ’ s internal energy is Consider a closed path that passes through the states A and B .
Internal energy is a state function , so is zero for a closed path .
Thus and This yields The change in internal energy is the same for any path , so and the heat exchanged is The negative sign indicates that the system loses heat in this transition .
When a closed cycle is considered for the first law of thermodynamics , the change in internal energy around the whole path is equal to zero .
If friction were to play a role in this example , less work would result from this heat added .
takes into consideration what happens if friction plays a role .
Notice that in , we did not assume that the transitions were quasi-static .
This is because the first law is not subject to such a restriction .
It describes transitions between equilibrium states but is not concerned with the intermediate states .
The system does not have to pass through only equilibrium states .
This system is clearly not in equilibrium during its transition ; however , its behavior is still governed by the first law because the process starts and ends with the system in equilibrium states .
A machinist polishes a 0.50-kg copper fitting with a piece of emery cloth for 2.0 min .
He moves the cloth across the fitting at a constant speed of 1.0 m/s by applying a force of 20 N , tangent to the surface of the fitting .
( a ) What is the total work done on the fitting by the machinist ?
( b ) What is the increase in the internal energy of the fitting ?
Assume that the change in the internal energy of the cloth is negligible and that no heat is exchanged between the fitting and its environment .
( c ) What is the increase in the temperature of the fitting ?
The machinist ’ s force over a distance that can be calculated from the speed and time given is the work done on the system .
The work , in turn , increases the internal energy of the system .
This energy can be interpreted as the heat that raises the temperature of the system via its heat capacity .
Be careful with the sign of each quantity .
The power created by a force on an object or the rate at which the machinist does frictional work on the fitting is .
Thus , and the increase in the temperature of the fitting is where we have used the value for the specific heat of copper , .
If heat were released , the change in internal energy would be less and cause less of a temperature change than what was calculated in the problem .
Check Your Understanding The quantities below represent four different transitions between the same initial and final state .
Fill in the blanks .
–80 90 –120 40 –40 Consider the quasi-static expansions of an ideal gas between the equilibrium states A and C of .
If 515 J of heat are added to the gas as it traverses the path ABC , how much heat is required for the transition along ADC ?
Assume that and The difference in work done between process ABC and process ADC is the area enclosed by ABCD .
Because the change of the internal energy ( a function of state ) is the same for both processes , the difference in work is thus the same as the difference in heat transferred to the system .
An isothermal line could also have been used , as we have derived the work for an isothermal process as .
Heat is added to 1 mol of an ideal monatomic gas confined to a cylinder with a movable piston at one end .
The gas expands quasi-statically at a constant temperature of 300 K until its volume increases from V to 3 V .
( a ) What is the change in internal energy of the gas ?
( b ) How much work does the gas do ?
( c ) How much heat is added to the gas ?
( a ) Because the system is an ideal gas , the internal energy only changes when the temperature changes .
( b ) The heat added to the system is therefore purely used to do work that has been calculated in .
( c ) Lastly , the first law of thermodynamics can be used to calculate the heat added to the gas .
We saw in the preceding section that the internal energy of an ideal monatomic gas is a function only of temperature .
Based on that , the first law of thermodynamics reduces to .
Check Your Understanding Why was it necessary to state that the process of is quasistatic ?
When 1.00 g of water at changes from the liquid to the gas phase at atmospheric pressure , its change in volume is ( a ) How much heat must be added to vaporize the water ?
( b ) How much work is done by the water against the atmosphere in its expansion ?
( c ) What is the change in the internal energy of the water ?
We can first figure out how much heat is needed from the latent heat of vaporization of the water .
From the volume change , we can calculate the work done from because the pressure is constant .
Then , the first law of thermodynamics provides us with the change in the internal energy .
Ideal gases that are not undergoing phase changes have the internal energy proportional to temperature .
Internal energy in general is the sum of all energy in the system .
Check Your Understanding When 1.00 g of ammonia boils at atmospheric pressure and its volume changes from 1.47 to .
Its heat of vaporization at this pressure is What is the change in the internal energy of the ammonia when it vaporizes ?
View this to learn about how the first law of thermodynamics .
First , pump some heavy species molecules into the chamber .
Then , play around by doing work ( pushing the wall to the right where the person is located ) to see how the internal energy changes ( as seen by temperature ) .
Then , look at how heat added changes the internal energy .
In solving mechanics problems , we isolate the body under consideration , analyze the external forces acting on it , and then use Newton ’ s laws to predict its behavior .
In thermodynamics , we take a similar approach .
We start by identifying the part of the universe we wish to study ; it is also known as our system .
( We defined a system at the beginning of this chapter as anything whose properties are of interest to us ; it can be a single atom or the entire Earth . )
Once our system is selected , we determine how the environment , or surroundings , interact with the system .
Finally , with the interaction understood , we study the thermal behavior of the system with the help of the laws of thermodynamics .
The thermal behavior of a system is described in terms of thermodynamic variables .
For an ideal gas , these variables are pressure , volume , temperature , and the number of molecules or moles of the gas .
Different types of systems are generally characterized by different sets of variables .
For example , the thermodynamic variables for a stretched rubber band are tension , length , temperature , and mass .
The state of a system can change as a result of its interaction with the environment .
The change in a system can be fast or slow and large or small .
The manner in which a state of a system can change from an initial state to a final state is called a thermodynamic process .
For analytical purposes in thermodynamics , it is helpful to divide up processes as either quasistatic or non-quasi-static , as we now explain .
A quasi-static process refers to an idealized or imagined process where the change in state is made infinitesimally slowly so that at each instant , the system can be assumed to be at a thermodynamic equilibrium with itself and with the environment .
For instance , imagine heating 1 kg of water from a temperature to at a constant pressure of 1 atmosphere .
To heat the water very slowly , we may imagine placing the container with water in a large bath that can be slowly heated such that the temperature of the bath can rise infinitesimally slowly from to .
If we put 1 kg of water at directly into a bath at , the temperature of the water will rise rapidly to in a non-quasi-static way .
Quasi-static processes are done slowly enough that the system remains at thermodynamic equilibrium at each instant , despite the fact that the system changes over time .
The thermodynamic equilibrium of the system is necessary for the system to have well-defined values of macroscopic properties such as the temperature and the pressure of the system at each instant of the process .
Therefore , quasi-static processes can be shown as well-defined paths in state space of the system .
Since quasi-static processes can not be completely realized for any finite change of the system , all processes in nature are non-quasi-static .
Examples of quasi-static and non-quasi-static processes are shown in .
Despite the fact that all finite changes must occur essentially non-quasi-statically at some stage of the change , we can imagine performing infinitely many quasi-static process corresponding to every quasi-static process .
Since quasi-static processes can be analyzed analytically , we mostly study quasi-static processes in this book .
We have already seen that in a quasi-static process the work by a gas is given by pdV .
An isothermal process is a change in the state of the system at a constant temperature .
This process is accomplished by keeping the system in thermal equilibrium with a large heat bath during the process .
Recall that a heat bath is an idealized “ infinitely ” large system whose temperature does not change .
In practice , the temperature of a finite bath is controlled by either adding or removing a finite amount of energy as the case may be .
As an illustration of an isothermal process , consider a cylinder of gas with a movable piston immersed in a large water tank whose temperature is maintained constant .
Since the piston is freely movable , the pressure inside is balanced by the pressure outside by some weights on the piston , as in .
As weights on the piston are removed , an imbalance of forces on the piston develops .
The net nonzero force on the piston would cause the piston to accelerate , resulting in an increase in volume .
The expansion of the gas cools the gas to a lower temperature , which makes it possible for the heat to enter from the heat bath into the system until the temperature of the gas is reset to the temperature of the heat bath .
If weights are removed in infinitesimal steps , the pressure in the system decreases infinitesimally slowly .
This way , an isothermal process can be conducted quasi-statically .
An isothermal line on a ( p , V ) diagram is represented by a curved line from starting point A to finishing point B , as seen in .
For an ideal gas , an isothermal process is hyperbolic , since for an ideal gas at constant temperature , .
An isothermal process studied in this chapter is quasi-statically performed , since to be isothermal throughout the change of volume , you must be able to state the temperature of the system at each step , which is possible only if the system is in thermal equilibrium continuously .
The system must go out of equilibrium for the state to change , but for quasi-static processes , we imagine that the process is conducted in infinitesimal steps such that these departures from equilibrium can be made as brief and as small as we like .
Other quasi-static processes of interest for gases are isobaric and isochoric processes .
An isobaric process is a process where the pressure of the system does not change , whereas an isochoric process is a process where the volume of the system does not change .
In an adiabatic process , the system is insulated from its environment so that although the state of the system changes , no heat is allowed to enter or leave the system , as seen in .
An adiabatic process can be conducted either quasi-statically or non-quasi-statically .
When a system expands adiabatically , it must do work against the outside world , and therefore its energy goes down , which is reflected in the lowering of the temperature of the system .
An adiabatic expansion leads to a lowering of temperature , and an adiabatic compression leads to an increase of temperature .
We discuss adiabatic expansion again in .
We say that a system goes through a cyclic process if the state of the system at the end is same as the state at the beginning .
A reversible process is one that can be made to retrace its path by differential changes in the environment .
Such a process must therefore also be quasi-static .
Note , however , that a quasi-static process is not necessarily reversible , since there may be dissipative forces involved .
For example , if friction occurred between the piston and the walls of the cylinder containing the gas , the energy lost to friction would prevent us from reproducing the original states of the system .
View this to set up your own process in a pV diagram .
See if you can calculate the values predicted by the simulation for heat , work , and change in internal energy .
We learned about specific heat and molar heat capacity in ; however , we have not considered a process in which heat is added .
We do that in this section .
First , we examine a process where the system has a constant volume , then contrast it with a system at constant pressure and show how their specific heats are related .
Let ’ s start with looking at , which shows two vessels A and B , each containing 1 mol of the same type of ideal gas at a temperature T and a volume V .
The only difference between the two vessels is that the piston at the top of A is fixed , whereas the one at the top of B is free to move against a constant external pressure p .
We now consider what happens when the temperature of the gas in each vessel is slowly increased to with the addition of heat .
Since the piston of vessel A is fixed , the volume of the enclosed gas does not change .
Consequently , the gas does no work , and we have from the first law We represent the fact that the heat is exchanged at constant volume by writing where is the molar heat capacity at constant volume of the gas .
In addition , since for this particular process , We obtained this equation assuming the volume of the gas was fixed .
However , internal energy is a state function that depends on only the temperature of an ideal gas .
Therefore , gives the change in internal energy of an ideal gas for any process involving a temperature change dT .
When the gas in vessel B is heated , it expands against the movable piston and does work In this case , the heat is added at constant pressure , and we write where is the molar heat capacity at constant pressure of the gas .
Furthermore , since the ideal gas expands against a constant pressure , becomes Finally , inserting the expressions for dQ and pdV into the first law , we obtain We have found for both an isochoric and an isobaric process .
Because the internal energy of an ideal gas depends only on the temperature , must be the same for both processes .
Thus , and The derivation of was based only on the ideal gas law .
shows the molar heat capacities of some dilute ideal gases at room temperature .
The heat capacities of real gases are somewhat higher than those predicted by the expressions of and given in .
This indicates that vibrational motion in polyatomic molecules is significant , even at room temperature .
Nevertheless , the difference in the molar heat capacities , is very close to R , even for the polyatomic gases .
When an ideal gas is compressed adiabatically work is done on it and its temperature increases ; in an adiabatic expansion , the gas does work and its temperature drops .
Adiabatic compressions actually occur in the cylinders of a car , where the compressions of the gas-air mixture take place so quickly that there is no time for the mixture to exchange heat with its environment .
Nevertheless , because work is done on the mixture during the compression , its temperature does rise significantly .
In fact , the temperature increases can be so large that the mixture can explode without the addition of a spark .
Such explosions , since they are not timed , make a car run poorly—it usually “ knocks. ” Because ignition temperature rises with the octane of gasoline , one way to overcome this problem is to use a higher-octane gasoline .
Another interesting adiabatic process is the free expansion of a gas .
shows a gas confined by a membrane to one side of a two-compartment , thermally insulated container .
When the membrane is punctured , gas rushes into the empty side of the container , thereby expanding freely .
Because the gas expands “ against a vacuum ” , it does no work , and because the vessel is thermally insulated , the expansion is adiabatic .
With and in the first law , so for the free expansion .
If the gas is ideal , the internal energy depends only on the temperature .
Therefore , when an ideal gas expands freely , its temperature does not change .
A quasi-static , adiabatic expansion of an ideal gas is represented in , which shows an insulated cylinder that contains 1 mol of an ideal gas .
The gas is made to expand quasi-statically by removing one grain of sand at a time from the top of the piston .
When the gas expands by dV , the change in its temperature is dT .
Upon equating them , we find that Now , we divide this equation by pV and use .
For example , if an ideal gas makes a quasi-static adiabatic transition from a state with pressure and volume and to a state with and The adiabatic condition of can be written in terms of other pairs of thermodynamic variables by combining it with the ideal gas law .
In doing this , we find that then it must be true that and A reversible adiabatic expansion of an ideal gas is represented on the pV diagram of .
The slope of the curve at any point is The dashed curve shown on this pV diagram represents an isothermal expansion where T ( and therefore pV ) is constant .
The slope of this curve is useful when we consider the second law of thermodynamics in the next chapter .
This slope is Because the isothermal curve is not as steep as that for the adiabatic expansion .
Gasoline vapor is injected into the cylinder of an automobile engine when the piston is in its expanded position .
The temperature , pressure , and volume of the resulting gas-air mixture are , and , respectively .
The mixture is then compressed adiabatically to a volume of .
Note that in the actual operation of an automobile engine , the compression is not quasi-static , although we are making that assumption here .
( a ) What are the pressure and temperature of the mixture after the compression ?
( b ) How much work is done by the mixture during the compression ?
Because we are modeling the process as a quasi-static adiabatic compression of an ideal gas , we have and .
The work needed can then be evaluated with .
The engine would not work if the gas-air mixture did work on the piston .
the change in internal energy for any transition between two equilibrium states is According to the first law of thermodynamics , the only processes that can occur are those that conserve energy .
But this can not be the only restriction imposed by nature , because many seemingly possible thermodynamic processes that would conserve energy do not occur .
For example , when two bodies are in thermal contact , heat never flows from the colder body to the warmer one , even though this is not forbidden by the first law .
So some other thermodynamic principles must be controlling the behavior of physical systems .
One such principle is the second law of thermodynamics , which limits the use of energy within a source .
Energy can not arbitrarily pass from one object to another , just as we can not transfer heat from a cold object to a hot one without doing any work .
We can not unmix cream from coffee without a chemical process that changes the physical characteristics of the system or its environment .
We can not use internal energy stored in the air to propel a car , or use the energy of the ocean to run a ship , without disturbing something around that object .
We start by discussing spontaneous processes and explain why some processes require work to occur even if energy would have been conserved .
Consider an ideal gas that is held in half of a thermally insulated container by a wall in the middle of the container .
The other half of the container is under vacuum with no molecules inside .
Now , if we remove the wall in the middle quickly , the gas expands and fills up the entire container immediately , as shown in .
Because half of the container is under vacuum before the gas expands there , we do not expect any work to be done by the system—that is , —because no force from the vacuum is exerted on the gas during the expansion .
If the container is thermally insulated from the rest of the environment , we do not expect any heat transfer to the system either , so .
Then the first law of thermodynamics leads to the change of the internal energy of the system , For an ideal gas , if the internal energy doesn ’ t change , then the temperature stays the same .
Thus , the equation of state of the ideal gas gives us the final pressure of the gas , where is the pressure of the gas before the expansion .
The volume is doubled and the pressure is halved , but nothing else seems to have changed during the expansion .
All of this discussion is based on what we have learned so far and makes sense .
Here is what puzzles us : Can all the molecules go backward to the original half of the container in some future time ?
Our intuition tells us that this is going to be very unlikely , even though nothing we have learned so far prevents such an event from happening , regardless of how small the probability is .
What we are really asking is whether the expansion into the vacuum half of the container is reversible .
A reversible process is a process in which the system and environment can be restored to exactly the same initial states that they were in before the process occurred , if we go backward along the path of the process .
The necessary condition for a reversible process is therefore the quasi-static requirement .
Note that it is quite easy to restore a system to its original state ; the hard part is to have its environment restored to its original state at the same time .
For example , in the example of an ideal gas expanding into vacuum to twice its original volume , we can easily push it back with a piston and restore its temperature and pressure by removing some heat from the gas .
The problem is that we can not do it without changing something in its surroundings , such as dumping some heat there .
A reversible process is truly an ideal process that rarely happens .
We can make certain processes close to reversible and therefore use the consequences of the corresponding reversible processes as a starting point or reference .
In reality , almost all processes are irreversible , and some properties of the environment are altered when the properties of the system are restored .
The expansion of an ideal gas , as we have just outlined , is irreversible because the process is not even quasi-static , that is , not in an equilibrium state at any moment of the expansion .
From the microscopic point of view , a particle described by Newton ’ s second law can go backward if we flip the direction of time .
But this is not the case , in practical terms , in a macroscopic system with more than particles or molecules , where numerous collisions between these molecules tend to erase any trace of memory of the initial trajectory of each of the particles .
For example , we can actually estimate the chance for all the particles in the expanded gas to go back to the original half of the container , but the current age of the universe is still not long enough for it to happen even once .
An irreversible process is what we encounter in reality almost all the time .
The system and its environment can not be restored to their original states at the same time .
Because this is what happens in nature , it is also called a natural process .
The sign of an irreversible process comes from the finite gradient between the states occurring in the actual process .
For example , when heat flows from one object to another , there is a finite temperature difference ( gradient ) between the two objects .
More importantly , at any given moment of the process , the system most likely is not at equilibrium or in a welldefined state .
This phenomenon is called irreversibility .
Let us see another example of irreversibility in thermal processes .
Consider two objects in thermal contact : one at temperature and the other at temperature , as shown in .
We know from common personal experience that heat flows from a hotter object to a colder one .
For example , when we hold a few pieces of ice in our hands , we feel cold because heat has left our hands into the ice .
The opposite is true when we hold one end of a metal rod while keeping the other end over a fire .
Based on all of the experiments that have been done on spontaneous heat transfer , the following statement summarizes the governing principle : Heat never flows spontaneously from a colder object to a hotter object .
This statement turns out to be one of several different ways of stating the second law of thermodynamics .
The form of this statement is credited to German physicist Rudolf Clausius ( 1822−1888 ) and is referred to as the Clausius statement of the second law of thermodynamics .
The word “ spontaneously ” here means no other effort has been made by a third party , or one that is neither the hotter nor colder object .
We will introduce some other major statements of the second law and show that they imply each other .
In fact , all the different statements of the second law of thermodynamics can be shown to be equivalent , and all lead to the irreversibility of spontaneous heat flow between macroscopic objects of a very large number of molecules or particles .
Both isothermal and adiabatic processes sketched on a pV graph ( discussed in ) are reversible in principle because the system is always at an equilibrium state at any point of the processes and can go forward or backward along the given curves .
Other idealized processes can be represented by pV curves ; summarizes the most common reversible processes .
A heat engine is a device used to extract heat from a source and then convert it into mechanical work that is used for all sorts of applications .
For example , a steam engine on an old-style train can produce the work needed for driving the train .
Several questions emerge from the construction and application of heat engines .
For example , what is the maximum percentage of the heat extracted that can be used to do work ?
This turns out to be a question that can only be answered through the second law of thermodynamics .
The second law of thermodynamics can be formally stated in several ways .
One statement presented so far is about the direction of spontaneous heat flow , known as the Clausius statement .
A couple of other statements are based on heat engines .
Whenever we consider heat engines and associated devices such as refrigerators and heat pumps , we do not use the normal sign convention for heat and work .
For convenience , we assume that the symbols and W represent only the amounts of heat transferred and work delivered , regardless what the givers or receivers are .
Whether heat is entering or leaving a system and work is done to or by a system are indicated by proper signs in front of the symbols and by the directions of arrows in diagrams .
It turns out that we need more than one heat source/sink to construct a heat engine .
We will come back to this point later in the chapter , when we compare different statements of the second law of thermodynamics .
For the moment , we assume that a heat engine is constructed between a heat source ( high-temperature reservoir or hot reservoir ) and a heat sink ( lowtemperature reservoir or cold reservoir ) , represented schematically in .
Power plants use steam produced at high temperature to drive electric generators , while exhausting heat to the atmosphere or a nearby body of water in the role of the heat sink .
In an internal combustion engine , a hot gas-air mixture is used to push a piston , and heat is exhausted to the nearby atmosphere in a similar manner .
Actual heat engines have many different designs .
Examples include internal combustion engines , such as those used in most cars today , and external combustion engines , such as the steam engines used in old steam-engine trains .
shows a photo of a nuclear power plant in operation .
The atmosphere around the reactors acts as the cold reservoir , and the heat generated from the nuclear reaction provides the heat from the hot reservoir .
Heat engines operate by carrying a working substance through a cycle .
In a steam power plant , the working substance is water , which starts as a liquid , becomes vaporized , is then used to drive a turbine , and is finally condensed back into the liquid state .
As is the case for all working substances in cyclic processes , once the water returns to its initial state , it repeats the same sequence .
For now , we assume that the cycles of heat engines are reversible , so there is no energy loss to friction or other irreversible effects .
Suppose that the engine of goes through one complete cycle and that and W represent the heats exchanged and the work done for that cycle .
Since the initial and final states of the system are the same , for the cycle .
A lawn mower is rated to have an efficiency of and an average power of 3.00 kW .
What are ( a ) the average work and ( b ) the minimum heat discharge into the air by the lawn mower in one minute of use ?
From the average power—that is , the rate of work production—we can figure out the work done in the given elapsed time .
Then , from the efficiency given , we can figure out the minimum heat discharge with The average work delivered by the lawn mower is The minimum heat discharged into the air is given by which leads to As the efficiency rises , the minimum heat discharged falls .
This helps our environment and atmosphere by not having as much waste heat expelled .
The cycles we used to describe the engine in the preceding section are all reversible , so each sequence of steps can just as easily be performed in the opposite direction .
In this case , the engine is known as a refrigerator or a heat pump , depending on what is the focus : the heat removed from the cold reservoir or the heat dumped to the hot reservoir .
Either a refrigerator or a heat pump is an engine running in reverse .
For a refrigerator , the focus is on removing heat from a specific area .
For a heat pump , the focus is on dumping heat to a specific area .
We first consider a refrigerator .
The purpose of this engine is to remove heat from the cold reservoir , which is the space inside the refrigerator for an actual household refrigerator or the space inside a building for an air-conditioning unit .
A household refrigerator removes heat from the food within it while exhausting heat to the surrounding air .
The required work , for which we pay in our electricity bill , is performed by the motor that moves a coolant through the coils .
A schematic sketch of a household refrigerator is given in .
Once again , we use the energy conservation condition to obtain the final step of this expression .
Earlier in this chapter , we introduced the Clausius statement of the second law of thermodynamics , which is based on the irreversibility of spontaneous heat flow .
As we remarked then , the second law of thermodynamics can be stated in several different ways , and all of them can be shown to imply the others .
In terms of heat engines , the second law of thermodynamics may be stated as follows : It is impossible to convert the heat from a single source into work without any other effect .
This is known as the Kelvin statement of the second law of thermodynamics .
This statement describes an unattainable “ perfect engine , ” as represented schematically in ( a ) .
Note that “ without any other effect ” is a very strong restriction .
For example , an engine can absorb heat and turn it all into work , but not if it completes a cycle .
Without completing a cycle , the substance in the engine is not in its original state and therefore an “ other effect ” has occurred .
Another example is a chamber of gas that can absorb heat from a heat reservoir and do work isothermally against a piston as it expands .
However , if the gas were returned to its initial state ( that is , made to complete a cycle ) , it would have to be compressed and heat would have to be extracted from it .
The Kelvin statement is a manifestation of a well-known engineering problem .
Despite advancing technology , we are not able to build a heat engine that is efficient .
The first law does not exclude the possibility of constructing a perfect engine , but the second law forbids it .
We can show that the Kelvin statement is equivalent to the Clausius statement if we view the two objects in the Clausius statement as a cold reservoir and a hot reservoir .
Thus , the Clausius statement becomes : It is impossible to construct a refrigerator that transfers heat from a cold reservoir to a hot reservoir without aid from an external source .
The Clausius statement is related to the everyday observation that heat never flows spontaneously from a cold object to a hot object .
Heat transfer in the direction of increasing temperature always requires some energy input .
A “ perfect refrigerator , ” shown in ( b ) , which works without such external aid , is impossible to construct .
To prove the equivalence of the Kelvin and Clausius statements , we show that if one statement is false , it necessarily follows that the other statement is also false .
Let us first assume that the Clausius statement is false , so that the perfect refrigerator of ( b ) does exist .
The refrigerator removes heat Q from a cold reservoir at a temperature and transfers all of it to a hot reservoir at a temperature Now consider a real heat engine working in the same temperature range .
It extracts heat from the hot reservoir , does work W , and discards heat Q to the cold reservoir .
From the first law , these quantities are related by .
Suppose these two devices are combined as shown in .
The net heat removed from the hot reservoir is , no net heat transfer occurs to or from the cold reservoir , and work W is done on some external body .
Since , the combination of a perfect refrigerator and a real heat engine is itself a perfect heat engine , thereby contradicting the Kelvin statement .
Thus , if the Clausius statement is false , the Kelvin statement must also be false .
Using the second law of thermodynamics , we now prove two important properties of heat engines operating between two heat reservoirs .
The first property is that any reversible engine operating between two reservoirs has a greater efficiency than any irreversible engine operating between the same two reservoirs .
The second property to be demonstrated is that all reversible engines operating between the same two reservoirs have the same efficiency .
It then follows from the first law that Suppose the cycle of D is reversed so that it operates as a refrigerator , and the two engines are coupled such that the work output of E is used to drive D , as shown in ( b ) .
Since and the net result of each cycle is equivalent to a spontaneous transfer of heat from the cold reservoir to the hot reservoir , a process the second law does not allow .
Suppose that D and E are both reversible engines .
If they are coupled as shown in ( b ) , the efficiency of E can not be greater than the efficiency of D , or the second law would be violated .
If both engines are then reversed , the same reasoning implies that the efficiency of D can not be greater than the efficiency of E. Combining these results leads to the conclusion that all reversible engines working between the same two reservoirs have the same efficiency .
Check Your Understanding What is the efficiency of a perfect heat engine ?
What is the coefficient of performance of a perfect refrigerator ?
Check Your Understanding Show that ( b ) .
for the hypothetical engine of In the early 1820s , Sadi Carnot ( 1786−1832 ) , a French engineer , became interested in improving the efficiencies of practical heat engines .
In 1824 , his studies led him to propose a hypothetical working cycle with the highest possible efficiency between the same two reservoirs , known now as the Carnot cycle .
An engine operating in this cycle is called a Carnot engine .
The Carnot cycle is of special importance for a variety of reasons .
At a practical level , this cycle represents a reversible model for the steam power plant and the refrigerator or heat pump .
Yet , it is also very important theoretically , for it plays a major role in the development of another important statement of the second law of thermodynamics .
Finally , because only two reservoirs are involved in its operation , it can be used along with the second law of thermodynamics to define an absolute temperature scale that is truly independent of any substance used for temperature measurement .
With an ideal gas as the working substance , the steps of the Carnot cycle , as represented by , are as follows .
With the first law of thermodynamics , we find that the heat absorbed by the gas is Adiabatic expansion .
The gas is thermally isolated and allowed to expand further , doing work Because this expansion is adiabatic , the temperature of the gas falls—in this case , from From and the equation of state for an ideal gas , , we have so that Isothermal compression .
The gas is placed in thermal contact with a cold reservoir at temperature and compressed isothermally .
During this process , work is done on the gas and it gives up heat to the cold reservoir .
The reasoning used in step 1 now yields where is the heat dumped to the cold reservoir by the gas .
The gas is thermally isolated and returned to its initial state by compression .
In this process , work is done on the gas .
Because the compression is adiabatic , the temperature of the gas rises—from in this particular case .
The reasoning of step 2 now gives The total work done by the gas in the Carnot cycle is given by This work is equal to the area enclosed by the loop shown in the pV diagram of .
Because the initial and final states of the system are the same , the change of the internal energy of the gas in the cycle must be zero , that is , .
All engines , however , have the same net effect , namely the absorption of heat from a hot reservoir , the production of work , and the discarding of heat to a cold reservoir .
This leads us to ask : Do all reversible cycles operating between the same two reservoirs have the same efficiency ?
The answer to this question comes from the second law of thermodynamics discussed earlier : All reversible engine cycles produce exactly the same efficiency .
Also , as you might expect , all real engines operating between two reservoirs are less efficient than reversible engines operating between the same two reservoirs .
This too is a consequence of the second law of thermodynamics shown earlier .
The cycle of an ideal gas Carnot refrigerator is represented by the pV diagram of .
It is a Carnot engine operating in reverse .
The refrigerator extracts heat from a cold-temperature reservoir at when the ideal gas expands isothermally .
From the first law , this work is given by An analysis just like the analysis done for the Carnot engine gives When combined with , this yields for the coefficient of performance of the ideal-gas Carnot refrigerator .
However , these equations are more general than their derivations imply .
We will soon show that they are both valid no matter what the working substance is .
Carnot summarized his study of the Carnot engine and Carnot cycle into what is now known as Carnot ’ s principle : No engine working between two reservoirs at constant temperatures can have a greater efficiency than a reversible engine .
This principle can be viewed as another statement of the second law of thermodynamics and can be shown to be equivalent to the Kelvin statement and the Clausius statement .
A Carnot engine has an efficiency of 0.60 and the temperature of its cold reservoir is 300 K. ( a ) What is the temperature of the hot reservoir ?
( b ) If the engine does 300 J of work per cycle , how much heat is removed from the high-temperature reservoir per cycle ?
( c ) How much heat is exhausted to the low-temperature reservoir per cycle ?
From the temperature dependence of the thermal efficiency of the Carnot engine , we can find the temperature of the hot reservoir .
Then , from the definition of the efficiency , we can find the heat removed when the work done by the engine is given .
Finally , energy conservation will lead to how much heat must be dumped to the cold reservoir .
As the difference in temperatures of the hot and cold reservoir increases , the efficiency of a Carnot engine increases .
Imagine a Carnot heat pump operates between an outside temperature of and an inside temperature of .
What is the work needed if the heat delivered to the inside of the house is 30.0 kJ ?
The dependence on the temperature outside makes them impractical to use in areas where the temperature is much colder outside than room temperature .
In terms of energy costs , the heat pump is a very economical means for heating buildings .
Contrast this method with turning electrical energy directly into heat with resistive heating elements .
In this case , one unit of electrical energy furnishes at most only one unit of heat .
Unfortunately , heat pumps have problems that do limit their usefulness .
They are quite expensive to purchase compared to resistive heating elements , and , as the performance coefficient for a Carnot heat pump shows , they become less effective as the outside temperature decreases .
In fact , below about , the heat they furnish is less than the energy used to operate them .
Check Your Understanding A Carnot engine operates between reservoirs at and .
( a ) What is the efficiency of the engine ?
( b ) If the engine does 5.0 J of work per cycle , how much heat per cycle does it absorb from the high-temperature reservoir ?
( c ) How much heat per cycle does it exhaust to the coldtemperature reservoir ?
( d ) What temperatures at the cold reservoir would give the minimum and maximum efficiency ?
Check Your Understanding A Carnot refrigerator operates between two heat reservoirs whose temperatures are and .
( a ) What is the coefficient of performance of the refrigerator ?
( b ) If 200 J of work are done on the working substance per cycle , how much heat per cycle is extracted from the cold reservoir ?
( c ) How much heat per cycle is discarded to the hot reservoir ?
The second law of thermodynamics is best expressed in terms of a change in the thermodynamic variable known as entropy , which is represented by the symbol S .
Entropy , like internal energy , is a state function .
This means that when a system makes a transition from one state into another , the change in entropy is independent of path and depends only on the thermodynamic variables of the two states .
We first consider for a system undergoing a reversible process at a constant temperature .
In this case , the change in entropy of the system is given by where Q is the heat exchanged by the system kept at a temperature T ( in kelvin ) .
If the system absorbs heat—that is , with —the entropy of the system increases .
As an example , suppose a gas is kept at a constant temperature of 300 K while it absorbs 10 J of heat in a reversible process .
What is the entropy change of the ice ?
Because the process is slow , we can approximate it as a reversible process .
The temperature is a constant , and we can therefore use in the calculation .
The ice is melted by the addition of heat : In this reversible process , the temperature of the ice-water mixture is fixed at or 273 K. Now from , the entropy change of the ice is when it melts to water at .
During a phase change , the temperature is constant , allowing us to use to solve this problem .
The same equation could also be used if we changed from a liquid to a gas phase , since the temperature does not change during that process either .
The change in entropy of a system for an arbitrary , reversible transition for which the temperature is not necessarily constant is defined by modifying .
Imagine a system making a transition from state A to B in small , discrete steps .
The temperatures associated with these states are and respectively .
During each step of the transition , the system exchanges heat reversibly at a temperature This can be accomplished experimentally by placing the system in thermal contact with a large number of heat reservoirs of varying temperatures , as illustrated in .
The change in entropy for each step is The net change in entropy of the system for the transition is We now take the limit as , and the number of steps approaches infinity .
Then , replacing the summation by an integral , we obtain where the integral is taken between the initial state A and the final state B .
This equation is valid only if the transition from A to B is reversible .
As an example , let us determine the net entropy change of a reversible engine while it undergoes a single Carnot cycle .
Although this result was obtained for a particular case , its validity can be shown to be far more general : There is no net change in the entropy of a system undergoing any complete reversible cyclic process .
Mathematically , we write this statement as where represents the integral over a closed reversible path .
We can use to show that the entropy change of a system undergoing a reversible process between two given states is path independent .
An arbitrary , closed path for a reversible cycle that passes through the states A and B is shown in .
From , for this closed path .
We may split this integral into two segments , one along I , which leads from A to B , the other along II , which leads from B to A .
Then Since the process is reversible , Hence , the entropy change in going from A to B is the same for paths I and II .
Since paths I and II are arbitrary , reversible paths , the entropy change in a transition between two equilibrium states is the same for all the reversible processes joining these states .
Entropy , like internal energy , is therefore a state function .
What happens if the process is irreversible ?
When the process is irreversible , we expect the entropy of a closed system , or the system and its environment ( the universe ) , to increase .
Therefore we can rewrite this expression as where S is the total entropy of the closed system or the entire universe , and the equal sign is for a reversible process .
The fact is the entropy statement of the second law of thermodynamics : The entropy of a closed system and the entire universe never decreases .
We can show that this statement is consistent with the Kelvin statement , the Clausius statement , and the Carnot principle .
However , because entropy of a system is a function of state , we can imagine a reversible process that starts from the same initial state and ends at the given final state .
But if we count whatever is used to remove the heat from the object , we would still end up with because the process is irreversible .
If the temperature changes during the heat flow , you must keep it inside the integral to solve for the change in entropy .
If , however , the temperature is constant , you can simply calculate the entropy change as the heat flow divided by the temperature .
The steps of a reversible Stirling engine are as follows .
For this problem , we will use 0.0010 mol of a monatomic gas that starts at a temperature of and a volume of , which will be called point A .
( b ) Fill in the following table .
( c ) How does the efficiency of the Stirling engine compare to the Carnot engine working within the same two heat reservoirs ?
Using the ideal gas law , calculate the pressure at each point so that they can be labeled on the pV diagram .
and an isochoric process has no work done .
The Isothermal work is calculated using heat flow is calculated from the first law of thermodynamics , where for monatomic gasses .
Isothermal steps have a change in entropy of Q / T , whereas isochoric steps have The efficiency of a heat engine is calculated by using The graph is shown below .
The completed table is shown below .
The efficiency of the Stirling heat engine is If this were a Carnot engine operating between the same heat reservoirs , its efficiency would be Therefore , the Carnot engine would have a greater efficiency than the Stirling engine .
In the early days of steam engines , accidents would occur due to the high pressure of the steam in the boiler .
Robert Stirling developed an engine in 1816 that did not use steam and therefore was safer .
The Stirling engine was commonly used in the nineteenth century , but developments in steam and internal combustion engines have made it difficult to broaden the use of the Stirling engine .
The Stirling engine uses compressed air as the working substance , which passes back and forth between two chambers with a porous plug , called the regenerator , which is made of material that does not conduct heat as well .
In two of the steps , pistons in the two chambers move in phase .
We have seen how entropy is related to heat exchange at a particular temperature .
In this section , we consider entropy from a statistical viewpoint .
Although the details of the argument are beyond the scope of this textbook , it turns out that entropy can be related to how disordered or randomized a system is—the more it is disordered , the higher is its entropy .
For example , a new deck of cards is very ordered , as the cards are arranged numerically by suit .
In shuffling this new deck , we randomize the arrangement of the cards and therefore increase its entropy .
Thus , by picking one card off the top of the deck , there would be no indication of what the next selected card will be .
The second law of thermodynamics requires that the entropy of the universe increase in any irreversible process .
Thus , in terms of order , the second law may be stated as follows : In any irreversible process , the universe becomes more disordered .
For example , the irreversible free expansion of an ideal gas , shown in , results in a larger volume for the gas molecules to occupy .
A larger volume means more possible arrangements for the same number of atoms , so disorder is also increased .
As a result , the entropy of the gas has gone up .
The gas in this case is a closed system , and the process is irreversible .
Changes in phase also illustrate the connection between entropy and disorder .
Suppose we place 50 g of ice at in contact with a heat reservoir at .
Heat spontaneously flows from the reservoir to the ice , which melts and eventually reaches a temperature of .
Find the change in entropy of ( a ) the ice and ( b ) the universe .
Because the entropy of a system is a function of its state , we can imagine two reversible processes for the ice : ( 1 ) ice is melted at and ( 2 ) melted ice ( water ) is warmed up from to under constant pressure .
Then , we add the change in entropy of the reservoir when we calculate the change in entropy of the universe .
If we considered only the phase change of the ice into water and not the temperature increase , the entropy change of the ice and reservoir would be the same , resulting in the universe gaining no entropy .
This process also results in a more disordered universe .
The ice changes from a solid with molecules located at specific sites to a liquid whose molecules are much freer to move .
The molecular arrangement has therefore become more randomized .
Although the change in average kinetic energy of the molecules of the heat reservoir is negligible , there is nevertheless a significant decrease in the entropy of the reservoir because it has many more molecules than the melted ice cube .
However , the reservoir ’ s decrease in entropy is still not as large as the increase in entropy of the ice .
The increased disorder of the ice more than compensates for the increased order of the reservoir , and the entropy of the universe increases by 4.6 J/K .
You might suspect that the growth of different forms of life might be a net ordering process and therefore a violation of the second law .
After all , a single cell gathers molecules and eventually becomes a highly structured organism , such as a human being .
However , this ordering process is more than compensated for by the disordering of the rest of the universe .
The net result is an increase in entropy and an increase in the disorder of the universe .
Check Your Understanding In , the spontaneous flow of heat from a hot object to a cold object results in a net increase in entropy of the universe .
Discuss how this result can be related to an increase in disorder of the system .
The second law of thermodynamics makes clear that the entropy of the universe never decreases during any thermodynamic process .
For any other thermodynamic system , when the process is reversible , the change of the entropy is given by .
But what happens if the temperature goes to zero , ?
It turns out this is not a question that can be answered by the second law .
A fundamental issue still remains : Is it possible to cool a system all the way down to zero kelvin ?
We understand that the system must be at its lowest energy state because lowering temperature reduces the kinetic energy of the constituents in the system .
What happens to the entropy of a system at the absolute zero temperature ?
It turns out the absolute zero temperature is not reachable—at least , not though a finite number of cooling steps .
This is a statement of the third law of thermodynamics , whose proof requires quantum mechanics that we do not present here .
In actual experiments , physicists have continuously pushed that limit downward , with the lowest temperature achieved at about in a lowtemperature lab at the Helsinki University of Technology in 2008 .
Like the second law of thermodynamics , the third law of thermodynamics can be stated in different ways .
One of the common statements of the third law of thermodynamics is : The absolute zero temperature can not be reached through any finite number of cooling steps .
In other words , the temperature of any given physical system must be finite , that is , .
This produces a very interesting question in physics : Do we know how a system would behave if it were at the absolute zero temperature ?
The reason a system is unable to reach 0 K is fundamental and requires quantum mechanics to fully understand its origin .
We can put this expression in words : A system becomes perfectly ordered when its temperature approaches absolute zero and its entropy approaches its absolute minimum .
The third law of thermodynamics puts another limit on what can be done when we look for energy resources .
If there could be a reservoir at the absolute zero temperature , we could have engines with efficiency of , which would , of course , violate the second law of thermodynamics .
An ideal gas occupies a partitioned volume inside a box whose walls are thermally insulating , as shown in ( a ) .
When the partition is removed , the gas expands and fills the entire volume of the box , as shown in part ( b ) .
What is the entropy change of the universe ( the system plus its environment ) ?
The adiabatic free expansion of an ideal gas is an irreversible process .
There is no change in the internal energy ( and hence temperature ) of the gas in such an expansion because no work or heat transfer has happened .
Thus , a convenient reversible path connecting the same two equilibrium states is a slow , isothermal expansion from to .
In this process , the gas could be expanding against a piston while in thermal contact with a heat reservoir , as in step 1 of the Carnot cycle .
What about the environment ?
The walls of the container are thermally insulating , so no heat exchange takes place between the gas and its surroundings .
The entropy of the environment is therefore constant during the expansion .
The net entropy change of the universe is then simply the entropy change of the gas .
Since this is positive , the entropy of the universe increases in the free expansion of the gas .
Heat flows from a steel object of mass 4.00 kg whose temperature is 400 K to an identical object at 300 K. Assuming that the objects are thermally isolated from the environment , what is the net entropy change of the universe after thermal equilibrium has been reached ?
Since the objects are identical , their common temperature at equilibrium is 350 K. To calculate the entropy changes associated with their transitions , we substitute the irreversible process of the heat transfer by two isobaric , reversible processes , one for each of the two objects .
Thus , the entropy of the universe also increases by 37 J/K .
Check Your Understanding A quantity of heat Q is absorbed from a reservoir at a temperature by a cooler reservoir at a temperature What is the entropy change of the hot reservoir , the cold reservoir , and the universe ?
Check Your Understanding A 50-g copper piece at a temperature of is placed into a large insulated vat of water at .
( a ) What is the entropy change of the copper piece when it reaches thermal equilibrium with the water ?
( b ) What is the entropy change of the water ?
( c ) What is the entropy change of the universe ?
View this to learn about entropy and microstates .
Start with a large barrier in the middle and 1000 molecules in only the left chamber .
What is the total entropy of the system ?
Now remove the barrier and let the molecules travel from the left to the right hand side ?
What is the total entropy of the system now ?
Lastly , add heat and note what happens to the temperature .
Did this increase entropy of the system ?
Back when we were studying Newton ’ s laws , we identified several physical phenomena as forces .
We did so based on the effect they had on a physical object : Specifically , they caused the object to accelerate .
Later , when we studied impulse and momentum , we expanded this idea to identify a force as any physical phenomenon that changed the momentum of an object .
In either case , the result is the same : We recognize a force by the effect that it has on an object .
In , we examined the force of gravity , which acts on all objects with mass .
In this chapter , we begin the study of the electric force , which acts on all objects with a property called charge .
The electric force is much stronger than gravity ( in most systems where both appear ) , but it can be a force of attraction or a force of repulsion , which leads to very different effects on objects .
The electric force helps keep atoms together , so it is of fundamental importance in matter .
But it also governs most everyday interactions we deal with , from chemical interactions to biological processes .
You are certainly familiar with electronic devices that you activate with the click of a switch , from computers to cell phones to television .
And you have certainly seen electricity in a flash of lightning during a heavy thunderstorm .
But you have also most likely experienced electrical effects in other ways , maybe without realizing that an electric force was involved .
Let ’ s take a look at some of these activities and see what we can learn from them about electric charges and forces .
You have probably experienced the phenomenon of static electricity : When you first take clothes out of a dryer , many ( not all ) of them tend to stick together ; for some fabrics , they can be very difficult to separate .
Another example occurs if you take a woolen sweater off quickly—you can feel ( and hear ) the static electricity pulling on your clothes , and perhaps even your hair .
If you comb your hair on a dry day and then put the comb close to a thin stream of water coming out of a faucet , you will find that the water stream bends toward ( is attracted to ) the comb .
Suppose you bring the comb close to some small strips of paper ; the strips of paper are attracted to the comb and even cling to it .
In the kitchen , quickly pull a length of plastic cling wrap off the roll ; it will tend to cling to most any nonmetallic material ( such as plastic , glass , or food ) .
If you rub a balloon on a wall for a few seconds , it will stick to the wall .
Probably the most annoying effect of static electricity is getting shocked by a doorknob ( or a friend ) after shuffling your feet on some types of carpeting .
Many of these phenomena have been known for centuries .
Additionally , he found that the rubbed amber would not only attract the fur , and the fur attract the amber , but they both could affect other ( nonmetallic ) objects , even if not in contact with those objects .
The English physicist William Gilbert ( 1544–1603 ) also studied this attractive force , using various substances .
He worked with amber , and , in addition , he experimented with rock crystal and various precious and semi-precious gemstones .
He also experimented with several metals .
He found that the metals never exhibited this force , whereas the minerals did .
Moreover , although an electrified amber rod would attract a piece of fur , it would repel another electrified amber rod ; similarly , two electrified pieces of fur would repel each other .
This suggested there were two types of an electric property ; this property eventually came to be called electric charge .
The difference between the two types of electric charge is in the directions of the electric forces that each type of charge causes : These forces are repulsive when the same type of charge exists on two interacting objects and attractive when the charges are of opposite types .
The SI unit of electric charge is the coulomb ( C ) , after the French physicist Charles-Augustin de Coulomb ( 1736–1806 ) .
The most peculiar aspect of this new force is that it does not require physical contact between the two objects in order to cause an acceleration .
This is an example of a so-called “ long-range ” force .
( Or , as Albert Einstein later phrased it , “ action at a distance. ” ) With the exception of gravity , all other forces we have discussed so far act only when the two interacting objects actually touch .
The American physicist and statesman Benjamin Franklin found that he could concentrate charge in a “ Leyden jar , ” which was essentially a glass jar with two sheets of metal foil , one inside and one outside , with the glass between them .
This created a large electric force between the two foil sheets .
Franklin pointed out that the observed behavior could be explained by supposing that one of the two types of charge remained motionless , while the other type of charge flowed from one piece of foil to the other .
He further suggested that an excess of what he called this “ electrical fluid ” be called “ positive electricity ” and the deficiency of it be called “ negative electricity. ” His suggestion , with some minor modifications , is the model we use today .
( With the experiments that he was able to do , this was a pure guess ; he had no way of actually determining the sign of the moving charge .
Unfortunately , he guessed wrong ; we now know that the charges that flow are the ones Franklin labeled negative , and the positive charges remain largely motionless .
Fortunately , as we ’ ll see , it makes no practical or theoretical difference which choice we make , as long as we stay consistent with our choice . )
Let ’ s list the specific observations that we have of this electric force : The force acts without physical contact between the two objects .
The force can be either attractive or repulsive : If two interacting objects carry the same sign of charge , the force is repulsive ; if the charges are of opposite sign , the force is attractive .
These interactions are referred to as electrostatic repulsion and electrostatic attraction , respectively .
Not all objects are affected by this force .
The magnitude of the force decreases ( rapidly ) with increasing separation distance between the objects .
To be more precise , we find experimentally that the magnitude of the force decreases as the square of the distance between the two interacting objects increases .
Thus , for example , when the distance between two interacting objects is doubled , the force between them decreases to one fourth what it was in the original system .
We can also observe that the surroundings of the charged objects affect the magnitude of the force .
However , we will explore this issue in a later chapter .
In addition to the existence of two types of charge , several other properties of charge have been discovered .
Charge is quantized .
This means that electric charge comes in discrete amounts , and there is a smallest possible amount of charge that an object can have .
In the SI system , this smallest amount is .
No free particle can have less charge than this , and , therefore , the charge on any object—the charge on all objects—must be an integer multiple of this amount .
All macroscopic , charged objects have charge because electrons have either been added or taken away from them , resulting in a net charge .
The magnitude of the charge is independent of the type .
Phrased another way , the smallest possible positive charge ( to four significant figures ) is , and the smallest possible negative charge is ; these values are exactly equal .
This is simply how the laws of physics in our universe turned out .
Charge is conserved .
Charge can neither be created nor destroyed ; it can only be transferred from place to place , from one object to another .
Frequently , we speak of two charges “ canceling ” ; this is verbal shorthand .
It means that if two objects that have equal and opposite charges are physically close to each other , then the ( oppositely directed ) forces they apply on some other charged object cancel , for a net force of zero .
It is important that you understand that the charges on the objects by no means disappear , however .
The net charge of the universe is constant .
Charge is conserved in closed systems .
In principle , if a negative charge disappeared from your lab bench and reappeared on the Moon , conservation of charge would still hold .
However , this never happens .
If the total charge you have in your local system on your lab bench is changing , there will be a measurable flow of charge into or out of the system .
Again , charges can and do move around , and their effects can and do cancel , but the net charge in your local environment ( if closed ) is conserved .
The last two items are both referred to as the law of conservation of charge .
Once it became clear that all matter was composed of particles that came to be called atoms , it also quickly became clear that the constituents of the atom included both positively charged particles and negatively charged particles .
The next question was , what are the physical properties of those electrically charged particles ?
The negatively charged particle was the first one to be discovered .
In 1897 , the English physicist J. J. Thomson was studying what was then known as cathode rays .
Some years before , the English physicist William Crookes had shown that these “ rays ” were negatively charged , but his experiments were unable to tell any more than that .
( The fact that they carried a negative electric charge was strong evidence that these were not rays at all , but particles . )
Thomson prepared a pure beam of these particles and sent them through crossed electric and magnetic fields , and adjusted the various field strengths until the net deflection of the beam was zero .
With this experiment , he was able to determine the charge-to-mass ratio of the particle .
This ratio showed that the mass of the particle was much smaller than that of any other previously known particle—1837 times smaller , in fact .
Eventually , this particle came to be called the electron .
Since the atom as a whole is electrically neutral , the next question was to determine how the positive and negative charges are distributed within the atom .
Thomson himself imagined that his electrons were embedded within a sort of positively charged paste , smeared out throughout the volume of the atom .
( See . )
In addition , he showed that the negatively charged electrons perpetually orbited about this nucleus , forming a sort of electrically charged cloud that surrounds the nucleus .
Rutherford concluded that the nucleus was constructed of small , massive particles that he named protons .
However , it was soon discovered that although the lightest atom , hydrogen , did indeed have a single proton as its nucleus , the next heaviest atom—helium—has twice the number of protons ( two ) , but four times the mass of hydrogen .
This mystery was resolved in 1932 by the English physicist James Chadwick , with the discovery of the neutron .
The neutron is , essentially , an electrically neutral twin of the proton , with no electric charge , but ( nearly ) identical mass to the proton .
The helium nucleus therefore has two neutrons along with its two protons .
( Later experiments were to show that although the neutron is electrically neutral overall , it does have an internal charge structure .
Furthermore , although the masses of the neutron and the proton are nearly equal , they aren ’ t exactly equal : The neutron ’ s mass is very slightly larger than the mass of the proton .
That slight mass excess turned out to be of great importance .
That , however , is a story that will have to wait until our study of modern physics in . )
Thus , in 1932 , the picture of the atom was of a small , massive nucleus constructed of a combination of protons and neutrons , surrounded by a collection of electrons whose combined motion formed a sort of negatively charged “ cloud ” around the nucleus .
In an electrically neutral atom , the total negative charge of the collection of electrons is equal to the total positive charge in the nucleus .
The very low-mass electrons can be more or less easily removed or added to an atom , changing the net charge on the atom ( though without changing its type ) .
An atom that has had the charge altered in this way is called an ion .
Positive ions have had electrons removed , whereas negative ions have had excess electrons added .
We also use this term to describe molecules that are not electrically neutral .
The story of the atom does not stop there , however .
In the latter part of the twentieth century , many more subatomic particles were discovered in the nucleus of the atom : pions , neutrinos , and quarks , among others .
With the exception of the photon , none of these particles are directly relevant to the study of electromagnetism , so we defer further discussion of them until the chapter on particle physics .
As noted previously , electric charge is a property that an object can have .
This is similar to how an object can have a property that we call mass , a property that we call density , a property that we call temperature , and so on .
Nevertheless , this terminology is extremely common ( and is frequently used in this book , as it is everywhere else ) .
So , keep in the back of your mind what we really mean when we refer to a “ charge. ” In the preceding section , we said that scientists were able to create electric charge only on nonmetallic materials and never on metals .
To understand why this is the case , you have to understand more about the nature and structure of atoms .
In this section , we discuss how and why electric charges do—or do not—move through materials .
A more complete description is given in a later chapter .
As discussed in the previous section , electrons surround the tiny nucleus in the form of a ( comparatively ) vast cloud of negative charge .
However , this cloud does have a definite structure to it .
Let ’ s consider an atom of the most commonly used conductor , copper .
For reasons that will become clear in , there is an outermost electron that is only loosely bound to the atom ’ s nucleus .
It can be easily dislodged ; it then moves to a neighboring atom .
In a large mass of copper atoms ( such as a copper wire or a sheet of copper ) , these vast numbers of outermost electrons ( one per atom ) wander from atom to atom , and are the electrons that do the moving when electricity flows .
These wandering , or “ free , ” electrons are called conduction electrons , and copper is therefore an excellent conductor ( of electric charge ) .
All conducting elements have a similar arrangement of their electrons , with one or two conduction electrons .
This includes most metals .
Insulators , in contrast , are made from materials that lack conduction electrons ; charge flows only with great difficulty , if at all .
Even if excess charge is added to an insulating material , it can not move , remaining indefinitely in place .
Charge can not flow along or through an insulator , so its electric forces remain for long periods of time .
( Charge will dissipate from an insulator , given enough time . )
As it happens , amber , fur , and most semi-precious gems are insulators , as are materials like wood , glass , and plastic .
Let ’ s examine in more detail what happens in a conductor when an electrically charged object is brought close to it .
As mentioned , the conduction electrons in the conductor are able to move with nearly complete freedom .
As a result , when a charged insulator ( such as a positively charged glass rod ) is brought close to the conductor , the ( total ) charge on the insulator exerts an electric force on the conduction electrons .
Since the rod is positively charged , the conduction electrons ( which themselves are negatively charged ) are attracted , flowing toward the insulator to the near side of the conductor .
Now , the conductor is still overall electrically neutral ; the conduction electrons have changed position , but they are still in the conducting material .
However , the conductor now has a charge distribution ; the near end ( the portion of the conductor closest to the insulator ) now has more negative charge than positive charge , and the reverse is true of the end farthest from the insulator .
The relocation of negative charges to the near side of the conductor results in an overall positive charge in the part of the conductor farthest from the insulator .
We have thus created an electric charge distribution where one did not exist before .
This process is referred to as inducing polarization —in this case , polarizing the conductor .
The resulting separation of positive and negative charge is called polarization , and a material , or even a molecule , that exhibits polarization is said to be polarized .
A similar situation occurs with a negatively charged insulator , but the resulting polarization is in the opposite direction .
Neutral objects can be attracted to any charged object .
The pieces of straw attracted to polished amber are neutral , for example .
If you run a plastic comb through your hair , the charged comb can pick up neutral pieces of paper .
shows how the polarization of atoms and molecules in neutral objects results in their attraction to a charged object .
When a charged rod is brought near a neutral substance , an insulator in this case , the distribution of charge in atoms and molecules is shifted slightly .
Opposite charge is attracted nearer the external charged rod , while like charge is repelled .
Since the electrostatic force decreases with distance , the repulsion of like charges is weaker than the attraction of unlike charges , and so there is a net attraction .
Thus , a positively charged glass rod attracts neutral pieces of paper , as will a negatively charged rubber rod .
Some molecules , like water , are polar molecules .
Polar molecules have a natural or inherent separation of charge , although they are neutral overall .
Polar molecules are particularly affected by other charged objects and show greater polarization effects than molecules with naturally uniform charge distributions .
When the two ends of a dipole can be separated , this method of charging by induction may be used to create charged objects without transferring charge .
In , we see two neutral metal spheres in contact with one another but insulated from the rest of the world .
A positively charged rod is brought near one of them , attracting negative charge to that side , leaving the other sphere positively charged .
Another method of charging by induction is shown in .
The neutral metal sphere is polarized when a charged rod is brought near it .
The sphere is then grounded , meaning that a conducting wire is run from the sphere to the ground .
Since Earth is large and most of the ground is a good conductor , it can supply or accept excess charge easily .
In this case , electrons are attracted to the sphere through a wire called the ground wire , because it supplies a conducting path to the ground .
The ground connection is broken before the charged rod is removed , leaving the sphere with an excess charge opposite to that of the rod .
Again , an opposite charge is achieved when charging by induction , and the charged rod loses none of its excess charge .
Experiments with electric charges have shown that if two objects each have electric charge , then they exert an electric force on each other .
The magnitude of the force is linearly proportional to the net charge on each object and inversely proportional to the square of the distance between them .
( Interestingly , the force does not depend on the mass of the objects . )
The direction of the force vector is along the imaginary line joining the two objects and is dictated by the signs of the charges involved .
Let the net electric charges of the two objects ; the vector displacement from to .
For reasons that will become clear in a later chapter , the proportionality constant that we use is actually a collection of constants .
( We discuss this constant shortly . )
The magnitude of the electric force ( or Coulomb force ) between two electrically charged particles is equal to We use absolute value signs around the product because one of the charges may be negative , but the magnitude of the force is always positive .
The direction of the force vector depends on the sign of the charges .
If the charges are the same , the force points away from the other charge .
If the charges have different signs , the force points toward the other charge .
It is important to note that the electric force is not constant ; it is a function of the separation distance between the two changes , and therefore so does the force .
If either the test charge or the source charge ( or both ) move , then immediate consequence of this is that direct application of Newton ’ s laws with this force can be mathematically difficult , depending on the specific problem at hand .
It can ( usually ) be done , but we almost always look for easier methods of calculating whatever physical quantity we are interested in .
( Conservation of energy is the most common choice . )
Finally , the new constant in Coulomb ’ s law is called the permittivity of free space , or ( better ) the permittivity of vacuum .
It has a very important physical meaning that we will discuss in a later chapter ; for now , it is simply an empirical proportionality constant .
Its numerical value ( to three significant figures ) turns out to be These units are required to give the force in Coulomb ’ s law the correct units of newtons .
Note that in Coulomb ’ s law , the permittivity of vacuum is only part of the proportionality constant .
For convenience , we often define a Coulomb ’ s constant : A hydrogen atom consists of a single proton and a single electron .
The proton has a charge of and the electron has .
In the “ ground state ” of the atom , the electron orbits the proton at most probable distance of .
Calculate the electric force on the electron due to the proton .
For the purposes of this example , we are treating the electron and proton as two point particles , each with an electric charge , and we are told the distance between them ; we are asked to calculate the force on the electron .
We thus use Coulomb ’ s law .
The force is thus expressed as This is a three-dimensional system , so the electron ( and therefore the force on it ) can be anywhere in an imaginary spherical shell around the proton .
In this “ classical ” model of the hydrogen atom , the electrostatic force on the electron points in the inward centripetal direction , thus maintaining the electron ’ s orbit .
But note that the quantum mechanical model of hydrogen ( discussed in ) is utterly different .
Check Your Understanding What would be different if the electron also had a positive charge ?
The analysis that we have done for two particles can be extended to an arbitrary number of particles ; we simply repeat the analysis , two charges at a time .
Specifically , we ask the question : Given N charges ( which we refer to as source charge ) , what is the net electric force that they exert on some other point charge ( which we call the test charge ) ?
Note that we use these terms because we can think of the test charge being used to test the strength of the force provided by the source charges .
Like all forces that we have seen up to now , the net electric force on our test charge is simply the vector sum of each individual electric force exerted on it by each of the individual test charges .
Thus , we can calculate the net force on the test charge Q by calculating the force on it from each source charge , taken one at a time , and then adding all those forces together ( as vectors ) .
This ability to simply add up individual forces in this way is referred to as the principle of superposition , and is one of the more important features of the electric force .
Each of the N unit vectors points directly from its associated source charge toward the test charge .
All of this is depicted in .
Please note that there is no physical difference between Q and ; the difference in labels is merely to allow clear discussion , with Q being the charge we are determining the force on .
( Note that the force vector does not necessarily point in the same direction as the unit vector ; it may point in the opposite direction , .
The signs of the source charge and test charge determine the direction of the force on the test charge . )
There is a complication , however .
Just as the source charges each exert a force on the test charge , so too ( by Newton ’ s third law ) does the test charge exert an equal and opposite force on each of the source charges .
As a consequence , each source charge would change position .
However , by , the force on the test charge is a function of position ; thus , as the positions of the source charges change , the net force on the test charge necessarily changes , which changes the force , which again changes the positions .
Thus , the entire mathematical analysis quickly becomes intractable .
Later , we will learn techniques for handling this situation , but for now , we make the simplifying assumption that the source charges are fixed in place somehow , so that their positions are constant in time .
( The test charge is allowed to move . )
With this restriction in place , the analysis of charges is known as electrostatics , where “ statics ” refers to the constant ( that is , static ) positions of the source charges and the force is referred to as an electrostatic force .
Three different , small charged objects are placed as shown in .
The charges and are fixed in place ; is free to move .
Given , , and , and that , what is the net force on the middle charge ?
We use Coulomb ’ s law again .
The way the question is phrased indicates that is our test charge , so that and are source charges .
The principle of superposition says that the force on from each of the other charges is unaffected by the presence of the other charge .
Therefore , we write down the force on from each and add them together as vectors .
We have two source charges and a test charge distances and and we are asked to find a force .
This calls for Coulomb ’ s law and superposition of forces .
The net force is obtained from applying the where and We find that at an angle of that is , above the − x -axis , as shown in the diagram .
Notice that when we substituted the numerical values of the charges , we did not include the negative sign of either or .
Recall that negative signs on vector quantities indicate a reversal of direction of the vector in question .
But for electric forces , the direction of the force is determined by the types ( signs ) of both interacting charges ; we determine the force directions by considering whether the signs of the two charges are the same or are opposite .
If you also include negative signs from negative charges when you substitute numbers , you run the risk of mathematically reversing the direction of the force you are calculating .
Thus , the safest thing to do is to calculate just the magnitude of the force , using the absolute values of the charges , and determine the directions physically .
Check Your Understanding What would be different if were negative ?
As we showed in the preceding section , the net electric force on a test charge is the vector sum of all the electric forces acting on it , from all of the various source charges , located at their various positions .
But what if we use a different test charge , one with a different magnitude , or sign , or both ?
Or suppose we have a dozen different test charges we wish to try at the same location ?
We would have to calculate the sum of the forces from scratch .
Fortunately , it is possible to define a quantity , called the electric field , which is independent of the test charge .
It only depends on the configuration of the source charges , and once found , allows us to calculate the force on any test charge .
Suppose we have N source charges located at positions electrostatic forces on a test charge Q .
The net force on Q is ( see ) , applying N We can rewrite this as where or , more compactly , This expression is called the electric field at position of the N source charges .
Here , P is the location of the of the source charges .
point in space where you are calculating the field and is relative to the positions Note that we have to impose a coordinate system to solve actual problems .
Notice that the calculation of the electric field makes no reference to the test charge .
Thus , the physically useful approach is to calculate the electric field and then use it to calculate the force on some test charge later , if needed .
Different test charges experience different forces , but it is the same electric field .
That being said , recall that there is no fundamental difference between a test charge and a source charge ; these are merely convenient labels for the system of interest .
Any charge produces an electric field ; however , just as Earth ’ s orbit is not affected by Earth ’ s own gravity , a charge is not subject to a force due to the electric field it generates .
Charges are only subject to forces from the electric fields of other charges .
In fact , this is exactly what we do when we say the gravitational field of Earth ( near Earth ’ s surface ) has a value of and then we calculate the resulting force ( i.e. , weight ) on different masses .
Also , the general expression for calculating at arbitrary distances from the center of Earth ( i.e. , not just near Earth ’ s surface ) is very similar to the expression for : , where G is a proportionality constant , playing does for .
The value of is calculated once and is then used in an endless number the same role for as of problems .
To push the analogy further , notice the units of the electric field : From , the units of E are newtons per coulomb , N/C , that is , the electric field applies a force on each unit charge .
Now notice the units of g : From , the units of g are newtons per kilogram , N/kg , that is , the gravitational field applies a force on each unit mass .
We could say that the gravitational field of Earth , near Earth ’ s surface , has a value of 9.81 N/kg .
Recall from your studies of gravity that the word “ field ” in this context has a precise meaning .
A field , in physics , is a physical quantity whose value depends on ( is a function of ) position , relative to the source of the field .
In the case of the electric field , shows that the value of ( both the magnitude and the direction ) depends on where in space the point P is located , measured from the locations of the source charges .
In addition , since the electric field is a vector quantity , the electric field is referred to as a vector field .
( The gravitational field is also a vector field . )
In contrast , a field that has only a magnitude at every point is a scalar field .
The temperature in a room is an example of a scalar field .
It is a field because the temperature , in general , is different at different locations in the room , and it is a scalar field because temperature is a scalar quantity .
The field exists at every physical point in space .
To put it another way , the electric charge on an object alters the space around the charged object in such a way that all other electrically charged objects in space experience an electric force as a result of being in that field .
The electric field , then , is the mechanism by which the electric properties of the source charge are transmitted to and through the rest of the universe .
( Again , the range of the electric force is infinite . )
We will see in subsequent chapters that the speed at which electrical phenomena travel is the same as the speed of light .
There is a deep connection between the electric field and light .
Yet another experimental fact about the field is that it obeys the superposition principle .
The total electric field , then , is the vector sum of all these fields .
That , in essence , is what says .
In the next section , we describe how to determine the shape of an electric field of a source charge distribution and how to sketch it .
enables us to determine the magnitude of the electric field , but we need the direction also .
We use the convention that the direction of any electric field vector is the same as the direction of the electric force vector that the field would apply to a positive test charge placed in that field .
Such a charge would be repelled by positive source charges ( the force on it would point away from the positive source charge ) but attracted to negative charges ( the force points toward the negative source ) .
By convention , all electric fields point away from positive source charges and point toward negative source charges .
Add charges to the and see how they react to the electric field .
Turn on a background electric field and adjust the direction and magnitude .
the most probable distance between the nucleus and the electron is In an ionized helium atom , .
What is the electric field due to the nucleus at the location of the electron ?
Note that although the electron is mentioned , it is not used in any calculation .
The problem asks for an electric field , not a force ; hence , there is only one charge involved , and the problem specifically asks for the field due to the nucleus .
Thus , the electron is a red herring ; only its distance matters .
Also , since the distance between the two protons in the nucleus is much , much smaller than the distance of the electron from the nucleus , we can treat the two protons as a single charge +2 e .
( a ) Find the electric field ( magnitude and direction ) a distance z above the midpoint between two equal charges that are a distance d apart .
Check that your result is consistent with what you ’ d expect when .
( b ) The same as part ( a ) , only this time make the right-hand charge instead of .
We add the two fields as vectors , per .
Notice that the system ( and therefore the field ) is symmetrical about the vertical axis ; as a result , the horizontal components of the field vectors cancel .
This simplifies the math .
Also , we take care to express our final answer in terms of only quantities that are given in the original statement of the problem : q , z , d , and constants By ( x ) -components symmetry , ; the of cancel horizontal .
The vertical ( z ) -component is given by Since none of the other components survive , this is the entire electric field , and it points in the direction .
Notice that this calculation uses the principle of superposition ; we calculate the fields of the two charges independently and then add them together .
What we want to do now is replace the quantities in this expression that we don ’ t know ( such as r ) , or can ’ t easily measure ( such as with quantities that we do know , or can measure .
In this example , we should evaluate the field expressions for the cases , , and , and confirm that the resulting expressions match our physical expectations .
Let ’ s do so : Let ’ s start with , the field of two identical charges .
From far away ( i.e. , the two source charges should “ merge ” and we should then “ see ” the field of just one charge , of size 2 q .
So , let then we can neglect in to obtain which is the correct expression for a field at a distance z away from a charge 2 q .
Next , we consider the field of equal and opposite charges , .
It can be shown ( via a Taylor expansion ) that for , this becomes which is the field of a dipole , a system that we will study in more detail later .
( Note that the units of are still correct in this expression , since the units of d in the numerator cancel the unit of the “ extra ” z in the denominator . )
If z is very large , then , as it should ; the two charges “ merge ” and so cancel out .
Check Your Understanding What is the electric field due to a single point particle ?
Try this to get the charge in the goal by placing other charges on the field .
The charge distributions we have seen so far have been discrete : made up of individual point particles .
This is in contrast with a continuous charge distribution , which has at least one nonzero dimension .
If a charge distribution is continuous rather than discrete , we can generalize the definition of the electric field .
We simply divide the charge into infinitesimal pieces and treat each piece as a point charge .
Note that because charge is quantized , there is no such thing as a “ truly ” continuous charge distribution .
However , in most practical cases , the total charge creating the field involves such a huge number of discrete charges that we can safely ignore the discrete nature of the charge and consider it to be continuous .
This is exactly the kind of approximation we make when we deal with a bucket of water as a continuous fluid , rather than a collection of molecules .
Our first step is to define a charge density for a charge distribution along a line , across a surface , or within a volume , as shown in .
They implicitly include and assume the principle of superposition .
The “ trick ” to using them is almost always in coming up with correct expressions for dl , dA , or dV , as the case may be , expressed in terms of r , and also expressing the charge density function appropriately .
It may be constant ; it might be dependent on location .
Note carefully the meaning of r in these equations : It is the distance from the charge element to the location of interest , ( the point in space where you want to determine the field ) .
However , don ’ t confuse this with the meaning of ; we are using it and the vector notation to write three integrals at once .
That is , is actually Find the electric field a distance z above the midpoint of a straight line segment of length L that carries a uniform line charge density .
Since this is a continuous charge distribution , we conceptually break the wire segment into differential pieces of length dl , each of which carries a differential amount of charge .
Then , we calculate the differential field created by two symmetrically placed pieces of the wire , using the symmetry of the setup to simplify the calculation .
Finally , we integrate this differential field expression over the length of the wire ( half of it , actually , as we explain below ) to obtain the complete electric field expression .
Before we jump into it , what do we expect the field to “ look like ” from far away ?
Since it is a finite line segment , from far away , it should look like a point charge .
We will check the expression we get to see if it meets this expectation .
Let ’ s check this formally .
This leaves These components are also equal , so we have where our differential line element dl is dx , in this example , since we are integrating along a line of charge that lies on the x -axis .
( The limits of integration are 0 to , because we have constructed the net field from two differential pieces of charge dq .
If we integrated along the entire length , we would pick up an erroneous factor of 2 . )
In principle , this is complete .
However , to actually calculate this integral , we need to eliminate all the variables that are not given .
In this case , both r and change as we integrate outward to the end of the line charge , so those are the variables to get rid of .
We can do that the same way we did for the two point charges : by noticing that , not to and Substituting , we obtain which simplifies to Notice , once again , the use of symmetry to simplify the problem .
This is a very common strategy for calculating electric fields .
The fields of nonsymmetrical charge distributions have to be handled with multiple integrals and may need to be calculated numerically by a computer .
Check Your Understanding How would the strategy used above change to calculate the electric field at a point a distance z above one end of the finite line segment ?
Find the electric field a distance z above the midpoint of an infinite line of charge that carries a uniform line charge density .
This is exactly like the preceding example , except the limits of integration will be to .
Again , the horizontal components cancel out , so we wind up with where our differential line element dl is dx , in this example , since we are integrating along a line of charge that lies on the x -axis .
Again , Substituting , we obtain which simplifies to Our strategy for working with continuous charge distributions also gives useful results for charges with infinite dimension .
This will become even more intriguing in the case of an infinite plane .
A ring has a uniform charge density , with units of coulomb per unit meter of arc .
Find the electric potential at a point on the axis passing through the center of the ring .
We use the same procedure as for the charged wire .
The difference here is that the charge is distributed on a circle .
We divide the circle into infinitesimal elements shaped as arcs on the circle and use polar coordinates shown in .
Also , when we take the limit of , we find that as we expect .
Again , by symmetry , the horizontal components cancel and the field is entirely in the vertical direction .
The vertical component of the electric field is extracted by multiplying by , so As before , we need to rewrite the unknown factors in the integrand in terms of the given quantities .
Also , we already performed the polar angle integral in writing down dA .
This surprising result is , again , an artifact of our limit , although one that we will make use of repeatedly in the future .
To understand why this happens , imagine being placed above an infinite plane of constant charge .
Does the plane look any different if you vary your altitude ?
No—you still see the plane going off to infinity , no matter how far you are from it .
It is important to note that is because we are above the plane .
If we were below , the field would point in the direction .
Find the electric field everywhere resulting from two infinite planes with equal but opposite charge densities .
We already know the electric field resulting from a single infinite plane , so we may use the principle of superposition to find the field from two .
The electric field points away from the positively charged plane and toward the negatively charged plane .
Since the are equal and opposite , this means that in the region outside of the two planes , the electric fields cancel each other out to zero .
However , in the region between the planes , the electric fields add , and we get for the electric field .
The is because in the figure , the field is pointing in the + x -direction .
Systems that may be approximated as two infinite planes of this sort provide a useful means of creating uniform electric fields .
Check Your Understanding What would the electric field look like in a system with two parallel positively charged planes with equal charge densities ?
Now that we have some experience calculating electric fields , let ’ s try to gain some insight into the geometry of electric fields .
The concept of electric field lines , and of electric field line diagrams , enables us to visualize the way in which the space is altered , allowing us to visualize the field .
The purpose of this section is to enable you to create sketches of this geometry , so we will list the specific steps and rules involved in creating an accurate and useful sketch of an electric field .
It is important to remember that electric fields are three-dimensional .
Although in this book we include some pseudo-threedimensional images , several of the diagrams that you ’ ll see ( both here , and in subsequent chapters ) will be two-dimensional projections , or cross-sections .
Always keep in mind that in fact , you ’ re looking at a three-dimensional phenomenon .
Our starting point is the physical fact that the electric field of the source charge causes a test charge in that field to experience a force .
Since the electric field is a vector , the arrows that we draw correspond at every point in space to both the magnitude and the direction of the field at that point .
As always , the length of the arrow that we draw corresponds to the magnitude of the field vector at that point .
For a point source charge , the length decreases by the square of the distance from the source charge .
In addition , the direction of the field vector is radially away from the source charge , because the direction of the electric field is defined by the direction of the force that a positive test charge would experience in that field .
( Again , keep in mind that the actual field is three-dimensional ; there are also field lines pointing out of and into the page . )
This diagram is correct , but it becomes less useful as the source charge distribution becomes more complicated .
For example , consider the vector field diagram of a dipole .
There is a more useful way to present the same information .
Rather than drawing a large number of increasingly smaller vector arrows , we instead connect all of them together , forming continuous lines and curves , as shown in .
Although it may not be obvious at first glance , these field diagrams convey the same information about the electric field as do the vector diagrams .
First , the direction of the field at every point is simply the direction of the field vector at that same point .
In other words , at any point in space , the field vector at each point is tangent to the field line at that same point .
The arrowhead placed on a field line indicates its direction .
As for the magnitude of the field , that is indicated by the field line density —that is , the number of field lines per unit area passing through a small cross-sectional area perpendicular to the electric field .
This field line density is drawn to be proportional to the magnitude of the field at that cross-section .
As a result , if the field lines are close together ( that is , the field line density is greater ) , this indicates that the magnitude of the field is large at that point .
If the field lines are far apart at the cross-section , this indicates the magnitude of the field is small .
shows the idea .
In , the same number of field lines passes through both surfaces ( S and but the surface S is larger than surface .
Therefore , the density of field lines ( number of lines per unit area ) is larger at the location of , indicating that the electric field is stronger at the location of than at S .
The rules for creating an electric field diagram are as follows .
Electric field lines either originate on positive charges or come in from infinity , and either terminate on negative charges or extend out to infinity .
The number of field lines originating or terminating at a charge is proportional to the magnitude of that charge .
A charge of 2 q will have twice as many lines as a charge of q .
At every point in space , the field vector at that point is tangent to the field line at that same point .
The field line density at any point in space is proportional to ( and therefore is representative of ) the magnitude of the field at that point in space .
Field lines can never cross .
Since a field line represents the direction of the field at a given point , if two field lines crossed at some point , that would imply that the electric field was pointing in two different directions at a single point .
This in turn would suggest that the ( net ) force on a test charge placed at that point would point in two different directions .
Since this is obviously impossible , it follows that field lines must never cross .
Always keep in mind that field lines serve only as a convenient way to visualize the electric field ; they are not physical entities .
Although the direction and relative intensity of the electric field can be deduced from a set of field lines , the lines can also be misleading .
For example , the field lines drawn to represent the electric field in a region must , by necessity , be discrete .
However , the actual electric field in that region exists at every point in space .
Field lines for three groups of discrete charges are shown in .
Since the charges in parts ( a ) and ( b ) have the same magnitude , the same number of field lines are shown starting from or terminating on each charge .
In ( c ) , however , we draw three times as many field lines leaving the charge as entering the .
The field lines that do not terminate at emanate outward from the charge configuration , to infinity .
The ability to construct an accurate electric field diagram is an important , useful skill ; it makes it much easier to estimate , predict , and therefore calculate the electric field of a source charge .
The best way to develop this skill is with software that allows you to place source charges and then will draw the net field upon request .
We strongly urge you to search the Internet for a program .
Once you ’ ve found one you like , run several simulations to get the essential ideas of field diagram construction .
Then practice drawing field diagrams , and checking your predictions with the computer-drawn diagrams .
One example of a is from the PhET “ Charges and Fields ” simulation .
Earlier we discussed , and calculated , the electric field of a dipole : two equal and opposite charges that are “ close ” to each other .
( In this context , “ close ” means that the distance d between the two charges is much , much less than the distance of the field point P , the location where you are calculating the field . )
Let ’ s now consider what happens to a dipole when it is placed in an external field .
We assume that the dipole is a permanent dipole ; it exists without the field , and does not break apart in the external field .
For now , we deal with only the simplest case : The external field is uniform in space .
Suppose we have the situation depicted in , where we denote the distance between the charges as the vector pointing from the negative charge to the positive charge .
The forces on the two charges are equal and opposite , so there is no net force on the dipole .
It is useful , therefore , to define this product as the so-called dipole moment of the dipole : We can therefore write Recall that a torque changes the angular velocity of an object , the dipole , in this case .
In this situation , the effect is to rotate the dipole ( that is , align the direction of so that it is parallel to the direction of the external field .
Neutral atoms are , by definition , electrically neutral ; they have equal amounts of positive and negative charge .
Furthermore , since they are spherically symmetrical , they do not have a “ built-in ” dipole moment the way most asymmetrical molecules do .
They obtain one , however , when placed in an external electric field , because the external field causes oppositely directed forces on the positive nucleus of the atom versus the negative electrons that surround the nucleus .
The result is a new charge distribution of the atom , and therefore , an induced dipole moment .
An important fact here is that , just as for a rotated polar molecule , the result is that the dipole moment ends up aligned parallel to the external electric field .
Generally , the magnitude of an induced dipole is much smaller than that of an inherent dipole .
For both kinds of dipoles , notice that once the alignment of the dipole ( rotated or induced ) is complete , the net effect is to decrease the total electric field in the regions inside the dipole charges .
By “ inside ” we mean in between the charges .
This effect is crucial for capacitors , as you will see in .
Recall that we found the electric field of a dipole in .
If we rewrite it in terms of the dipole moment we get : The form of this field is shown in .
Notice that along the plane perpendicular to the axis of the dipole and midway between the charges , the direction of the electric field is opposite that of the dipole and gets weaker the further from the axis one goes .
Similarly , on the axis of the dipole ( but outside it ) , the field points in the same direction as the dipole , again getting weaker the further one gets from the charges .
Flux is a general and broadly applicable concept in physics .
However , in this chapter , we concentrate on the flux of the electric field .
This allows us to introduce Gauss ’ s law , which is particularly useful for finding the electric fields of charge distributions exhibiting spatial symmetry .
The main topics discussed here are Electric flux .
We define electric flux for both open and closed surfaces .
Gauss ’ s law .
We derive Gauss ’ s law for an arbitrary charge distribution and examine the role of electric flux in Gauss ’ s law .
Calculating electric fields with Gauss ’ s law .
The main focus of this chapter is to explain how to use Gauss ’ s law to find the electric fields of spatially symmetrical charge distributions .
We discuss the importance of choosing a Gaussian surface and provide examples involving the applications of Gauss ’ s law .
Electric fields in conductors .
Gauss ’ s law provides useful insight into the absence of electric fields in conducting materials .
So far , we have found that the electrostatic field begins and ends at point charges and that the field of a point charge varies inversely with the square of the distance from that charge .
These characteristics of the electrostatic field lead to an important mathematical relationship known as Gauss ’ s law .
This law is named in honor of the extraordinary German mathematician and scientist Karl Friedrich Gauss .
Gauss ’ s law gives us an elegantly simple way of finding the electric field , and , as you will see , it can be much easier to use than the integration method described in the previous chapter .
However , there is a catch—Gauss ’ s law has a limitation in that , while always true , it can be readily applied only for charge distributions with certain symmetries .
The concept of flux describes how much of something goes through a given area .
More formally , it is the dot product of a vector field ( in this chapter , the electric field ) with an area .
You may conceptualize the flux of an electric field as a measure of the number of electric field lines passing through an area .
The larger the area , the more field lines go through it and , hence , the greater the flux ; similarly , the stronger the electric field is ( represented by a greater density of lines ) , the greater the flux .
On the other hand , if the area rotated so that the plane is aligned with the field lines , none will pass through and there will be no flux .
A macroscopic analogy that might help you imagine this is to put a hula hoop in a flowing river .
As you change the angle of the hoop relative to the direction of the current , more or less of the flow will go through the hoop .
Similarly , the amount of flow through the hoop depends on the strength of the current and the size of the hoop .
Again , flux is a general concept ; we can also use it to describe the amount of sunlight hitting a solar panel or the amount of energy a telescope receives from a distant star , for example .
To quantify this idea , ( a ) shows a planar surface of area that is perpendicular to the uniform electric field If N field lines pass through , then we know from the definition of electric field lines that or The quantity is the electric flux through .
We represent the electric flux through an open surface like by the symbol .
Electric flux is a scalar quantity and has an SI unit of newton-meters squared per coulomb .
Notice that may also be written as , demonstrating that electric flux is a measure of the number of field lines crossing a surface .
Now consider a planar surface that is not perpendicular to the field .
How would we represent the electric flux ?
( b ) shows a surface of area that is inclined at an angle to the xz -plane and whose projection in that plane is ( area ) .
The areas are related by Because the same number of field lines crosses both and , the fluxes through both surfaces must be the same .
The flux through is therefore Designating as a unit vector normal to ( see ( b ) ) , we obtain Check out this to observe what happens to the flux as the area changes in size and angle , or the electric field changes in strength .
For discussing the flux of a vector field , it is helpful to introduce an area vector This allows us to write the last equation in a more compact form .
What should the magnitude of the area vector be ?
What should the direction of the area vector be ?
What are the implications of how you answer the previous question ?
The area vector of a flat surface of area A has the following magnitude and direction : Magnitude is equal to area ( A ) Direction is along the normal to the surface ; that is , perpendicular to the surface .
Since the normal to a flat surface can point in either direction from the surface , the direction of the area vector of an open surface needs to be chosen , as shown in .
Since is a unit normal to a surface , it has two possible directions at every point on that surface ( ( a ) ) .
For an open surface , we can use either direction , as long as we are consistent over the entire surface .
Part ( c ) of the figure shows several cases .
However , if a surface is closed , then the surface encloses a volume .
In that case , the direction of the normal vector at any point on the surface points from the inside to the outside .
On a closed surface such as that of ( b ) , is chosen to be the outward normal at every point , to be consistent with the sign convention for electric charge .
The electric field between the plates is uniform and points from the positive plate toward the negative plate .
A calculation of the flux of this field through various faces of the box shows that the net flux through the box is zero .
Why does the flux cancel out here ?
The reason is that the sources of the electric field are outside the box .
Therefore , if any electric field line enters the volume of the box , it must also exit somewhere on the surface because there is no charge inside for the lines to land on .
Therefore , quite generally , electric flux through a closed surface is zero if there are no sources of electric field , whether positive or negative charges , inside the enclosed volume .
In general , when field lines leave ( or “ flow out of ” ) a closed surface , is positive ; when they enter ( or “ flow into ” ) the surface , is negative .
Any smooth , non-flat surface can be replaced by a collection of tiny , approximately flat surfaces , as shown in .
If we divide a surface S into small patches , then we notice that , as the patches become smaller , they can be approximated by flat surfaces .
This is similar to the way we treat the surface of Earth as locally flat , even though we know that globally , it is approximately spherical .
To keep track of the patches , we can number them from 1 through N .
Now , we define the area vector for each patch as the area of the patch pointed in the direction of the normal .
Let us denote the area vector for the i th patch by ( We have used the symbol to remind us that the area is of an arbitrarily small patch . )
With sufficiently small patches , we may approximate the electric field over any given patch as uniform .
This estimate of the flux gets better as we decrease the size of the patches .
However , when you use smaller patches , you need more of them to cover the same surface .
In the limit of infinitesimally small patches , they may be considered to have area dA and unit normal .
Since the elements are infinitesimal , they may be assumed to be planar , and may be taken as constant over any element .
Then the flux through an area dA is given by It is positive when the angle between and is less than and negative when the angle is greater than .
The net flux is the sum of the infinitesimal flux elements over the entire surface .
With infinitesimally small patches , you need infinitely many patches , and the limit of the sum becomes a surface integral .
With representing the integral over S , In practical terms , surface integrals are computed by taking the antiderivatives of both dimensions defining the area , with the edges of the surface in question being the bounds of the integral .
If you only integrate over a portion of a closed surface , that means you are treating a subset of it as an open surface .
A constant electric field of magnitude points in the direction of the positive z -axis .
What is the electric flux through a rectangle with sides a and b in the ( a ) xy -plane and in the ( b ) xz -plane ?
Apply the definition of flux : , where the definition of dot product is crucial .
In this case , Here , the direction of the area vector is either along the positive y -axis or toward the negative y -axis .
Therefore , the scalar product of the electric field with the area vector is zero , giving zero flux .
The relative directions of the electric field and area can cause the flux through the area to be zero .
A constant electric field of magnitude points in the direction of the positive z -axis .
What is the net electric flux through a cube ?
Apply the definition of flux : , noting that a closed surface eliminates the ambiguity in the direction of the area vector .
Through the top face of the cube , because the area vector here points downward .
Through the bottom face of the cube , Along the other four sides , the direction of the area vector is perpendicular to the direction of the electric field .
Therefore , the scalar product of the electric field with the area vector is zero , giving zero flux .
The net flux is .
The net flux of a uniform electric field through a closed surface is zero .
A uniform electric field of magnitude 10 N/C is directed parallel to the yz -plane at above the xy -plane , as shown in .
What is the electric flux through the plane surface of area located in the xz -plane ?
Assume that points in the positive y -direction .
, where the direction and magnitude of the electric field are constant .
Apply The angle between the uniform electric field and the unit normal to the planar surface is .
Since both the direction and magnitude are constant , E comes outside the integral .
All that is left is a surface integral over dA , which is A .
Check Your Understanding What angle should there be between the electric field and the surface shown in in the previous example so that no electric flux passes through the surface ?
What is the total flux of the electric field through the rectangular surface shown in ?
We assume that the unit normal to the given surface points in the positive Apply z -direction , so Since the electric field is not uniform over the surface , it is necessary to divide the surface into infinitesimal strips along which is essentially constant .
As shown in , these strips are parallel to the x -axis , and each strip has an area From the open surface integral , we find that the net flux through the rectangular surface is For a non-constant electric field , the integral method is required .
Check Your Understanding If the electric field in is what is the flux through the rectangular area ?
We can now determine the electric flux through an arbitrary closed surface due to an arbitrary charge distribution .
We found that if a closed surface does not have any charge inside where an electric field line can terminate , then any electric field line entering the surface at one point must necessarily exit at some other point of the surface .
Therefore , if a closed surface does not have any charges inside the enclosed volume , then the electric flux through the surface is zero .
Now , what happens to the electric flux if there are some charges inside the enclosed volume ?
Gauss ’ s law gives a quantitative answer to this question .
To get a feel for what to expect , let ’ s calculate the electric flux through a spherical surface around a positive point charge q , since we already know the electric field in such a situation .
Then we apply an infinitesimal area dA , to this system and substitute known values .
This can be directly attributed to the fact that the electric field of a point charge decreases as with distance , which just cancels the rate of increase of the surface area .
An alternative way to see why the flux through a closed spherical surface is independent of the radius of the surface is to look at the electric field lines .
Note that every field line from q that pierces the surface at radius also pierces the surface at .
Therefore , the net number of electric field lines passing through the two surfaces from the inside to outside direction is equal .
This net number of electric field lines , which is obtained by subtracting the number of lines in the direction from outside to inside from the number of lines in the direction from inside to outside gives a visual measure of the electric flux through the surfaces .
You can see that if no charges are included within a closed surface , then the electric flux through it must be zero .
A typical field line enters the surface at and leaves at Every line that enters the surface must also leave that surface .
Hence the net “ flow ” of the field lines into or out of the surface is zero ( ( a ) ) .
The same thing happens if charges of equal and opposite sign are included inside the closed surface , so that the total charge included is zero ( part ( b ) ) .
A surface that includes the same amount of charge has the same number of field lines crossing it , regardless of the shape or size of the surface , as long as the surface encloses the same amount of charge ( part ( c ) ) .
Gauss ’ s law generalizes this result to the case of any number of charges and any location of the charges in the space inside the closed surface .
If the enclosed charge is negative ( see ( b ) ) , then the flux through either is negative .
The Gaussian surface does not need to correspond to a real , physical object ; indeed , it rarely will .
It is a mathematical construct that may be of any shape , provided that it is closed .
However , since our goal is to integrate the flux over it , we tend to choose shapes that are highly symmetrical .
If the charges are discrete point charges , then we just add them .
If the charge is described by a continuous distribution , then we need to integrate appropriately to find the total charge that resides inside the enclosed volume .
For example , the flux through the Gaussian surface S of is Note that is simply the sum of the point charges .
If the charge distribution were continuous , we would need to integrate appropriately to compute the total charge within the Gaussian surface .
Recall that the principle of superposition holds for the electric field .
Therefore , the total electric field at any point , including those on the chosen Gaussian surface , is the sum of all the electric fields present at this point .
This allows us to write Gauss ’ s law in terms of the total electric field .
The field is the total electric field at every point on the Gaussian surface .
This total field includes contributions from charges both inside and outside the Gaussian surface .
However , is just the charge inside the Gaussian surface .
Finally , the Gaussian surface is any closed surface in space .
That surface can coincide with the actual surface of a conductor , or it can be an imaginary geometric surface .
The only requirement imposed on a Gaussian surface is that it be closed .
Calculate the electric flux through each Gaussian surface shown in .
From Gauss ’ s law , the flux through each surface is given by where is the charge enclosed by that surface .
For the surfaces and charges shown , we find In the special case of a closed surface , the flux calculations become a sum of charges .
In the next section , this will allow us to work with more complex systems .
Check Your Understanding Calculate the electric flux through the closed cubical surface for each charge distribution shown in .
Use this to adjust the magnitude of the charge and the radius of the Gaussian surface around it .
See how this affects the total flux and the magnitude of the electric field at the Gaussian surface .
Gauss ’ s law is very helpful in determining expressions for the electric field , even though the law is not directly about the electric field ; it is about the electric flux .
It turns out that in situations that have certain symmetries ( spherical , cylindrical , or planar ) in the charge distribution , we can deduce the electric field based on knowledge of the electric flux .
In these systems , we can find a Gaussian surface S over which the electric field has constant magnitude .
Furthermore , if is parallel to everywhere on the surface , then ( If and are antiparallel everywhere on the surface , then ) Gauss ’ s law then simplifies to where A is the area of the surface .
Note that these symmetries lead to the transformation of the flux integral into a product of the magnitude of the electric field and an appropriate area .
Therefore , Gauss ’ s law can be used to determine Here is a summary of the steps we will follow : Identify the spatial symmetry of the charge distribution .
This is an important first step that allows us to choose the appropriate Gaussian surface .
As examples , an isolated point charge has spherical symmetry , and an infinite line of charge has cylindrical symmetry .
Choose a Gaussian surface with the same symmetry as the charge distribution and identify its consequences .
With this choice , is easily determined over the Gaussian surface .
Evaluate the integral over the Gaussian surface , that is , calculate the flux through the surface .
The symmetry of the Gaussian surface allows us to factor outside the integral .
Determine the amount of charge enclosed by the Gaussian surface .
This is an evaluation of the right-hand side of the equation representing Gauss ’ s law .
It is often necessary to perform an integration to obtain the net enclosed charge .
Evaluate the electric field of the charge distribution .
The field may now be found using the results of steps 3 and 4 .
Basically , there are only three types of symmetry that allow Gauss ’ s law to be used to deduce the electric field .
A charge distribution has spherical symmetry if the density of charge depends only on the distance from a point in space and not on the direction .
In other words , if you rotate the system , it doesn ’ t look different .
For instance , if a sphere of radius R is uniformly charged with charge density then the distribution has spherical symmetry ( ( a ) ) .
Thus , it is not the shape of the object but rather the shape of the charge distribution that determines whether or not a system has spherical symmetry .
( c ) shows a sphere with four different shells , each with its own uniform charge density .
Although this is a situation where charge density in the full sphere is not uniform , the charge density function depends only on the distance from the center and not on the direction .
Therefore , this charge distribution does have spherical symmetry .
One good way to determine whether or not your problem has spherical symmetry is to look at the charge density function in spherical coordinates , .
If the charge density is only a function of r , that is , then you have spherical symmetry .
If the density depends on or , you could change it by rotation ; hence , you would not have spherical symmetry .
In all spherically symmetrical cases , the electric field at any point must be radially directed , because the charge and , hence , the field must be invariant under rotation .
The radial component of the electric field can be positive or negative .
When the electric field at P points away from the origin , and when the electric field at P points toward the origin .
We can now use this form of the electric field to obtain the flux of the electric field through the Gaussian surface .
For spherical symmetry , the Gaussian surface is a closed spherical surface that has the same center as the center of the charge distribution .
Thus , the direction of the area vector of an area element on the Gaussian surface at any point is parallel to the direction of the electric field at that point , since they are both radially directed outward .
The magnitude of the electric field must be the same everywhere on a spherical Gaussian surface concentric with the distribution .
For a spherical surface of radius r , According to Gauss ’ s law , the flux through a closed surface is equal to the total charge enclosed within the closed surface divided by the permittivity of vacuum .
Let be the total charge enclosed inside the distance r from the origin , which is the space inside the Gaussian spherical surface of radius r .
The direction of the field at point P depends on whether the charge in the sphere is positive or negative .
For a net positive charge enclosed within the Gaussian surface , the direction is from O to P , and for a net negative charge , the direction is from P to O .
This is all we need for a point charge , and you will notice that the result above is identical to that for a point charge .
However , Gauss ’ s law becomes truly useful in cases where the charge occupies a finite volume .
The more interesting case is when a spherical charge distribution occupies a volume , and asking what the electric field inside the charge distribution is thus becomes relevant .
In this case , the charge enclosed depends on the distance r of the field point relative to the radius of the charge distribution R , such as that shown in .
If point P is located outside the charge distribution—that is , if —then the Gaussian surface containing P encloses all charges in the sphere .
In this case , equals the total charge in the sphere .
On the other hand , if point P is within the spherical charge distribution , that is , if then the Gaussian surface encloses a smaller sphere than the sphere of charge distribution .
In this case , is less than the total charge present in the sphere .
This is remarkable since the charges are not located at the center only .
We now work out specific examples of spherical charge distributions , starting with the case of a uniformly charged sphere .
A sphere of radius R , such as that shown in , has a uniform volume charge density .
Find the electric field at a point outside the sphere and at a point inside the sphere .
Apply the Gauss ’ s law problem-solving strategy , where we have already worked out the flux calculation .
Specifically , the charge enclosed grows , whereas the field from each infinitesimal element of charge drops off with the net result that the electric field within the distribution increases in strength linearly with the radius .
The magnitude of the electric field outside the sphere decreases as you go away from the charges , because the included charge remains the same but the distance increases .
displays the variation of the magnitude of the electric field with distance from the center of a uniformly charged sphere .
The direction of the electric field at any point P is radially outward from the origin if is positive , and inward ( i.e. , toward the center ) if is negative .
The electric field at some representative space points are displayed in whose radial coordinates r are , , and .
Notice that has the same form as the equation of the electric field of an isolated point charge .
In determining the electric field of a uniform spherical charge distribution , we can therefore assume that all of the charge inside the appropriate spherical Gaussian surface is located at the center of the distribution .
A non-conducting sphere of radius R has a non-uniform charge density that varies with the distance from its center as given by where a is a constant .
We require so that the charge density is not undefined at .
Find the electric field at a point outside the sphere and at a point inside the sphere .
Apply the Gauss ’ s law strategy given above , where we work out the enclosed charge integrals separately for cases inside and outside the sphere .
Since the given charge density function has only a radial dependence and no dependence on direction , we have a spherically symmetrical situation .
Therefore , the magnitude of the electric field at any point is given above and the direction is radial .
We just need to find the enclosed charge which depends on the location of the field point .
A note about symbols : We use for locating charges in the charge distribution and r for locating the field point ( s ) at the Gaussian surface ( s ) .
The letter R is used for the radius of the charge distribution .
As charge density is not constant here , we need to integrate the charge density function over the volume enclosed by the Gaussian surface .
Therefore , we set up the problem for charges in one spherical shell , say between and as shown in .
The volume of charges in the shell of infinitesimal width is equal to the product of the area of surface and the thickness .
Multiplying the volume with the density at this location , which is , gives the charge in the shell : ( a ) Field at a point outside the charge distribution .
In this case , the Gaussian surface , which contains the field point P , has a radius r that is greater than the radius R of the charge distribution , .
Therefore , all charges of the charge distribution are enclosed within the Gaussian surface .
( b ) Field at a point inside the charge distribution .
The Gaussian surface is now buried inside the charge distribution , with .
Check Your Understanding Check that the electric fields for the sphere reduce to the correct values for a point charge .
A charge distribution has cylindrical symmetry if the charge density depends only upon the distance r from the axis of a cylinder and must not vary along the axis or with direction about the axis .
In other words , if your system varies if you rotate it around the axis , or shift it along the axis , you do not have cylindrical symmetry .
shows four situations in which charges are distributed in a cylinder .
Neither does a cylinder in which charge density varies with the direction , such as a charge density for and for .
A system with concentric cylindrical shells , each with uniform charge densities , albeit different in different shells , as in ( d ) , does have cylindrical symmetry if they are infinitely long .
The infinite length requirement is due to the charge density changing along the axis of a finite cylinder .
In real systems , we don ’ t have infinite cylinders ; however , if the cylindrical object is considerably longer than the radius from it that we are interested in , then the approximation of an infinite cylinder becomes useful .
In all cylindrically symmetrical cases , the electric field Cylindrical symmetry : where r is the distance from the axis and is a unit vector directed perpendicularly away from the axis .
at any point P must also display cylindrical symmetry .
, To make use of the direction and functional dependence of the electric field , we choose a closed Gaussian surface in the shape of a cylinder with the same axis as the axis of the charge distribution .
The flux through this surface of radius s and height L is easy to compute if we divide our task into two parts : ( a ) a flux through the flat ends and ( b ) a flux through the curved surface .
The electric field is perpendicular to the cylindrical side and parallel to the planar end caps of the surface .
The flux through the cylindrical part is whereas the flux through the end caps is zero because there .
Thus , the flux is According to Gauss ’ s law , the flux must equal the amount of charge within the volume enclosed by this surface , divided by the permittivity of free space .
When you do the calculation for a cylinder of length L , you find that of Gauss ’ s law is directly proportional to L .
Let R be the radius of the cylinder within which charges are distributed in a cylindrically symmetrical way .
Let the field point P be at a distance s from the axis .
( The side of the Gaussian surface includes the field point P . )
When ( that is , when P is outside the charge distribution ) , the Gaussian surface includes all the charge in the cylinder of radius R and length L .
Apply the Gauss ’ s law strategy given earlier , where we treat the cases inside and outside the shell separately .
Electric field at a point outside the shell .
For a point outside the cylindrical shell , the Gaussian surface is the surface of a cylinder of radius and length L , as shown in .
The charge enclosed by the Gaussian cylinder is equal to the charge on the cylindrical shell of length L .
Therefore , is given by Hence , the electric field at a point P outside the shell at a distance r away from the axis is where is a unit vector , perpendicular to the axis and pointing away from it , as shown in the figure .
The electric field at P points in the direction of given in if and in the opposite direction to if .
Electric field at a point inside the shell .
For a point inside the cylindrical shell , the Gaussian surface is a cylinder whose radius r is less than R .
This means no charges are included inside the Gaussian surface : This gives the following equation for the magnitude of the electric field at a point whose r is less than R of the shell of charges .
This gives us Notice that the result inside the shell is exactly what we should expect : No enclosed charge means zero electric field .
A planar symmetry of charge density is obtained when charges are uniformly spread over a large flat surface .
In planar symmetry , all points in a plane parallel to the plane of charge are identical with respect to the charges .
We take the plane of the charge distribution to be the xy -plane and we find the electric field at a space point P with coordinates ( x , y , z ) .
Since the charge density is the same at all ( x , y ) -coordinates in the plane , by symmetry , the electric field at P can not depend on the x or y -coordinates of point P , as shown in .
Therefore , the electric field at P can only depend on the distance from the plane and has a direction either toward the plane or away from the plane .
That is , the electric field at P has only a nonzero z -component .
Uniform charges in xy plane : where z is the distance from the plane and is the unit vector normal to the plane .
Note that in this system , although of course they point in opposite directions .
In the present case , a convenient Gaussian surface is a box , since the expected electric field points in one direction only .
To keep the Gaussian box symmetrical about the plane of charges , we take it to straddle the plane of the charges , such that one face containing the field point P is taken parallel to the plane of the charges .
In , sides I and II of the Gaussian surface ( the box ) that are parallel to the infinite plane have been shaded .
They are the only surfaces that give rise to nonzero flux because the electric field and the area vectors of the other faces are perpendicular to each other .
Let A be the area of the shaded surface on each side of the plane and be the magnitude of the electric field at point P .
Since sides I and II are at the same distance from the plane , the electric field has the same magnitude at points in these planes , although the directions of the electric field at these points in the two planes are opposite to each other .
Magnitude at I or II : If the charge on the plane is positive , then the direction of the electric field and the area vectors are as shown in .
Therefore , we find for the flux of electric field through the box where the zeros are for the flux through the other sides of the box .
Note that if the charge on the plane is negative , the directions of electric field and area vectors for planes I and II are opposite to each other , and we get a negative sign for the flux .
According to Gauss ’ s law , the flux must equal .
From , we see that the charges inside the volume enclosed by the Gaussian box reside on an area A of the xy -plane .
Note that above the plane , , while below the plane , .
You may be surprised to note that the electric field does not actually depend on the distance from the plane ; this is an effect of the assumption that the plane is infinite .
In practical terms , the result given above is still a useful approximation for finite planes near the center .
So far , we have generally been working with charges occupying a volume within an insulator .
We now study what happens when free charges are placed on a conductor .
Generally , in the presence of a ( generally external ) electric field , the free charge in a conductor redistributes and very quickly reaches electrostatic equilibrium .
The resulting charge distribution and its electric field have many interesting properties , which we can investigate with the help of Gauss ’ s law and the concept of electric potential .
If an electric field is present inside a conductor , it exerts forces on the free electrons ( also called conduction electrons ) , which are electrons in the material that are not bound to an atom .
These free electrons then accelerate .
However , moving charges by definition means nonstatic conditions , contrary to our assumption .
Therefore , when electrostatic equilibrium is reached , the charge is distributed in such a way that the electric field inside the conductor vanishes .
If you place a piece of a metal near a positive charge , the free electrons in the metal are attracted to the external positive charge and migrate freely toward that region .
The region the electrons move to then has an excess of electrons over the protons in the atoms and the region from where the electrons have migrated has more protons than electrons .
Consequently , the metal develops a negative region near the charge and a positive region at the far end .
As we saw in the preceding chapter , this separation of equal magnitude and opposite type of electric charge is called polarization .
If you remove the external charge , the electrons migrate back and neutralize the positive region .
The polarization of the metal happens only in the presence of external charges .
You can think of this in terms of electric fields .
The external charge creates an external electric field .
When the metal is placed in the region of this electric field , the electrons and protons of the metal experience electric forces due to this external electric field , but only the conduction electrons are free to move in the metal over macroscopic distances .
The movement of the conduction electrons leads to the polarization , which creates an induced electric field in addition to the external electric field .
The net electric field is a vector sum of the fields of and the surface charge densities and This means that the net field inside the conductor is different from the field outside the conductor .
That is , and hence An interesting property of a conductor in static equilibrium is that extra charges on the conductor end up on the outer surface of the conductor , regardless of where they originate .
illustrates a system in which we bring an external positive charge inside the cavity of a metal and then touch it to the inside surface .
Initially , the inside surface of the cavity is negatively charged and the outside surface of the conductor is positively charged .
When we touch the inside surface of the cavity , the induced charge is neutralized , leaving the outside surface and the whole metal charged with a net positive charge .
To see why this happens , note that the Gaussian surface in ( the dashed line ) follows the contour of the actual surface of the conductor and is located an infinitesimal distance within it .
Since everywhere inside a conductor , Thus , from Gauss ’ s law , there is no net charge inside the Gaussian surface .
But the Gaussian surface lies just below the actual surface of the conductor ; consequently , there is no net charge inside the conductor .
Any excess charge must lie on its surface .
This particular property of conductors is the basis for an extremely accurate method developed by Plimpton and Lawton in 1936 to verify Gauss ’ s law and , correspondingly , Coulomb ’ s law .
A sketch of their apparatus is shown in .
Two spherical shells are connected to one another through an electrometer E , a device that can detect a very slight amount of charge flowing from one shell to the other .
When switch S is thrown to the left , charge is placed on the outer shell by the battery B .
Will charge flow through the electrometer to the inner shell ?
Doing so would mean a violation of Gauss ’ s law .
Plimpton and Lawton did not detect any flow and , knowing the sensitivity of their electrometer , concluded that if the radial dependence in Coulomb ’ s law were , would be less than .
More recent measurements place at less than , a number so small that the validity of Coulomb ’ s law seems indisputable .
S. Plimpton and W. Lawton .
“ A Very Accurate Test of Coulomb ’ s Law of Force between Charges. ” Physical Review 50 , No .
11 : 1066 , doi:10.1103/PhysRev.50.1066 2 .
E. Williams , J. Faller , and H. Hill .
“ New Experimental Test of Coulomb ’ s Law : A Laboratory Upper Limit on the Photon Rest Mass. ” Physical Review Letters 26 , No .
12 : 721 , doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.26.721 If the electric field had a component parallel to the surface of a conductor , free charges on the surface would move , a situation contrary to the assumption of electrostatic equilibrium .
Therefore , the electric field is always perpendicular to the surface of a conductor .
The cylinder has one end face inside and one end face outside the surface .
The height and cross-sectional area of the cylinder are and , respectively .
The cylinder ’ s sides are perpendicular to the surface of the conductor , and its end faces are parallel to the surface .
Because the cylinder is infinitesimally small , the charge density is essentially constant over the surface enclosed , so the total charge inside the Gaussian cylinder is .
Now E is perpendicular to the surface of the conductor outside the conductor and vanishes within it , because otherwise , the charges would accelerate , and we would not be in equilibrium .
Electric flux therefore crosses only the outer end face of the Gaussian surface and may be written as , since the cylinder is assumed to be small enough that E is approximately constant over that area .
From Gauss ’ law , Thus , The infinite conducting plate in has a uniform surface charge density .
Use Gauss ’ law to find the electric field outside the plate .
Compare this result with that previously calculated directly .
For this case , we use a cylindrical Gaussian surface , a side view of which is shown .
The flux calculation is similar to that for an infinite sheet of charge from the previous chapter with one major exception : The left face of the Gaussian surface is inside the conductor where so the total flux through the Gaussian surface is EA rather than 2 EA .
Then from Gauss ’ law , and the electric field outside the plate is This result is in agreement with the result from the previous section , and consistent with the rule stated above .
Two large conducting plates carry equal and opposite charges , with a surface charge density of magnitude as shown in .
The separation between the plates is .
What is the electric field between the plates ?
Note that the electric field at the surface of one plate only depends on the charge on that plate .
Thus , apply with the given values .
The electric field is directed from the positive to the negative plate , as shown in the figure , and its magnitude is given by This formula is applicable to more than just a plate .
Furthermore , two-plate systems will be important later .
The isolated conducting sphere has a radius R and an excess charge q .
What is the electric field both inside and outside the sphere ?
The sphere is isolated , so its surface change distribution and the electric field of that distribution are spherically symmetrical .
We can therefore represent the field as .
To calculate E ( r ) , we apply Gauss ’ s law over a closed spherical surface S of radius r that is concentric with the conducting sphere .
Since r is constant and on the sphere , For , S is within the conductor , so and Gauss ’ s law gives as expected inside a conductor .
The difference between the charged metal and a point charge occurs only at the space points inside the conductor .
For a point charge placed at the center of the sphere , the electric field is not zero at points of space occupied by the sphere , but a conductor with the same amount of charge has a zero electric field at those points .
However , there is no distinction at the outside points in space where , and we can replace the isolated charged spherical conductor by a point charge at its center with impunity .
Check Your Understanding How will the system above change if there are charged objects external to the sphere ?
For a conductor with a cavity , if we put a charge inside the cavity , then the charge separation takes place in the conductor , with amount of charge on the inside surface and a amount of charge at the outside surface ( ( a ) ) .
For the same conductor with a charge outside it , there is no excess charge on the inside surface ; both the positive and negative induced charges reside on the outside surface ( ( b ) ) .
The charges on the surfaces may not be uniformly spread out ; their spread depends upon the geometry .
Two terms commonly used to describe electricity are its energy and voltage , which we show in this chapter is directly related to the potential energy in a system .
We know , for example , that great amounts of electrical energy can be stored in batteries , are transmitted cross-country via currents through power lines , and may jump from clouds to explode the sap of trees .
In a similar manner , at the molecular level , ions cross cell membranes and transfer information .
We also know about voltages associated with electricity .
Batteries are typically a few volts , the outlets in your home frequently produce 120 volts , and power lines can be as high as hundreds of thousands of volts .
But energy and voltage are not the same thing .
A motorcycle battery , for example , is small and would not be very successful in replacing a much larger car battery , yet each has the same voltage .
In this chapter , we examine the relationship between voltage and electrical energy , and begin to explore some of the many applications of electricity .
When a free positive charge q is accelerated by an electric field , it is given kinetic energy .
The process is analogous to an object being accelerated by a gravitational field , as if the charge were going down an electrical hill where its electric potential energy is converted into kinetic energy , although of course the sources of the forces are very different .
Let us explore the work done on a charge q by the electric field in this process , so that we may develop a definition of electric potential energy .
The electrostatic or Coulomb force is conservative , which means that the work done on q is independent of the path taken , as we will demonstrate later .
This is exactly analogous to the gravitational force .
When a force is conservative , it is possible to define a potential energy associated with the force .
It is usually easier to work with the potential energy ( because it depends only on position ) than to calculate the work directly .
To show this explicitly , consider an electric charge fixed at the origin and move another charge toward q in such a manner that , at each instant , the applied force exactly balances the electric force on Q .
The work done by the applied force on the charge Q changes the potential energy of Q .
We call this potential energy the electrical potential energy of Q .
The work done by the applied force when the particle moves from to may be calculated by Since the applied force balances the electric force directions .
Therefore , the applied force is on Q , the two forces have equal magnitude and opposite where we have defined positive to be pointing away from the origin and r is the distance from the origin .
The directions of both the displacement and the applied force in the system in are parallel , and thus the work done on the system is positive .
We use the letter U to denote electric potential energy , which has units of joules ( J ) .
When a conservative force does negative work , the system gains potential energy .
When a conservative force does positive work , the system loses potential energy , In the system in , the Coulomb force acts in the opposite direction to the displacement ; therefore , the work is negative .
However , we have increased the potential energy in the two-charge system .
A charge Q is initially at rest a distance of 10 cm from a charge q fixed at the origin .
Naturally , the Coulomb force accelerates Q away from q , eventually reaching 15 cm .
What is the work done by the electric field between and ?
How much kinetic energy does Q have at ?
Calculate the work with the usual definition .
Since Q started from rest , this is the same as the kinetic energy .
Check Your Understanding If Q has a mass of what is the speed of Q at In this example , the work W done to accelerate a positive charge from rest is positive and results from a loss in U , or a negative .
A value for U can be found at any point by taking one point as a reference and calculating the work needed to move a charge to the other point .
Work W done to accelerate a positive charge from rest is positive and results from a loss in U , or a negative .
Mathematically , Gravitational potential energy and electric potential energy are quite analogous .
Potential energy accounts for work done by a conservative force and gives added insight regarding energy and energy transformation without the necessity of dealing with the force directly .
It is much more common , for example , to use the concept of electric potential energy than to deal with the Coulomb force directly in real-world applications .
In polar coordinates with q at the origin and Q located at r , the displacement element vector is and thus the work becomes Notice that this result only depends on the endpoints and is otherwise independent of the path taken .
To explore this further , compare path to with path in .
The segments and are arcs of circles centered at q .
Since the force on Q points either toward or away from q , no work is done by a force balancing the electric force , because it is perpendicular to the displacement along these arcs .
Therefore , the only work done is along segment which is identical to One implication of this work calculation is that if we were to go around the path the net work would be zero .
Recall that this is how we determine whether a force is conservative or not .
Hence , because the electric force is related to the electric field by , the electric field is itself conservative .
That is , Note that Q is a constant .
Another implication is that we may define an electric potential energy .
Recall that the work done by a conservative force is also expressed as the difference in the potential energy corresponding to that force .
( Recall the discussion of reference potential energy in . )
A charge Q is initially at rest a distance of 10 cm from a charge q fixed at the origin .
Naturally , the Coulomb force accelerates Q away from q , eventually reaching 15 cm .
What is the change in the potential energy of the two-charge system from to Calculate the potential energy with the definition given above : rest , this is the same as the kinetic energy .
We have Since Q started from The change in the potential energy is negative , as expected , and equal in magnitude to the change in kinetic energy in this system .
Recall from that the change in kinetic energy was positive .
Check Your Understanding What is the potential energy of Q relative to the zero reference at infinity at in the above example ?
Due to Coulomb ’ s law , the forces due to multiple charges on a test charge Q superimpose ; they may be calculated individually and then added .
This implies that the work integrals and hence the resulting potential energies exhibit the same behavior .
To demonstrate this , we consider an example of assembling a system of four charges .
agent must do in assembling four charges Find the amount of work an external and at the vertices of a square of side 1.0 cm , starting each charge from infinity .
We bring in the charges one at a time , giving them starting locations at infinity and calculating the work to bring them in from infinity to their final location .
We do this in order of increasing charge .
First bring the charge to the origin .
Since there are no other charges at a finite distance from this charge yet , no work is done in bringing it from infinity , Step 2 .
While keeping the charge fixed at the origin , bring the charge to .
Now , the applied force must do work against the force exerted by the charge fixed at the origin .
The work done equals the change in the potential energy of the charge : Step 3 .
While keeping the charges of and fixed in their places , bring in the charge to .
The work done in this step is Step 4 .
Finally , while keeping the first .
No more complicated interactions need to be considered ; the work on the third charge only depends on its interaction with the first and second charges , the interaction between the first and second charge does not affect the third .
Check Your Understanding Is the electrical potential energy of two point charges positive or negative if the charges are of the same sign ?
How does this relate to the work necessary to bring the charges into proximity from infinity ?
Note that the electrical potential energy is positive if the two charges are of the same type , either positive or negative , and negative if the two charges are of opposite types .
This makes sense if you think of the change in the potential energy as you bring the two charges closer or move them farther apart .
Depending on the relative types of charges , you may have to work on the system or the system would do work on you , that is , your work is either positive or negative .
If you have to do positive work on the system ( actually push the charges closer ) , then the energy of the system should increase .
If you bring two positive charges or two negative charges closer , you have to do positive work on the system , which raises their potential energy .
Since potential energy is proportional to 1/ r , the potential energy goes up when r goes down between two positive or two negative charges .
On the other hand , if you bring a positive and a negative charge nearer , you have to do negative work on the system ( the charges are pulling you ) , which means that you take energy away from the system .
This reduces the potential energy .
Since potential energy is negative in the case of a positive and a negative charge pair , the increase in 1/ r makes the potential energy more negative , which is the same as a reduction in potential energy .
The result from may be extended to systems with any arbitrary number of charges .
In this case , it is most convenient to write the formula as The factor of 1/2 accounts for adding each pair of charges twice .
Recall that earlier we defined electric field to be a quantity independent of the test charge in a given system , which would nonetheless allow us to calculate the force that would result on an arbitrary test charge .
( The default assumption in the absence of other information is that the test charge is positive . )
We briefly defined a field for gravity , but gravity is always attractive , whereas the electric force can be either attractive or repulsive .
Therefore , although potential energy is perfectly adequate in a gravitational system , it is convenient to define a quantity that allows us to calculate the work on a charge independent of the magnitude of the charge .
Calculating the work directly may be difficult , since and the direction and magnitude of can be complex for multiple charges , for odd-shaped objects , and along arbitrary paths .
But we do know that because , the work , and hence is proportional to the test charge q .
Thus , V does not depend on q .
Units of potential difference are joules per coulomb , given the name volt ( V ) after Alessandro Volta .
The familiar term voltage is the common name for electric potential difference .
Keep in mind that whenever a voltage is quoted , it is understood to be the potential difference between two points .
For example , every battery has two terminals , and its voltage is the potential difference between them .
More fundamentally , the point you choose to be zero volts is arbitrary .
This is analogous to the fact that gravitational potential energy has an arbitrary zero , such as sea level or perhaps a lecture hall floor .
It is worthwhile to emphasize the distinction between potential difference and electrical potential energy .
The relationship between potential difference ( or voltage ) and electrical potential energy is given by Voltage is not the same as energy .
Voltage is the energy per unit charge .
You have a 12.0-V motorcycle battery that can move 5000 C of charge , and a 12.0-V car battery that can move 60,000 C of charge .
How much energy does each deliver ?
( Assume that the numerical value of each charge is accurate to three significant figures . )
To say we have a 12.0-V battery means that its terminals have a 12.0-V potential difference .
When such a battery moves charge , it puts the charge through a potential difference of 12.0 V , and the charge is given a change in potential energy equal to To find the energy output , we multiply the charge moved by the potential difference .
For the motorcycle battery , and .
The total energy delivered by the motorcycle battery is Similarly , for the car battery , and Voltage and energy are related , but they are not the same thing .
The voltages of the batteries are identical , but the energy supplied by each is quite different .
A car battery has a much larger engine to start than a motorcycle .
Note also that as a battery is discharged , some of its energy is used internally and its terminal voltage drops , such as when headlights dim because of a depleted car battery .
The energy supplied by the battery is still calculated as in this example , but not all of the energy is available for external use .
Check Your Understanding How much energy does a 1.5-V AAA battery have that can move 100 C ?
Note that the energies calculated in the previous example are absolute values .
The change in potential energy for the battery is negative , since it loses energy .
These batteries , like many electrical systems , actually move negative charge—electrons in particular .
The batteries repel electrons from their negative terminals ( A ) through whatever circuitry is involved and attract them to their positive terminals ( B ) , as shown in .
The change in potential is and the charge q is negative , so that is negative , meaning the potential energy of the battery has decreased when q has moved from A to B .
When a 12.0-V car battery powers a single 30.0-W headlight , how many electrons pass through it each second ?
To find the number of electrons , we must first find the charge that moves in 1.00 s. The charge moved is related to voltage and energy through the equations A 30.0-W lamp uses 30.0 joules per second .
That is , This is a very large number .
It is no wonder that we do not ordinarily observe individual electrons with so many being present in ordinary systems .
In fact , electricity had been in use for many decades before it was determined that the moving charges in many circumstances were negative .
Positive charge moving in the opposite direction of negative charge often produces identical effects ; this makes it difficult to determine which is moving or whether both are moving .
Check Your Understanding How many electrons would go through a 24.0-W lamp ?
The energy per electron is very small in macroscopic situations like that in the previous example—a tiny fraction of a joule .
But on a submicroscopic scale , such energy per particle ( electron , proton , or ion ) can be of great importance .
For example , even a tiny fraction of a joule can be great enough for these particles to destroy organic molecules and harm living tissue .
The particle may do its damage by direct collision , or it may create harmful X-rays , which can also inflict damage .
It is useful to have an energy unit related to submicroscopic effects .
shows a situation related to the definition of such an energy unit .
An electron is accelerated between two charged metal plates , as it might be in an old-model television tube or oscilloscope .
The electron gains kinetic energy that is later converted into another form—light in the television tube , for example .
( Note that in terms of energy , “ downhill ” for the electron is “ uphill ” for a positive charge . )
Since energy is related to voltage by , we can think of the joule as a coulomb-volt .
It follows that an electron accelerated through 50 V gains 50 eV .
A potential difference of 100,000 V ( 100 kV ) gives an electron an energy of 100,000 eV ( 100 keV ) , and so on .
Similarly , an ion with a double positive charge accelerated through 100 V gains 200 eV of energy .
These simple relationships between accelerating voltage and particle charges make the electron-volt a simple and convenient energy unit in such circumstances .
The electron-volt is commonly employed in submicroscopic processes—chemical valence energies and molecular and nuclear binding energies are among the quantities often expressed in electron-volts .
For example , about 5 eV of energy is required to break up certain organic molecules .
The total energy of a system is conserved if there is no net addition ( or subtraction ) due to work or heat transfer .
For conservative forces , such as the electrostatic force , conservation of energy states that mechanical energy is a constant .
Mechanical energy is the sum of the kinetic energy and potential energy of a system ; that is , A loss of U for a charged particle becomes an increase in its K .
Conservation of energy is stated in equation form as or where i and f stand for initial and final conditions .
As we have found many times before , considering energy can give us insights and facilitate problem solving .
Calculate the final speed of a free electron accelerated from rest through a potential difference of 100 V. ( Assume that this numerical value is accurate to three significant figures . )
We have a system with only conservative forces .
Assuming the electron is accelerated in a vacuum , and neglecting the gravitational force ( we will check on this assumption later ) , all of the electrical potential energy is converted into kinetic energy .
From the discussion of electric charge and electric field , we know that electrostatic forces on small particles are generally very large compared with the gravitational force .
The large final speed confirms that the gravitational force is indeed negligible here .
The large speed also indicates how easy it is to accelerate electrons with small voltages because of their very small mass .
Voltages much higher than the 100 V in this problem are typically used in electron guns .
These higher voltages produce electron speeds so great that effects from special relativity must be taken into account and hence are reserved for a later chapter .
That is why we consider a low voltage ( accurately ) in this example .
Check Your Understanding How would this example change with a positron ?
A positron is identical to an electron except the charge is positive .
So far , we have explored the relationship between voltage and energy .
Now we want to explore the relationship between voltage and electric field .
We will start with the general case for a non-uniform field .
Consider the special case of a positive point charge q at the origin .
This will be explored further in the next section .
To examine another interesting special case , suppose a uniform electric field is produced by placing a potential difference ( or voltage ) across two parallel metal plates , labeled A and B .
Examining this situation will tell us what voltage is needed to produce a certain electric field strength .
It will also reveal a more fundamental relationship between electric potential and electric field .
From a physicist ’ s point of view , either or can be used to describe any interaction between charges .
However , is a scalar quantity and has no direction , whereas is a vector quantity , having both magnitude and direction .
( Note that the magnitude of the electric field , a scalar quantity , is represented by E . )
The relationship between and is revealed by calculating the work done by the electric force in moving a charge from point A to point B .
But , as noted earlier , arbitrary charge distributions require calculus .
We therefore look at a uniform electric field as an interesting special case .
Since , we see that .
Substituting this expression for work into the previous equation gives The charge cancels , so we obtain for the voltage between points A and B where d is the distance from A to B , or the distance between the plates in .
Note that this equation implies that the units for electric field are volts per meter .
We already know the units for electric field are newtons per coulomb ; thus , the following relation among units is valid : Furthermore , we may extend this to the integral form .
To do this , we integrate around an arc of the circle of constant radius r between A and B , which means we let while using .
Thus , for this system becomes However , and therefore This result , that there is no difference in potential along a constant radius from a point charge , will come in handy when we map potentials .
Dry air can support a maximum electric field strength of about Above that value , the field creates enough ionization in the air to make the air a conductor .
This allows a discharge or spark that reduces the field .
What , then , is the maximum voltage between two parallel conducting plates separated by 2.5 cm of dry air ?
We are given the maximum electric field E between the plates and the distance d between them .
We can use the equation to calculate the maximum voltage .
The potential difference or voltage between the plates is Entering the given values for E and d gives or ( The answer is quoted to only two digits , since the maximum field strength is approximate . )
One of the implications of this result is that it takes about 75 kV to make a spark jump across a 2.5-cm ( 1-in . )
gap , or 150 kV for a 5-cm spark .
This limits the voltages that can exist between conductors , perhaps on a power transmission line .
A smaller voltage can cause a spark if there are spines on the surface , since sharp points have larger field strengths than smooth surfaces .
Humid air breaks down at a lower field strength , meaning that a smaller voltage will make a spark jump through humid air .
The largest voltages can be built up with static electricity on dry days .
An electron gun has parallel plates separated by 4.00 cm and gives electrons 25.0 keV of energy .
( a ) What is the electric field strength between the plates ?
( b ) What force would this field exert on a piece of plastic with a charge that gets between the plates ?
Since the voltage and plate separation are given , the electric field strength can be calculated directly from the expression .
Once we know the electric field strength , we can find the force on a charge by using Since the electric field is in only one direction , we can write this equation in terms of the magnitudes , .
The expression for the magnitude of the electric field between two uniform metal plates is Since the electron is a single charge and is given 25.0 keV of energy , the potential difference must be 25.0 kV .
Entering this value for and the plate separation of 0.0400 m , we obtain The magnitude of the force on a charge in an electric field is obtained from the equation Substituting known values gives Note that the units are newtons , since .
Because the electric field is uniform between the plates , the force on the charge is the same no matter where the charge is located between the plates .
Given a point charge at the origin , calculate the potential difference between point a distance from q , and a distance from q , where the two points have an angle of between them .
Do this in two steps .
The first step is to use with and to integrate with limits and let and Then perform the integral .
The second step is around an arc of constant radius r , which means we let still using .
Then add the two results together .
Notice that , in this particular system , we could have also used the formula for the potential due to a point charge at the two points and simply taken the difference .
Check Your Understanding From the examples , how does the energy of a lightning strike vary with the height of the clouds from the ground ?
Consider the cloud-ground system to be two parallel plates .
Before presenting problems involving electrostatics , we suggest a problem-solving strategy to follow for this topic .
Examine the situation to determine if static electricity is involved ; this may concern separated stationary charges , the forces among them , and the electric fields they create .
Identify the system of interest .
This includes noting the number , locations , and types of charges involved .
Identify exactly what needs to be determined in the problem ( identify the unknowns ) .
A written list is useful .
Determine whether the Coulomb force is to be considered directly—if so , it may be useful to draw a free-body diagram , using electric field lines .
Make a list of what is given or can be inferred from the problem as stated ( identify the knowns ) .
It is important to distinguish the Coulomb force F from the electric field E , for example .
Solve the appropriate equation for the quantity to be determined ( the unknown ) or draw the field lines as requested .
Examine the answer to see if it is reasonable : Does it make sense ?
Are units correct and the numbers involved reasonable ?
Point charges , such as electrons , are among the fundamental building blocks of matter .
Furthermore , spherical charge distributions ( such as charge on a metal sphere ) create external electric fields exactly like a point charge .
The electric potential due to a point charge is , thus , a case we need to consider .
We can use calculus to find the work needed to move a test charge q from a large distance away to a distance of r from a point charge q .
Noting the connection between work and potential as in the last section , we can obtain the following result .
The electric potential V of a point charge is given by where k is a constant equal to The potential at infinity is chosen to be zero .
Thus , V for a point charge decreases with distance , whereas for a point charge decreases with distance squared : Recall that the electric potential V is a scalar and has no direction , whereas the electric field is a vector .
To find the voltage due to a combination of point charges , you add the individual voltages as numbers .
To find the total electric field , you must add the individual fields as vectors , taking magnitude and direction into account .
This is consistent with the fact that V is closely associated with energy , a scalar , whereas is closely associated with force , a vector .
Charges in static electricity are typically in the nanocoulomb ( nC ) to microcoulomb range .
What is the voltage 5.00 cm away from the center of a 1-cm-diameter solid metal sphere that has a –3.00-nC static charge ?
As we discussed in , charge on a metal sphere spreads out uniformly and produces a field like that of a point charge located at its center .
Conversely , a negative charge would be repelled , as expected .
A demonstration Van de Graaff generator has a 25.0-cm-diameter metal sphere that produces a voltage of 100 kV near its surface .
What excess charge resides on the sphere ?
( Assume that each numerical value here is shown with three significant figures . )
The potential on the surface is the same as that of a point charge at the center of the sphere , 12.5 cm away .
( The radius of the sphere is 12.5 cm . )
We can thus determine the excess charge using the equation Solving for q and entering known values gives This is a relatively small charge , but it produces a rather large voltage .
We have another indication here that it is difficult to store isolated charges .
Check Your Understanding What is the potential inside the metal sphere in ?
The voltages in both of these examples could be measured with a meter that compares the measured potential with ground potential .
Ground potential is often taken to be zero ( instead of taking the potential at infinity to be zero ) .
It is the potential difference between two points that is of importance , and very often there is a tacit assumption that some reference point , such as Earth or a very distant point , is at zero potential .
As noted earlier , this is analogous to taking sea level as when considering gravitational potential energy .
Just as the electric field obeys a superposition principle , so does the electric potential .
Consider a system consisting of N charges What is the net electric potential V at a space point P from these charges ?
Each of these charges is a source charge that produces its own electric potential at point P , independent of whatever other changes may be doing .
Let be the electric potentials at P produced by the charges respectively .
Then , the net electric potential at that point is equal to the sum of these individual electric potentials .
You can easily show this by calculating the potential energy of a test charge when you bring the test charge from the reference point at infinity to point P : Note that electric potential follows the same principle of superposition as electric field and electric potential energy .
To show this more explicitly , note that a test charge at the point P in space has distances of from the N charges fixed in space above , as shown in .
An electric dipole is a system of two equal but opposite charges a fixed distance apart .
This system is used to model many real-world systems , including atomic and molecular interactions .
One of these systems is the water molecule , under certain circumstances .
These circumstances are met inside a microwave oven , where electric fields with alternating directions make the water molecules change orientation .
This vibration is the same as heat at the molecular level .
Consider the dipole in with the charge magnitude of and separation distance What is the potential at the following locations in space ?
( a ) ( 0 , 0 , 1.0 cm ) ; ( b ) ( 0 , 0 , –5.0 cm ) ; ( c ) ( 3.0 cm , 0 , 2.0 cm ) .
Apply to each of these three points .
Note that evaluating potential is significantly simpler than electric field , due to potential being a scalar instead of a vector .
Check Your Understanding What is the potential on the x -axis ?
The z -axis ?
This is not so far ( infinity ) that we can simply treat the potential as zero , but the distance is great enough that we can simplify our calculations relative to the previous example .
We start by noting that in the potential is given by where This is still the exact formula .
To take advantage of the fact that we rewrite the radii in terms of polar coordinates , with and .
Note that this has magnitude qd .
This quantity allows us to write the potential at point P due to a dipole at the origin as A diagram of the application of this formula is shown in .
There are also higher-order moments , for quadrupoles , octupoles , and so on .
You will see these in future classes .
We have been working with point charges a great deal , but what about continuous charge distributions ?
Recall from that We may treat a continuous charge distribution as a collection of infinitesimally separated individual points .
This yields the integral for the potential at a point P .
Note that r is the distance from each individual point in the charge distribution to the point P .
As we saw in , the infinitesimal charges are given by where is linear charge density , is the charge per unit area , and is the charge per unit volume .
Find the electric potential of a uniformly charged , nonconducting wire with linear density ( coulomb/meter ) and length L at a point that lies on a line that divides the wire into two equal parts .
To set up the problem , we choose Cartesian coordinates in such a way as to exploit the symmetry in the problem as much as possible .
We place the origin at the center of the wire and orient the y -axis along the wire so that the ends of the wire are at .
The field point P is in the xy -plane and since the choice of axes is up to us , we choose the x -axis to pass through the field point P , as shown in .
Consider a small element of the charge distribution between y and .
The charge in this cell is and the distance from the cell to the field point P is Therefore , the potential becomes Note that this was simpler than the equivalent problem for electric field , due to the use of scalar quantities .
Recall that we expect the zero level of the potential to be at infinity , when we have a finite charge .
To examine this , we take the limit of the above potential as x approaches infinity ; in this case , the terms inside the natural log approach one , and hence the potential approaches zero in this limit .
Note that we could have done this problem equivalently in cylindrical coordinates ; the only effect would be to substitute r for x and z for y .
A ring has a uniform charge density , with units of coulomb per unit meter of arc .
Find the electric potential at a point on the axis passing through the center of the ring .
We use the same procedure as for the charged wire .
The difference here is that the charge is distributed on a circle .
We divide the circle into infinitesimal elements shaped as arcs on the circle and use cylindrical coordinates shown in .
The net potential at P is that of the total charge placed at the common distance , .
A disk of radius R has a uniform charge density , with units of coulomb meter squared .
Find the electric potential at any point on the axis passing through the center of the disk .
We divide the disk into ring-shaped cells , and make use of the result for a ring worked out in the previous example , then integrate over r in addition to .
This is shown in .
This is accomplished by integrating from to : The basic procedure for a disk is to first integrate around and then over r .
This has been demonstrated for uniform ( constant ) charge density .
Often , the charge density will vary with r , and then the last integral will give different results .
Find the electric potential due to an infinitely long uniformly charged wire .
The reason for this problem may be traced to the fact that the charges are not localized in some space but continue to infinity in the direction of the wire .
Hence , our ( unspoken ) assumption that zero potential must be an infinite distance from the wire is no longer valid .
To avoid this difficulty in calculating limits , let us use the definition of potential by integrating over the electric field from the previous section , and the value of the electric field from this charge configuration from the previous chapter .
We use the integral where R is a finite distance from the line of charge , as shown in .
Although calculating potential directly can be quite convenient , we just found a system for which this strategy does not work well .
In such cases , going back to the definition of potential in terms of the electric field may offer a way forward .
Check Your Understanding What is the potential on the axis of a nonuniform ring of charge , where the charge density is ?
Recall that we were able , in certain systems , to calculate the potential by integrating over the electric field .
As you may already suspect , this means that we may calculate the electric field by taking derivatives of the potential , although going from a scalar to a vector quantity introduces some interesting wrinkles .
We frequently need to calculate the force in a system ; since it is often simpler to calculate the potential directly , there are systems in which it is useful to calculate V and then derive from it .
In general , regardless of whether the electric field is uniform , it points in the direction of decreasing potential , because the force on a positive charge is in the direction of and also in the direction of lower potential V .
Furthermore , the magnitude of equals the rate of decrease of V with distance .
The faster V decreases over distance , the greater the electric field .
This gives us the following result .
In equation form , the relationship between voltage and uniform electric field is where is the distance over which the change in potential takes place .
The minus sign tells us that E points in the direction of decreasing potential .
The electric field is said to be the gradient ( as in grade or slope ) of the electric potential .
For continually changing potentials , and become infinitesimals , and we need differential calculus to determine the electric field .
In Cartesian coordinates , it takes the form With this notation , we can calculate the electric field from the potential with a process we call calculating the gradient of the potential .
If we have a system with either cylindrical or spherical symmetry , we only need to use the del operator in the appropriate coordinates : , which has a spherical symmetry .
Therefore , we use the spherical del Calculate the electric field of a point charge from the potential .
The potential is known to be operator in the formula .
Performing this calculation gives us This equation simplifies to as expected .
We not only obtained the equation for the electric field of a point particle that we ’ ve seen before , we also have a demonstration that points in the direction of decreasing potential , as shown in .
Use the potential found in to calculate the electric field along the axis of a ring of charge .
In this case , we are only interested in one dimension , the z -axis .
Therefore , we use with the potential found previously .
Taking the derivative of the potential yields Again , this matches the equation for the electric field found previously .
It also demonstrates a system in which using the full del operator is not necessary .
Check Your Understanding Which coordinate system would you use to calculate the electric field of a dipole ?
We can represent electric potentials ( voltages ) pictorially , just as we drew pictures to illustrate electric fields .
This is not surprising , since the two concepts are related .
Consider , which shows an isolated positive point charge and its electric field lines , which radiate out from a positive charge and terminate on negative charges .
We use red arrows to represent the magnitude and direction of the electric field , and we use black lines to represent places where the electric potential is constant .
These are called equipotential surfaces in three dimensions , or equipotential lines in two dimensions .
The term equipotential is also used as a noun , referring to an equipotential line or surface .
The potential for a point charge is the same anywhere on an imaginary sphere of radius r surrounding the charge .
This is true because the potential for a point charge is given by and thus has the same value at any point that is a given distance r from the charge .
An equipotential sphere is a circle in the two-dimensional view of .
Because the electric field lines point radially away from the charge , they are perpendicular to the equipotential lines .
It is important to note that equipotential lines are always perpendicular to electric field lines .
No work is required to move a charge along an equipotential , since .
Thus , the work is Work is zero if the direction of the force is perpendicular to the displacement .
Force is in the same direction as E , so motion along an equipotential must be perpendicular to E .
More precisely , work is related to the electric field by Note that in this equation , E and F symbolize the magnitudes of the electric field and force , respectively .
Neither q nor E is zero ; d is also not zero .
So must be 0 , meaning must be .
In other words , motion along an equipotential is perpendicular to E .
One of the rules for static electric fields and conductors is that the electric field must be perpendicular to the surface of any conductor .
This implies that a conductor is an equipotential surface in static situations .
There can be no voltage difference across the surface of a conductor , or charges will flow .
One of the uses of this fact is that a conductor can be fixed at what we consider zero volts by connecting it to the earth with a good conductor—a process called grounding .
Grounding can be a useful safety tool .
For example , grounding the metal case of an electrical appliance ensures that it is at zero volts relative to Earth .
Because a conductor is an equipotential , it can replace any equipotential surface .
For example , in , a charged spherical conductor can replace the point charge , and the electric field and potential surfaces outside of it will be unchanged , confirming the contention that a spherical charge distribution is equivalent to a point charge at its center .
shows the electric field and equipotential lines for two equal and opposite charges .
Given the electric field lines , the equipotential lines can be drawn simply by making them perpendicular to the electric field lines .
Conversely , given the equipotential lines , as in ( a ) , the electric field lines can be drawn by making them perpendicular to the equipotentials , as in ( b ) .
To improve your intuition , we show a three-dimensional variant of the potential in a system with two opposing charges .
displays a three-dimensional map of electric potential , where lines on the map are for equipotential surfaces .
The hill is at the positive charge , and the trough is at the negative charge .
The potential is zero far away from the charges .
Note that the cut off at a particular potential implies that the charges are on conducting spheres with a finite radius .
A two-dimensional map of the cross-sectional plane that contains both charges is shown in .
The line that is equidistant from the two opposite charges corresponds to zero potential , since at the points on the line , the positive potential from the positive charge cancels the negative potential from the negative charge .
Equipotential lines in the cross-sectional plane are closed loops , which are not necessarily circles , since at each point , the net potential is the sum of the potentials from each charge .
View this equipotential surfaces and electric fields for many standard charge configurations .
There ’ s a lot to explore .
to observe and modify the One of the most important cases is that of the familiar parallel conducting plates shown in .
Between the plates , the equipotentials are evenly spaced and parallel .
The same field could be maintained by placing conducting plates at the equipotential lines at the potentials shown .
Consider the parallel plates in .
These have equipotential lines that are parallel to the plates in the space between and evenly spaced .
An example of this ( with sample values ) is given in .
We could draw a similar set of equipotential isolines for gravity on the hill shown in .
If the hill has any extent at the same slope , the isolines along that extent would be parallel to each other .
Furthermore , in regions of constant slope , the isolines would be evenly spaced .
An example of real topographic lines is shown in .
You have seen the equipotential lines of a point charge in .
How do we calculate them ?
For example , if we have a charge at the origin , what are the equipotential surfaces at which the potential is ( a ) 100 V , ( b ) 50 V , ( c ) 20 V , and ( d ) 10 V ?
Set the equation for the potential of a point charge equal to a constant and solve for the remaining variable ( s ) .
Then calculate values as needed .
In equipotential surfaces are spheres about the origin .
Their locations are : , let V be a constant .
The only remaining variable is r ; hence , .
Thus , the ; ; ; This means that equipotential surfaces around a point charge are spheres of constant radius , as shown earlier , with well-defined locations .
Two large conducting plates carry equal and opposite charges , with a surface charge density of magnitude as shown in .
The separation between the plates is .
( a ) What is the electric field between the plates ?
( b ) What is the potential difference between the plates ?
( c ) What is the distance between equipotential planes which differ by 100 V ?
( a ) Since the plates are described as “ large ” and the distance between them is not , we will approximate each of them as an infinite plane , and apply the result from Gauss ’ s law in the previous chapter .
( b ) Use .
( c ) Since the electric field is constant , find the ratio of 100 V to the total potential difference ; then calculate this fraction of the distance .
The displacement vector and the electric field are antiparallel so The potential difference between the positive plate and the negative plate is then The total potential difference is 500 V , so 1/5 of the distance between the plates will be the distance between 100-V potential differences .
The distance between the plates is 6.5 mm , so there will be 1.3 mm between 100-V potential differences .
You have now seen a numerical calculation of the locations of equipotentials between two charged parallel plates .
Check Your Understanding What are the equipotential surfaces for an infinite line charge ?
In with a point charge , we found that the equipotential surfaces were in the form of spheres , with the point charge at the center .
Given that a conducting sphere in electrostatic equilibrium is a spherical equipotential surface , we should expect that we could replace one of the surfaces in with a conducting sphere and have an identical solution outside the sphere .
Inside will be rather different , however .
To investigate this , consider the isolated conducting sphere of that has a radius R and an excess charge q .
To find the electric field both inside and outside the sphere , note that the sphere is isolated , so its surface change distribution and the electric field of that distribution are spherically symmetric .
We can therefore represent the field as To calculate E ( r ) , we apply Gauss ’ s law over a closed spherical surface S of radius r that is concentric with the conducting sphere .
Since r is constant and on the sphere , For , S is within the conductor , so recall from our previous study of Gauss ’ s law that and Gauss ’ s law gives , as expected inside a conductor at equilibrium .
To find the electric potential inside and outside the sphere , note that for an isolated point charge q located at , the potential must be the same as that of simply due to the similarity of the electric field .
For so V ( r ) is constant in this region .
Since We will use this result to show that for two conducting spheres of radii , with surface charge densities respectively , that are connected by a thin wire , as shown in .
The spheres are sufficiently separated so that each can be treated as if it were isolated ( aside from the wire ) .
Note that the connection by the wire means that this entire system must be an equipotential .
Nevertheless , this result does at least provide a qualitative idea of how charge density varies over the surface of a conductor .
The equation indicates that where the radius of curvature is large ( points B and D in ) , and E are small .
Similarly , the charges tend to be denser where the curvature of the surface is greater , as demonstrated by the charge distribution on oddly shaped metal .
The surface charge density is higher at locations with a small radius of curvature than at locations with a large radius of curvature .
A practical application of this phenomenon is the lightning rod , which is simply a grounded metal rod with a sharp end pointing upward .
As positive charge accumulates in the ground due to a negatively charged cloud overhead , the electric field around the sharp point gets very large .
When the field reaches a value of approximately ( the dielectric strength of the air ) , the free ions in the air are accelerated to such high energies that their collisions with air molecules actually ionize the molecules .
The resulting free electrons in the air then flow through the rod to Earth , thereby neutralizing some of the positive charge .
This keeps the electric field between the cloud and the ground from getting large enough to produce a lightning bolt in the region around the rod .
An important application of electric fields and equipotential lines involves the heart .
The heart relies on electrical signals to maintain its rhythm .
The movement of electrical signals causes the chambers of the heart to contract and relax .
When a person has a heart attack , the movement of these electrical signals may be disturbed .
An artificial pacemaker and a defibrillator can be used to initiate the rhythm of electrical signals .
The equipotential lines around the heart , the thoracic region , and the axis of the heart are useful ways of monitoring the structure and functions of the heart .
An electrocardiogram ( ECG ) measures the small electric signals being generated during the activity of the heart .
Play around with this to move point charges around on the playing field and then view the electric field , voltages , equipotential lines , and more .
The study of electrostatics has proven useful in many areas .
This module covers just a few of the many applications of electrostatics .
Van de Graaff generators ( or Van de Graaffs ) are not only spectacular devices used to demonstrate high voltage due to static electricity—they are also used for serious research .
The first was built by Robert Van de Graaff in 1931 ( based on original suggestions by Lord Kelvin ) for use in nuclear physics research .
shows a schematic of a large research version .
Van de Graaffs use both smooth and pointed surfaces , and conductors and insulators to generate large static charges and , hence , large voltages .
A very large excess charge can be deposited on the sphere because it moves quickly to the outer surface .
Practical limits arise because the large electric fields polarize and eventually ionize surrounding materials , creating free charges that neutralize excess charge or allow it to escape .
Nevertheless , voltages of 15 million volts are well within practical limits .
Most copy machines use an electrostatic process called xerography —a word coined from the Greek words xeros for dry and graphos for writing .
The heart of the process is shown in simplified form in .
A selenium-coated aluminum drum is sprayed with positive charge from points on a device called a corotron .
Selenium is a substance with an interesting property—it is a photoconductor .
That is , selenium is an insulator when in the dark and a conductor when exposed to light .
In the first stage of the xerography process , the conducting aluminum drum is grounded so that a negative charge is induced under the thin layer of uniformly positively charged selenium .
In the second stage , the surface of the drum is exposed to the image of whatever is to be copied .
In locations where the image is light , the selenium becomes conducting , and the positive charge is neutralized .
In dark areas , the positive charge remains , so the image has been transferred to the drum .
The third stage takes a dry black powder , called toner , and sprays it with a negative charge so that it is attracted to the positive regions of the drum .
Next , a blank piece of paper is given a greater positive charge than on the drum so that it will pull the toner from the drum .
Finally , the paper and electrostatically held toner are passed through heated pressure rollers , which melt and permanently adhere the toner to the fibers of the paper .
Laser printers use the xerographic process to make high-quality images on paper , employing a laser to produce an image on the photoconducting drum as shown in .
In its most common application , the laser printer receives output from a computer , and it can achieve high-quality output because of the precision with which laser light can be controlled .
Many laser printers do significant information processing , such as making sophisticated letters or fonts , and in the past may have contained a computer more powerful than the one giving them the raw data to be printed .
The ink jet printer , commonly used to print computer-generated text and graphics , also employs electrostatics .
A nozzle makes a fine spray of tiny ink droplets , which are then given an electrostatic charge .
Once charged , the droplets can be directed , using pairs of charged plates , with great precision to form letters and images on paper .
Ink jet printers can produce color images by using a black jet and three other jets with primary colors , usually cyan , magenta , and yellow , much as a color television produces color .
( This is more difficult with xerography , requiring multiple drums and toners . )
Electrostatic painting employs electrostatic charge to spray paint onto oddly shaped surfaces .
Mutual repulsion of like charges causes the paint to fly away from its source .
Surface tension forms drops , which are then attracted by unlike charges to the surface to be painted .
Electrostatic painting can reach hard-to-get-to places , applying an even coat in a controlled manner .
If the object is a conductor , the electric field is perpendicular to the surface , tending to bring the drops in perpendicularly .
Corners and points on conductors will receive extra paint .
Felt can similarly be applied .
Another important application of electrostatics is found in air cleaners , both large and small .
Home precipitators , often in conjunction with the home heating and air conditioning system , are very effective in removing polluting particles , irritants , and allergens .
Capacitors are important components of electrical circuits in many electronic devices , including pacemakers , cell phones , and computers .
In this chapter , we study their properties , and , over the next few chapters , we examine their function in combination with other circuit elements .
By themselves , capacitors are often used to store electrical energy and release it when needed ; with other circuit components , capacitors often act as part of a filter that allows some electrical signals to pass while blocking others .
You can see why capacitors are considered one of the fundamental components of electrical circuits .
A capacitor is a device used to store electrical charge and electrical energy .
It consists of at least two electrical conductors separated by a distance .
( You will learn more about dielectrics in the sections on dielectrics later in this chapter . )
The amount of storage in a capacitor is determined by a property called capacitance , which you will learn more about a bit later in this section .
Capacitors have applications ranging from filtering static from radio reception to energy storage in heart defibrillators .
Typically , commercial capacitors have two conducting parts close to one another but not touching , such as those in .
Most of the time , a dielectric is used between the two plates .
When battery terminals are connected to an initially uncharged capacitor , the battery potential moves a small amount of charge of magnitude Q from the positive plate to the negative plate .
The capacitor remains neutral overall , but with charges and residing on opposite plates .
A system composed of two identical parallel-conducting plates separated by a distance is called a parallel-plate capacitor .
The magnitude of the electrical field in the space between the parallel plates is , where denotes the surface charge density on one plate ( recall that is the charge Q per the surface area A ) .
Thus , the magnitude of the field is directly proportional to Q .
Capacitors with different physical characteristics ( such as shape and size of their plates ) store different amounts of charge for the same applied voltage V across their plates .
The capacitance C of a capacitor is defined as the ratio of the maximum charge Q that can be stored in a capacitor to the applied voltage V across its plates .
In other words , capacitance is the largest amount of charge per volt that can be stored on the device : The SI unit of capacitance is the farad ( F ) , named after Michael Faraday ( 1791–1867 ) .
Typical capacitance values range from picofarads to millifarads , which also includes microfarads .
Capacitors can be produced in various shapes and sizes .
We can calculate the capacitance of a pair of conductors with the standard approach that follows .
Assume that the capacitor has a charge Q .
Determine the electrical field between the conductors .
If symmetry is present in the arrangement of conductors , you may be able to use Gauss ’ s law for this calculation .
Find the potential difference between the conductors from where the path of integration leads from one conductor to the other .
The magnitude of the potential difference is then .
With V known , obtain the capacitance directly from .
To show how this procedure works , we now calculate the capacitances of parallel-plate , spherical , and cylindrical capacitors .
In all cases , we assume vacuum capacitors ( empty capacitors ) with no dielectric substance in the space between conductors .
The parallel-plate capacitor has two identical conducting plates , each having a surface area A , separated by a distance d .
When a voltage V is applied to the capacitor , it stores a charge Q , as shown .
We can see how its capacitance may depend on A and d by considering characteristics of the Coulomb force .
We know that force between the charges increases with charge values and decreases with the distance between them .
We should expect that the bigger the plates are , the more charge they can store .
Thus , C should be greater for a larger value of A .
Similarly , the closer the plates are together , the greater the attraction of the opposite charges on them .
Therefore , C should be greater for a smaller d .
In fact , this is true not only for a parallel-plate capacitor , but for all capacitors : The capacitance is independent of Q or V .
If the charge changes , the potential changes correspondingly so that Q / V remains constant .
( a ) What is the capacitance of an empty parallel-plate capacitor with metal plates that each have an area of , separated by 1.00 mm ?
( b ) How much charge is stored in this capacitor if a voltage of is applied to it ?
Finding the capacitance C is a straightforward application of .
Once we find C , we can find the charge stored by using .
Entering the given values into yields This small capacitance value indicates how difficult it is to make a device with a large capacitance .
Inverting and entering the known values into this equation gives This charge is only slightly greater than those found in typical static electricity applications .
Since air breaks down ( becomes conductive ) at an electrical field strength of about 3.0 MV/m , no more charge can be stored on this capacitor by increasing the voltage .
Suppose you wish to construct a parallel-plate capacitor with a capacitance of 1.0 F. What area must you use for each plate if the plates are separated by 1.0 mm ?
Rearranging , we obtain Each square plate would have to be 10 km across .
It used to be a common prank to ask a student to go to the laboratory stockroom and request a 1-F parallel-plate capacitor , until stockroom attendants got tired of the joke .
Check Your Understanding The capacitance of a parallel-plate capacitor is 2.0 pF .
If the area of each plate is , what is the plate separation ?
Check Your Understanding Verify that and have the same physical units .
A spherical capacitor is another set of conductors whose capacitance can be easily determined .
It consists of two concentric conducting spherical shells of radii ( inner shell ) and ( outer shell ) .
The shells are given equal and opposite charges and , respectively .
From symmetry , the electrical field between the shells is directed radially outward .
We can obtain the magnitude of the field by applying Gauss ’ s law over a spherical Gaussian surface of radius r concentric with the shells .
The enclosed charge is ; therefore we have Thus , the electrical field between the conductors is We substitute this into and integrate along a radial path between the shells : In this equation , the potential difference between the plates is .
We substitute this result into to find the capacitance of a spherical capacitor : Calculate the capacitance of a single isolated conducting sphere of radius and compare it with in the limit as .
We assume that the charge on the sphere is Q , and so we follow the four steps outlined earlier .
We also assume the other conductor to be a concentric hollow sphere of infinite radius .
On the outside of an isolated conducting sphere , the electrical field is given by .
The magnitude of the potential difference between the surface of an isolated sphere and infinity is The capacitance of an isolated sphere is therefore The same result can be obtained by taking the limit of as .
A single isolated sphere is therefore equivalent to a spherical capacitor whose outer shell has an infinitely large radius .
Check Your Understanding The radius of the outer sphere of a spherical capacitor is five times the radius of its inner shell .
What are the dimensions of this capacitor if its capacitance is 5.00 pF ?
A cylindrical capacitor consists of two concentric , conducting cylinders .
The inner cylinder , of radius , may either be a shell or be completely solid .
The outer cylinder is a shell of inner radius .
We assume that the length of each cylinder is l and that the excess charges and reside on the inner and outer cylinders , respectively .
With edge effects ignored , the electrical field between the conductors is directed radially outward from the common axis of the cylinders .
Using the Gaussian surface shown in , we have Therefore , the electrical field between the cylinders is Here is the unit radial vector along the radius of the cylinder .
We can substitute into and find the potential difference between the cylinders : Thus , the capacitance of a cylindrical capacitor is As in other cases , this capacitance depends only on the geometry of the conductor arrangement .
An important application of is the determination of the capacitance per unit length of a coaxial cable , which is commonly used to transmit time-varying electrical signals .
A coaxial cable consists of two concentric , cylindrical conductors separated by an insulating material .
( Here , we assume a vacuum between the conductors , but the physics is qualitatively almost the same when the space between the conductors is filled by a dielectric . )
This configuration shields the electrical signal propagating down the inner conductor from stray electrical fields external to the cable .
Current flows in opposite directions in the inner and the outer conductors , with the outer conductor usually grounded .
Now , from , the capacitance per unit length of the coaxial cable is given by In practical applications , it is important to select specific values of C / l .
This can be accomplished with appropriate choices of radii of the conductors and of the insulating material between them .
Check Your Understanding When a cylindrical capacitor is given a charge of 0.500 nC , a potential difference of 20.0 V is measured between the cylinders .
( a ) What is the capacitance of this system ?
( b ) If the cylinders are 1.0 m long , what is the ratio of their radii ?
Several types of practical capacitors are shown in .
Common capacitors are often made of two small pieces of metal foil separated by two small pieces of insulation ( see ( b ) ) .
The metal foil and insulation are encased in a protective coating , and two metal leads are used for connecting the foils to an external circuit .
Some common insulating materials are mica , ceramic , paper , and Teflon™ non-stick coating .
Another popular type of capacitor is an electrolytic capacitor .
It consists of an oxidized metal in a conducting paste .
The main advantage of an electrolytic capacitor is its high capacitance relative to other common types of capacitors .
When reverse polarization occurs , electrolytic action destroys the oxide film .
This type of capacitor can not be connected across an alternating current source , because half of the time , ac voltage would have the wrong polarity , as an alternating current reverses its polarity ( see on alternating-current circuits ) .
A variable air capacitor has two sets of parallel plates .
One set of plates is fixed ( indicated as “ stator ” ) , and the other set of plates is attached to a shaft that can be rotated ( indicated as “ rotor ” ) .
By turning the shaft , the cross-sectional area in the overlap of the plates can be changed ; therefore , the capacitance of this system can be tuned to a desired value .
Capacitor tuning has applications in any type of radio transmission and in receiving radio signals from electronic devices .
Any time you tune your car radio to your favorite station , think of capacitance .
The symbols shown in are circuit representations of various types of capacitors .
We generally use the symbol shown in ( a ) .
The symbol in ( c ) represents a variable-capacitance capacitor .
Notice the similarity of these symbols to the symmetry of a parallel-plate capacitor .
An electrolytic capacitor is represented by the symbol in part ( b ) , where the curved plate indicates the negative terminal .
An interesting applied example of a capacitor model comes from cell biology and deals with the electrical potential in the plasma membrane of a living cell .
Cell membranes separate cells from their surroundings but allow some selected ions to pass in or out of the cell .
The potential difference across a membrane is about 70 mV .
The cell membrane may be 7 to 10 nm thick .
Treating the cell membrane as a nano-sized capacitor , the estimate of the smallest electrical field strength across its ‘ plates ’ yields the value .
This magnitude of electrical field is great enough to create an electrical spark in the air .
the to Visit explore how a capacitor works .
Change the size of the plates and add a dielectric to see the effect on capacitance .
Change the voltage and see charges built up on the plates .
Observe the electrical field in the capacitor .
Measure the voltage and the electrical field .
Several capacitors can be connected together to be used in a variety of applications .
Multiple connections of capacitors behave as a single equivalent capacitor .
The total capacitance of this equivalent single capacitor depends both on the individual capacitors and how they are connected .
Capacitors can be arranged in two simple and common types of connections , known as series and parallel , for which we can easily calculate the total capacitance .
These two basic combinations , series and parallel , can also be used as part of more complex connections .
illustrates a series combination of three capacitors , arranged in a row within the circuit .
As for any capacitor , the capacitance of the combination is related to the charge and voltage by using .
When this series combination is connected to a battery with voltage V , each of the capacitors acquires an identical charge Q .
To explain , first note that the charge on the plate connected to the positive terminal of the battery is and the charge on the plate connected to the negative terminal is .
Charges are then induced on the other plates so that the sum of the charges on all plates , and the sum of charges on any pair of capacitor plates , is zero .
However , the potential drop on one capacitor may be different from the potential drop on another capacitor , because , generally , the capacitors may have different capacitances .
The series combination of two or three capacitors resembles a single capacitor with a smaller capacitance .
Generally , any number of capacitors connected in series is equivalent to one capacitor whose capacitance ( called the equivalent capacitance ) is smaller than the smallest of the capacitances in the series combination .
Charge on this equivalent capacitor is the same as the charge on any capacitor in a series combination : That is , all capacitors of a series combination have the same charge .
This occurs due to the conservation of charge in the circuit .
When a charge Q in a series circuit is removed from a plate of the first capacitor ( which we denote as ) , it must be placed on a plate of the second capacitor ( which we denote as and so on .
We can find an expression for the total ( equivalent ) capacitance by considering the voltages across the individual capacitors .
The potentials across capacitors 1 , 2 , and 3 are , respectively , , , and .
These potentials must sum up to the voltage of the battery , giving the following potential balance : Potential V is measured across an equivalent capacitor that holds charge Q and has an equivalent capacitance .
Entering the expressions for , , and , we get Canceling the charge Q , we obtain an expression containing the equivalent capacitance , , of three capacitors connected in series : This expression can be generalized to any number of capacitors in a series network .
For capacitors connected in a series combination , the reciprocal of the equivalent capacitance is the sum of reciprocals of individual capacitances : Find the total capacitance for three capacitors connected in series , given their individual capacitances are , , and .
Because there are only three capacitors in this network , we can find the equivalent capacitance by using with three terms .
We enter the given capacitances into : Now we invert this result and obtain Note that in a series network of capacitors , the equivalent capacitance is always less than the smallest individual capacitance in the network .
A parallel combination of three capacitors , with one plate of each capacitor connected to one side of the circuit and the other plate connected to the other side , is illustrated in ( a ) .
Since the capacitors are connected in parallel , they all have the same voltage V across their plates .
However , each capacitor in the parallel network may store a different charge .
On the righthand side of the equation , we use the relations and for the three capacitors in the network .
In this way we obtain This equation , when simplified , is the expression for the equivalent capacitance of the parallel network of three capacitors : This expression is easily generalized to any number of capacitors connected in parallel in the network .
Entering the given capacitances into yields Note that in a parallel network of capacitors , the equivalent capacitance is always larger than any of the individual capacitances in the network .
Capacitor networks are usually some combination of series and parallel connections , as shown in .
To find the net capacitance of such combinations , we identify parts that contain only series or only parallel connections , and find their equivalent capacitances .
We repeat this process until we can determine the equivalent capacitance of the entire network .
The following example illustrates this process .
Find the total capacitance of the combination of capacitors shown in .
Assume the capacitances are known to three decimal places Round your answer to three decimal places .
We first identify which capacitors are in series and which are in parallel .
Capacitors and are in series .
When a 12.0-V potential difference is maintained across the combination , find the charge and the voltage across each capacitor .
We first compute the net capacitance of the parallel connection and .
Then C is the net capacitance of the series connection and .
We use the relation to find the charges , , and , and the voltages , , and , across capacitors 1 , 2 , and 3 , respectively .
The equivalent capacitance for and is The entire three-capacitor combination is equivalent to two capacitors in series , Consider the equivalent two-capacitor combination in ( b ) .
Since the capacitors are in series , they have the same charge , .
Assume that , , , and .
Find the charge on each capacitor , assuming there is a potential difference of 12.0 V across each network .
Most of us have seen dramatizations of medical personnel using a defibrillator to pass an electrical current through a patient ’ s heart to get it to beat normally .
Often realistic in detail , the person applying the shock directs another person to “ make it 400 joules this time. ” The energy delivered by the defibrillator is stored in a capacitor and can be adjusted to fit the situation .
SI units of joules are often employed .
Less dramatic is the use of capacitors in microelectronics to supply energy when batteries are charged .
Capacitors are also used to supply energy for flash lamps on cameras .
The energy stored in a capacitor is electrostatic potential energy and is thus related to the charge Q and voltage V between the capacitor plates .
A charged capacitor stores energy in the electrical field between its plates .
As the capacitor is being charged , the electrical field builds up .
When a charged capacitor is disconnected from a battery , its energy remains in the field in the space between its plates .
To gain insight into how this energy may be expressed ( in terms of Q and V ) , consider a charged , empty , parallel-plate capacitor ; that is , a capacitor without a dielectric but with a vacuum between its plates .
The space between its plates has a volume Ad , and it is filled with a uniform electrostatic field E .
The total energy of the capacitor is contained within this space .
The energy density in this space is simply divided by the volume Ad .
If we know the energy density , the energy can be found as .
To see this , consider any uncharged capacitor ( not necessarily a parallel-plate type ) .
At some instant , we connect it across a battery , giving it a potential difference between its plates .
Initially , the charge on the plates is As the capacitor is being charged , the charge gradually builds up on its plates , and after some time , it reaches the value Q .
In order to charge the capacitor to a charge Q , .
the total work required is Since the geometry of the capacitor has not been specified , this equation holds for any type of capacitor .
The total work W needed to charge a capacitor is the electrical potential energy stored in it , or .
When the charge is expressed in coulombs , potential is expressed in volts , and the capacitance is expressed in farads , this relation gives the energy in joules .
Knowing that the energy stored in a capacitor is , we can now find the energy density stored in a vacuum between the plates of a charged parallel-plate capacitor .
We just have to divide by the volume Ad of space between its plates and take into account that for a parallel-plate capacitor , we have and .
Therefore , we obtain We see that this expression for the density of energy stored in a parallel-plate capacitor is in accordance with the general relation expressed in .
We could repeat this calculation for either a spherical capacitor or a cylindrical capacitor—or other capacitors—and in all cases , we would end up with the general relation given by .
Calculate the energy stored in the capacitor network in ( a ) when the capacitors are fully charged and when the capacitances are and respectively .
We use to find the energy , , and stored in capacitors 1 , 2 , and 3 , respectively .
The total energy is the sum of all these energies .
We identify and , and , and The energies stored in these capacitors are The total energy stored in this network is We can verify this result by calculating the energy stored in the single capacitor , which is found to be equivalent to the entire network .
The voltage across the network is 12.0 V. The total energy obtained in this way agrees with our previously obtained result , .
Check Your Understanding The potential difference across a 5.0-pF capacitor is 0.40 V. ( a ) What is the energy stored in this capacitor ?
( b ) The potential difference is now increased to 1.20 V. By what factor is the stored energy increased ?
In a cardiac emergency , a portable electronic device known as an automated external defibrillator ( AED ) can be a lifesaver .
A defibrillator delivers a large charge in a short burst , or a shock , to a person ’ s heart to correct abnormal heart rhythm ( an arrhythmia ) .
A heart attack can arise from the onset of fast , irregular beating of the heart—called cardiac or ventricular fibrillation .
Applying a large shock of electrical energy can terminate the arrhythmia and allow the body ’ s natural pacemaker to resume its normal rhythm .
Today , it is common for ambulances to carry AEDs .
AEDs are also found in many public places .
These are designed to be used by lay persons .
The device automatically diagnoses the patient ’ s heart rhythm and then applies the shock with appropriate energy and waveform .
CPR ( cardiopulmonary resuscitation ) is recommended in many cases before using a defibrillator .
A heart defibrillator delivers of energy by discharging a capacitor initially at What is its capacitance ?
We are given and V , and we are asked to find the capacitance C .
We solve for C and substitute .
Solving this expression for C and entering the given values yields As we discussed earlier , an insulating material placed between the plates of a capacitor is called a dielectric .
Inserting a dielectric between the plates of a capacitor affects its capacitance .
To see why , let ’ s consider an experiment described in .
Initially , a capacitor with capacitance when there is air between its plates is charged by a battery to voltage .
When the capacitor is fully charged , the battery is disconnected .
A charge then resides on the plates , and the potential difference between the plates is measured to be .
Now , suppose we insert a dielectric that totally fills the gap between the plates .
If we monitor the voltage , we find that the voltmeter reading has dropped to a smaller value V .
We write this new voltage value as a fraction of the original voltage , with a positive number , : The constant in this equation is called the dielectric constant of the material between the plates , and its value is characteristic for the material .
A detailed explanation for why the dielectric reduces the voltage is given in the next section .
Different materials have different dielectric constants ( a table of values for typical materials is provided in the next section ) .
Once the battery becomes disconnected , there is no path for a charge to flow to the battery from the capacitor plates .
Hence , the insertion of the dielectric has no effect on the charge on the plate , which remains at a value of .
Note that can also be used for an empty capacitor by setting .
In other words , we can say that the dielectric constant of the vacuum is 1 , which is a reference value .
The principle expressed by is widely used in the construction industry .
Metal plates in an electronic stud finder act effectively as a capacitor .
You place a stud finder with its flat side on the wall and move it continually in the horizontal direction .
When the finder moves over a wooden stud , the capacitance of its plates changes , because wood has a different dielectric constant than a gypsum wall .
This change triggers a signal in a circuit , and thus the stud is detected .
The electrical energy stored by a capacitor is also affected by the presence of a dielectric .
Just as we learned in on electrostatics , there will be the induced charges on the surface of the sample ; however , they are not free charges like in a conductor , because a perfect insulator does not have freely moving charges .
These induced charges on the dielectric surface are of an opposite sign to the free charges on the plates of the capacitor , and so they are attracted by the free charges on the plates .
Consequently , the dielectric is “ pulled ” into the gap , and the work to polarize the dielectric material between the plates is done at the expense of the stored electrical energy , which is reduced , in accordance with .
An empty 20.0-pF capacitor is charged to a potential difference of 40.0 V. The charging battery is then disconnected , and a piece of Teflon™ with a dielectric constant of 2.1 is inserted to completely fill the space between the capacitor plates ( see ) .
What are the values of ( a ) the capacitance , ( b ) the charge of the plate , ( c ) the potential difference between the plates , and ( d ) the energy stored in the capacitor with and without dielectric ?
We identify the original capacitance and the original potential difference between the plates .
We combine with other relations involving capacitance and substitute .
The capacitance increases to Without dielectric , the charge on the plates is Since the battery is disconnected before the dielectric is inserted , the plate charge is unaffected by the dielectric and remains at 0.8 nC .
This effect is far more profound than a mere change in the geometry of a capacitor .
Check Your Understanding When a dielectric is inserted into an isolated and charged capacitor , the stored energy decreases to 33 % of its original value .
( a ) What is the dielectric constant ?
( b ) How does the capacitance change ?
We can understand the effect of a dielectric on capacitance by looking at its behavior at the molecular level .
As we have seen in earlier chapters , in general , all molecules can be classified as either polar or nonpolar .
There is a net separation of positive and negative charges in an isolated polar molecule , whereas there is no charge separation in an isolated nonpolar molecule .
In other words , polar molecules have permanent electric-dipole moments and nonpolar molecules do not .
For example , a molecule of water is polar , and a molecule of oxygen is nonpolar .
Nonpolar molecules can become polar in the presence of an external electrical field , which is called induced polarization .
Let ’ s first consider a dielectric composed of polar molecules .
In the absence of any external electrical field , the electric dipoles are oriented randomly , as illustrated in ( a ) .
However , if the dielectric is placed in an external electrical field , the polar molecules align with the external field , as shown in part ( b ) of the figure .
Opposite charges on adjacent dipoles within the volume of dielectric neutralize each other , so there is no net charge within the dielectric ( see the dashed circles in part ( b ) ) .
However , this is not the case very close to the upper and lower surfaces that border the dielectric ( the region enclosed by the dashed rectangles in part ( b ) ) , where the alignment does produce a net charge .
Since the external electrical field merely aligns the dipoles , the dielectric as a whole is neutral , and the surface charges induced on its opposite faces are equal and opposite .
These induced surface charges and produce an additional electrical field ( an induced electrical field ) , which opposes the external field , as illustrated in part ( c ) .
The same effect is produced when the molecules of a dielectric are nonpolar .
In this case , a nonpolar molecule acquires an induced electric-dipole moment because the external field causes a separation between its positive and negative charges .
The induced dipoles of the nonpolar molecules align with in the same way as the permanent dipoles of the polar molecules are aligned ( shown in part ( b ) ) .
Hence , the electrical field within the dielectric is weakened regardless of whether its molecules are polar or nonpolar .
Their vector sum gives the net electrical field within the dielectric between the capacitor plates ( shown in part ( b ) of the figure ) : This net field can be considered to be the field produced by an effective charge on the capacitor .
In most dielectrics , the net electrical field is proportional to the field these two electrical fields , the dielectric constant of the material is defined as produced by the free charge .
A molecule or an atom is ionized when one or more electrons are removed from it and become free electrons , no longer bound to the molecular or atomic structure .
When this happens , the material can conduct , thereby allowing charge to move through the dielectric from one capacitor plate to the other .
This phenomenon is called dielectric breakdown .
( shows typical random-path patterns of electrical discharge during dielectric breakdown . )
The critical value , , of the electrical field at which the molecules of an insulator become ionized is called the dielectric strength of the material .
The dielectric strength imposes a limit on the voltage that can be applied for a given plate separation in a capacitor .
For example , the dielectric strength of air is , so for an air-filled capacitor with a plate separation of the limit on the potential difference that can be safely applied across its plates without causing dielectric breakdown is .
However , this limit becomes 60.0 kV when the same capacitor is filled with Teflon™ , whose dielectric strength is about .
Typical values of dielectric constants and dielectric strengths for various materials are given in .
Notice that the dielectric constant is exactly 1.0 for a vacuum ( the empty space serves as a reference condition ) and very close to 1.0 for air under normal conditions ( normal pressure at room temperature ) .
These two values are so close that , in fact , the properties of an air-filled capacitor are essentially the same as those of an empty capacitor .
Not all substances listed in the table are good insulators , despite their high dielectric constants .
Water , for example , consists of polar molecules and has a large dielectric constant of about 80 .
In a water molecule , electrons are more likely found around the oxygen nucleus than around the hydrogen nuclei .
This makes the oxygen end of the molecule slightly negative and leaves the hydrogens end slightly positive , which makes the molecule easy to align along an external electrical field , and thus water has a large dielectric constant .
However , the polar nature of water molecules also makes water a good solvent for many substances , which produces undesirable effects , because any concentration of free ions in water conducts electricity .
Suppose that the distance between the plates of the capacitor in is 2.0 mm and the area of each plate is .
Determine : ( a ) the electrical field between the plates before and after the Teflon™ is inserted , and ( b ) the surface charge induced on the Teflon™ surfaces .
In part ( a ) , we know that the voltage across the empty capacitor is , so to find the electrical fields we use the relation and .
In part ( b ) , knowing the magnitude of the electrical field , we use the expression for the magnitude of electrical field near a charged plate , where is a uniform surface charge density caused by the surface charge .
We use the value of free charge obtained in .
The electrical field between the plates of an empty capacitor is The electrical field E with the Teflon™ in place is The effective charge on the capacitor is the difference between the free charge and the induced charge .
The electrical field in the Teflon™ is caused by this effective charge .
Thus We invert this equation to obtain , which yields When a battery of voltage is connected across an empty capacitor of capacitance , the charge on its plates is , and the electrical field between its plates is .
A dielectric of dielectric constant is inserted between the plates while the battery remains in place , as shown in .
( a ) Find the capacitance C , the voltage V across the capacitor , and the electrical field E between the plates after the dielectric is inserted .
( b ) Obtain an expression for the free charge Q on the plates of the filled capacitor and the induced charge on the dielectric surface in terms of the original plate charge .
We identify the known values : , , , , and .
Our task is to express the unknown values in terms of these known values .
( a ) The capacitance of the filled capacitor is .
Since the battery is always connected to the capacitor plates , the potential difference between them does not change ; hence , .
The opposite is true for gasses like air whose dielectric constant is smaller than 2 .
Check Your Understanding Continuing with , show that when the battery is connected across the plates the energy stored in dielectric-filled capacitor is ( larger than the energy of an empty capacitor kept at the same voltage ) .
Compare this result with the result found previously for an isolated , charged capacitor .
Check Your Understanding Repeat the calculations of for the case in which the battery remains connected while the dielectric is placed in the capacitor .
We also examine a characteristic of materials known as the resistance .
Resistance is a measure of how much a material impedes the flow of charge , and it will be shown that the resistance depends on temperature .
In general , a good conductor , such as copper , gold , or silver , has very low resistance .
Some materials , called superconductors , have zero resistance at very low temperatures .
High currents are required for the operation of electromagnets .
Superconductors can be used to make electromagnets that are 10 times stronger than the strongest conventional electromagnets .
These superconducting magnets are used in the construction of magnetic resonance imaging ( MRI ) devices that can be used to make high-resolution images of the human body .
The chapter-opening picture shows an MRI image of the vertebrae of a human subject and the MRI device itself .
Superconducting magnets have many other uses .
For example , superconducting magnets are used in the Large Hadron Collider ( LHC ) to curve the path of protons in the ring .
Up to now , we have considered primarily static charges .
When charges did move , they were accelerated in response to an electrical field created by a voltage difference .
The charges lost potential energy and gained kinetic energy as they traveled through a potential difference where the electrical field did work on the charge .
Although charges do not require a material to flow through , the majority of this chapter deals with understanding the movement of charges through a material .
The rate at which the charges flow past a location—that is , the amount of charge per unit time—is known as the electrical current .
When charges flow through a medium , the current depends on the voltage applied , the material through which the charges flow , and the state of the material .
Of particular interest is the motion of charges in a conducting wire .
In previous chapters , charges were accelerated due to the force provided by an electrical field , losing potential energy and gaining kinetic energy .
Current is measured in units called amperes ; you may have noticed that circuit breakers in your home and fuses in your car are rated in amps ( or amperes ) .
But what is the ampere and what does it measure ?
Electrical current is defined to be the rate at which charge flows .
When there is a large current present , such as that used to run a refrigerator , a large amount of charge moves through the wire in a small amount of time .
If the current is small , such as that used to operate a handheld calculator , a small amount of charge moves through the circuit over a long period of time .
The average electrical current I is the rate at which charge flows , where is the amount of charge passing through a given area in time .
The SI unit for current is the ampere ( A ) , named for the French physicist André-Marie Ampère ( 1775–1836 ) .
The main purpose of a battery in a car or truck is to run the electric starter motor , which starts the engine .
The operation of starting the vehicle requires a large current to be supplied by the battery .
Once the engine starts , a device called an alternator takes over supplying the electric power required for running the vehicle and for charging the battery .
( a ) What is the average current involved when a truck battery sets in motion 720 C of charge in 4.00 s while starting an engine ?
( b ) How long does it take 1.00 C of charge to flow from the battery ?
We can use the definition of the average current in the equation to find the average current in part ( a ) , since charge and time are given .
For part ( b ) , once we know the average current , we can its definition to find the time required for 1.00 C of charge to flow from the battery .
Entering the given values for charge and time into the definition of current gives b .
Solving the relationship for time and entering the known values for charge and current gives a .
This large value for current illustrates the fact that a large charge is moved in a small amount of time .
The currents in these “ starter motors ” are fairly large to overcome the inertia of the engine .
A high current requires a short time to supply a large amount of charge .
This large current is needed to supply the large amount of energy needed to start the engine .
Consider a charge moving through a cross-section of a wire where the charge is modeled as .
Here , is the charge after a long period of time , as time approaches infinity , with units of coulombs , and is a time constant with units of seconds ( see ) .
What is the current through the wire ?
The current through the cross-section can be found from to and the derivative decreases , approaching zero , as time increases .
The derivative can be found using .
Notice from the figure that the charge increases The current through the wire in question decreases exponentially , as shown in .
In later chapters , it will be shown that a time-dependent current appears when a capacitor charges or discharges through a resistor .
Recall that a capacitor is a device that stores charge .
You will learn about the resistor in .
Check Your Understanding Handheld calculators often use small solar cells to supply the energy required to complete the calculations needed to complete your next physics exam .
The current needed to run your calculator can be as small as 0.30 mA .
How long would it take for 1.00 C of charge to flow from the solar cells ?
Can solar cells be used , instead of batteries , to start traditional internal combustion engines presently used in most cars and trucks ?
Check Your Understanding Circuit breakers in a home are rated in amperes , normally in a range from 10 amps to 30 amps , and are used to protect the residents from harm and their appliances from damage due to large currents .
A single 15-amp circuit breaker may be used to protect several outlets in the living room , whereas a single 20-amp circuit breaker may be used to protect the refrigerator in the kitchen .
What can you deduce from this about current used by the various appliances ?
In the previous paragraphs , we defined the current as the charge that flows through a cross-sectional area per unit time .
In order for charge to flow through an appliance , such as the headlight shown in , there must be a complete path ( or circuit ) from the positive terminal to the negative terminal .
Consider a simple circuit of a car battery , a switch , a headlight lamp , and wires that provide a current path between the components .
In order for the lamp to light , there must be a complete path for current flow .
In other words , a charge must be able to leave the positive terminal of the battery , travel through the component , and back to the negative terminal of the battery .
The switch is there to control the circuit .
Part ( a ) of the figure shows the simple circuit of a car battery , a switch , a conducting path , and a headlight lamp .
Also shown is the schematic of the circuit [ part ( b ) ] .
A schematic is a graphical representation of a circuit and is very useful in visualizing the main features of a circuit .
Schematics use standardized symbols to represent the components in a circuits and solid lines to represent the wires connecting the components .
The battery is shown as a series of long and short lines , representing the historic voltaic pile .
The lamp is shown as a circle with a loop inside , representing the filament of an incandescent bulb .
The switch is shown as two points with a conducting bar to connect the two points and the wires connecting the components are shown as solid lines .
The schematic in part ( c ) shows the direction of current flow when the switch is closed .
When the switch is closed in ( c ) , there is a complete path for charges to flow , from the positive terminal of the battery , through the switch , then through the headlight and back to the negative terminal of the battery .
Note that the direction of current flow is from positive to negative .
The direction of conventional current is always represented in the direction that positive charge would flow , from the positive terminal to the negative terminal .
The conventional current flows from the positive terminal to the negative terminal , but depending on the actual situation , positive charges , negative charges , or both may move .
In metal wires , for example , current is carried by electrons—that is , negative charges move .
In ionic solutions , such as salt water , both positive and negative charges move .
This is also true in nerve cells .
A Van de Graaff generator , used for nuclear research , can produce a current of pure positive charges , such as protons .
In the Tevatron Accelerator at Fermilab , before it was shut down in 2011 , beams of protons and antiprotons traveling in opposite directions were collided .
The protons are positive and therefore their current is in the same direction as they travel .
The antiprotons are negativity charged and thus their current is in the opposite direction that the actual particles travel .
A closer look at the current flowing through a wire is shown in .
The figure illustrates the movement of charged particles that compose a current .
The fact that conventional current is taken to be in the direction that positive charge would flow can be traced back to American scientist and statesman Benjamin Franklin in the 1700s .
He surmised that current would flow from the material with more electrical fluid—the positive material—to the negative material , which has less electrical fluid .
Franklin called this direction of current a positive current flow .
This was pretty advanced thinking for a man who knew nothing about the atom .
We now know that a material is positive if it has a greater number of protons than electrons , and it is negative if it has a greater number of electrons than protons .
It is important to realize that an electrical field is present in conductors and is responsible for producing the current .
In previous chapters , we considered the static electrical case , where charges in a conductor quickly redistribute themselves on the surface of the conductor in order to cancel out the external electrical field and restore equilibrium .
In the case of an electrical circuit , the charges are prevented from ever reaching equilibrium by an external source of electric potential , such as a battery .
The energy needed to move the charge is supplied by the electric potential from the battery .
Although the electrical field is responsible for the motion of the charges in the conductor , the work done on the charges by the electrical field does not increase the kinetic energy of the charges .
Rather , they interact with and collide with atoms and other free electrons in the conductor .
Thus , the electrons move in a zig-zag fashion and drift through the wire .
We should also note that even though it is convenient to discuss the direction of current , current is a scalar quantity .
When discussing the velocity of charges in a current , it is more appropriate to discuss the current density .
We will come back to this idea at the end of this section .
Electrical signals move very rapidly .
Telephone conversations carried by currents in wires cover large distances without noticeable delays .
Lights come on as soon as a light switch is moved to the ‘ on ’ position .
Most electrical signals carried by currents travel at speeds on the order of , a significant fraction of the speed of light .
Interestingly , the individual charges that make up the current move much slower on average , typically drifting at speeds on the order of .
How do we reconcile these two speeds , and what does it tell us about standard conductors ?
The high speed of electrical signals results from the fact that the force between charges acts rapidly at a distance .
Thus , when a free charge is forced into a wire , as in , the incoming charge pushes other charges ahead of it due to the repulsive force between like charges .
These moving charges push on charges farther down the line .
The density of charge in a system can not easily be increased , so the signal is passed on rapidly .
The resulting electrical shock wave moves through the system at nearly the speed of light .
To be precise , this fast-moving signal , or shock wave , is a rapidly propagating change in the electrical field .
Good conductors have large numbers of free charges .
In metals , the free charges are free electrons .
( In fact , good electrical conductors are often good heat conductors too , because large numbers of free electrons can transport thermal energy as well as carry electrical current . )
shows how free electrons move through an ordinary conductor .
The distance that an individual electron can move between collisions with atoms or other electrons is quite small .
The electron paths thus appear nearly random , like the motion of atoms in a gas .
But there is an electrical field in the conductor that causes the electrons to drift in the direction shown ( opposite to the field , since they are negative ) .
The drift velocity is the average velocity of the free charges .
Drift velocity is quite small , since there are so many free charges .
If we have an estimate of the density of free electrons in a conductor , we can calculate the drift velocity for a given current .
The larger the density , the lower the velocity required for a given current .
Free-electron collisions transfer energy to the atoms of the conductor .
The electrical field does work in moving the electrons through a distance , but that work does not increase the kinetic energy ( nor speed ) of the electrons .
The work is transferred to the conductor ’ s atoms , often increasing temperature .
Thus , a continuous power input is required to keep a current flowing .
( An exception is superconductors , for reasons we shall explore in a later chapter .
Superconductors can have a steady current without a continual supply of energy—a great energy savings . )
For a conductor that is not a superconductor , the supply of energy can be useful , as in an incandescent light bulb filament .
The supply of energy is necessary to increase the temperature of the tungsten filament , so that the filament glows .
We can obtain an expression for the relationship between current and drift velocity by considering the number of free charges in a segment of wire , as illustrated in .
The number of free charges per unit volume , or the number density of free charges , is given the symbol n where .
The value of n depends on the material .
The shaded segment has a volume , so that the number of free charges in the volume is .
The charge dQ in this segment is thus , where q is the amount of charge on each carrier .
( The magnitude of the charge of electrons is . )
The carriers of the current each have charge q and move with a drift velocity of magnitude .
Note that simple drift velocity is not the entire story .
The speed of an electron is sometimes much greater than its drift velocity .
In addition , not all of the electrons in a conductor can move freely , and those that do move might move somewhat faster or slower than the drift velocity .
So what do we mean by free electrons ?
Atoms in a metallic conductor are packed in the form of a lattice structure .
Some electrons are far enough away from the atomic nuclei that they do not experience the attraction of the nuclei as strongly as the inner electrons do .
These are the free electrons .
They are not bound to a single atom but can instead move freely among the atoms in a “ sea ” of electrons .
When an electrical field is applied , these free electrons respond by accelerating .
As they move , they collide with the atoms in the lattice and with other electrons , generating thermal energy , and the conductor gets warmer .
In an insulator , the organization of the atoms and the structure do not allow for such free electrons .
As you know , electric power is usually supplied to equipment and appliances through round wires made of a conducting material ( copper , aluminum , silver , or gold ) that are stranded or solid .
The diameter of the wire determines the currentcarrying capacity—the larger the diameter , the greater the current-carrying capacity .
Even though the current-carrying capacity is determined by the diameter , wire is not normally characterized by the diameter directly .
Instead , wire is commonly sold in a unit known as “ gauge. ” Wires are manufactured by passing the material through circular forms called “ drawing dies. ” In order to make thinner wires , manufacturers draw the wires through multiple dies of successively thinner diameter .
Historically , the gauge of the wire was related to the number of drawing processes required to manufacture the wire .
For this reason , the larger the gauge , the smaller the diameter .
In the United States , the American Wire Gauge ( AWG ) was developed to standardize the system .
Household wiring commonly consists of 10-gauge ( 2.588-mm diameter ) to 14-gauge ( 1.628-mm diameter ) wire .
A device used to measure the gauge of wire is shown in .
Calculate the drift velocity of electrons in a copper wire with a diameter of 2.053 mm ( 12-gauge ) carrying a 20.0-A current , given that there is one free electron per copper atom .
( Household wiring often contains 12-gauge copper wire , and the maximum current allowed in such wire is usually 20.0 A . )
The density of copper is and the atomic mass of copper is 63.54 g/mol .
We can calculate the drift velocity using the equation .
The current and is the charge of an electron .
We can calculate the area of a cross-section of the wire using the formula , where r is one-half the diameter .
The given diameter is 2.053 mm , so r is 1.0265 mm .
We are given the density of copper , , and the atomic mass of copper is .
We can use these two quantities along with Avogadro ’ s number , , to determine n , the number of free electrons per cubic meter .
First , we calculate the density of free electrons in copper .
There is one free electron per copper atom .
Therefore , the number of free electrons is the same as the number of copper atoms per .
We can now find n as follows : is The cross-sectional area of the wire is Rearranging to isolate drift velocity gives The minus sign indicates that the negative charges are moving in the direction opposite to conventional current .
The small value for drift velocity ( on the order of confirms that the signal moves on the order of times faster ( about than the charges that carry it .
Check Your Understanding In , the drift velocity was calculated for a 2.053-mm diameter ( 12-gauge ) copper wire carrying a 20-amp current .
Would the drift velocity change for a 1.628-mm diameter ( 14-gauge ) wire carrying the same 20-amp current ?
Although it is often convenient to attach a negative or positive sign to indicate the overall direction of motion of the charges , current is a scalar quantity , .
It is often necessary to discuss the details of the motion of the charge , instead of , a vector discussing the overall motion of the charges .
In such cases , it is necessary to discuss the current density , quantity .
The current density is the flow of charge through an infinitesimal area , divided by the area .
The current density must take into account the local magnitude and direction of the charge flow , which varies from point to point .
The unit of current density is ampere per meter squared , and the direction is defined as the direction of net flow of positive charges through the area .
The relationship between the current and the current density can be seen in .
The differential current flow through the area is found as where is the angle between the area and the current density .
The total current passing through area can be found by integrating over the area , Consider the magnitude of the current density , which is the current divided by the area : is in the same direction as the electrical field .
If q is positive , is in the is in the opposite direction of .
Either way , the direction of the current density Thus , the current density is If q is negative , direction of the electrical field .
The current supplied to a lamp with a 100-W light bulb is 0.87 amps .
The lamp is wired using a copper wire with diameter 2.588 mm ( 10-gauge ) .
Find the magnitude of the current density .
The current density is the current moving through an infinitesimal cross-sectional area divided by the area .
We can calculate the magnitude of the current density using .
The current is given as 0.87 A .
The cross-sectional area can be calculated to be .
Calculate the current density using the given current and the area , found to be .
The current density in a conducting wire depends on the current through the conducting wire and the crosssectional area of the wire .
For a given current , as the diameter of the wire increases , the charge density decreases .
Check Your Understanding The current density is proportional to the current and inversely proportional to the area .
If the current density in a conducting wire increases , what would happen to the drift velocity of the charges in the wire ?
What is the significance of the current density ?
The current density is proportional to the current , and the current is the number of charges that pass through a cross-sectional area per second .
The charges move through the conductor , accelerated by the electric force provided by the electrical field .
The electrical field is created when a voltage is applied across the conductor .
In , we will use this relationship between the current density and the electrical field to examine the relationship between the current through a conductor and the voltage applied .
What drives current ?
We can think of various devices—such as batteries , generators , wall outlets , and so on—that are necessary to maintain a current .
All such devices create a potential difference and are referred to as voltage sources .
When a voltage source is connected to a conductor , it applies a potential difference V that creates an electrical field .
The electrical field , in turn , exerts force on free charges , causing current .
The amount of current depends not only on the magnitude of the voltage , but also on the characteristics of the material that the current is flowing through .
The material can resist the flow of the charges , and the measure of how much a material resists the flow of charges is known as the resistivity .
This resistivity is crudely analogous to the friction between two materials that resists motion .
When a voltage is applied to a conductor , an electrical field is created , and charges in the conductor feel a force due to the electrical field .
The current density that results depends on the electrical field and the properties of the material .
This dependence can be very complex .
In some materials , including metals at a given temperature , the current density is approximately proportional to the electrical field .
In these cases , the current density can be modeled as where is the electrical conductivity .
The electrical conductivity is analogous to thermal conductivity and is a measure of a material ’ s ability to conduct or transmit electricity .
Conductors have a higher electrical conductivity than insulators .
Since the electrical conductivity is , the units are Here , we define a unit named the ohm with the Greek symbol uppercase omega , .
The unit is named after Georg Simon Ohm , whom we will discuss later in this chapter .
The is used to avoid confusion with the number 0 .
One ohm equals one volt per amp : .
The units of electrical conductivity are therefore .
Conductivity is an intrinsic property of a material .
Another intrinsic property of a material is the resistivity , or electrical resistivity .
The resistivity of a material is a measure of how strongly a material opposes the flow of electrical current .
The symbol for resistivity is the lowercase Greek letter rho , , and resistivity is the reciprocal of electrical conductivity : The unit of resistivity in SI units is the ohm-meter .
We can define the resistivity in terms of the electrical field and the current density , The greater the resistivity , the larger the field needed to produce a given current density .
The lower the resistivity , the larger the current density produced by a given electrical field .
Good conductors have a high conductivity and low resistivity .
Good insulators have a low conductivity and a high resistivity .
lists resistivity and conductivity values for various materials .
The materials listed in the table are separated into categories of conductors , semiconductors , and insulators , based on broad groupings of resistivity .
Conductors have the smallest resistivity , and insulators have the largest ; semiconductors have intermediate resistivity .
Conductors have varying but large , free charge densities , whereas most charges in insulators are bound to atoms and are not free to move .
Semiconductors are intermediate , having far fewer free charges than conductors , but having properties that make the number of free charges depend strongly on the type and amount of impurities in the semiconductor .
These unique properties of semiconductors are put to use in modern electronics , as we will explore in later chapters .
Calculate the current density , resistance , and electrical field of a 5-m length of copper wire with a diameter of 2.053 mm ( 12-gauge ) carrying a current of .
We can calculate the current density by first finding the cross-sectional area of the wire , which is .
The resistance can be found using the length of the wire , the area , and the resistivity of copper , where .
The resistivity and current density can be used to find the electrical field .
Note that the current density and electrical field are independent of the length of the wire , but the voltage depends on the length .
Check Your Understanding Copper wires use routinely used for extension cords and house wiring for several reasons .
Copper has the highest electrical conductivity rating , and therefore the lowest resistivity rating , of all nonprecious metals .
Also important is the tensile strength , where the tensile strength is a measure of the force required to pull an object to the point where it breaks .
The tensile strength of a material is the maximum amount of tensile stress it can take before breaking .
Copper has a high tensile strength , .
A third important characteristic is ductility .
Ductility is a measure of a material ’ s ability to be drawn into wires and a measure of the flexibility of the material , and copper has a high ductility .
Summarizing , for a conductor to be a suitable candidate for making wire , there are at least three important characteristics : low resistivity , high tensile strength , and high ductility .
What other materials are used for wiring and what are the advantages and disadvantages ?
View this to see what the effects of the cross-sectional area , the length , and the resistivity of a wire are on the resistance of a conductor .
Adjust the variables using slide bars and see if the resistance becomes smaller or larger .
Looking back at , you will see a column labeled “ Temperature Coefficient. ” The resistivity of some materials has a strong temperature dependence .
In some materials , such as copper , the resistivity increases with increasing temperature .
In fact , in most conducting metals , the resistivity increases with increasing temperature .
The increasing temperature causes increased vibrations of the atoms in the lattice structure of the metals , which impede the motion of the electrons .
In other materials , such as carbon , the resistivity decreases with increasing temperature .
In many materials , the dependence is approximately linear and can be modeled using a linear equation : where is the resistivity of the material at temperature T , is the temperature coefficient of the material , and is the resistivity at , usually taken as .
Note also that the temperature coefficient is negative for the semiconductors listed in , meaning that their resistivity decreases with increasing temperature .
They become better conductors at higher temperature , because increased thermal agitation increases the number of free charges available to carry current .
This property of decreasing with temperature is also related to the type and amount of impurities present in the semiconductors .
We now consider the resistance of a wire or component .
The resistance is a measure of how difficult it is to pass current through a wire or component .
Resistance depends on the resistivity .
The resistivity is a characteristic of the material used to fabricate a wire or other electrical component , whereas the resistance is a characteristic of the wire or component .
To calculate the resistance , consider a section of conducting wire with cross-sectional area A , length L , and resistivity A battery is connected across the conductor , providing a potential difference across it .
The potential difference produces an electrical field that is proportional to the current density , according to .
For a given voltage , the higher the resistance , the lower the current .
A common component in electronic circuits is the resistor .
The resistor can be used to reduce current flow or provide a voltage drop .
shows the symbols used for a resistor in schematic diagrams of a circuit .
Two commonly used standards for circuit diagrams are provided by the American National Standard Institute ( ANSI , pronounced “ AN-see ” ) and the International Electrotechnical Commission ( IEC ) .
Both systems are commonly used .
We use the ANSI standard in this text for its visual recognition , but we note that for larger , more complex circuits , the IEC standard may have a cleaner presentation , making it easier to read .
A resistor can be modeled as a cylinder with a cross-sectional area A and a length L , made of a material with a resistivity .
The resistance of the resistor is .
The most common material used to make a resistor is carbon .
A carbon track is wrapped around a ceramic core , and two copper leads are attached .
A second type of resistor is the metal film resistor , which also has a ceramic core .
The track is made from a metal oxide material , which has semiconductive properties similar to carbon .
Again , copper leads are inserted into the ends of the resistor .
The resistor is then painted and marked for identification .
A resistor has four colored bands , as shown in .
Resistances range over many orders of magnitude .
Some ceramic insulators , such as those used to support power lines , have resistances of or more .
A dry person may have a hand-to-foot resistance of , whereas the resistance of the human heart is about .
A meter-long piece of large-diameter copper wire may have a resistance of , and superconductors have no resistance at all at low temperatures .
As we have seen , resistance is related to the shape of an object and the material of which it is composed .
Numerous thermometers are based on the effect of temperature on resistance .
One of the most common thermometers is based on the thermistor , a semiconductor crystal with a strong temperature dependence , the resistance of which is measured to obtain its temperature .
The device is small , so that it quickly comes into thermal equilibrium with the part of a person it touches .
Although caution must be used in applying and for temperature changes greater than , for tungsten , the equations work reasonably well for very large temperature changes .
A tungsten filament at has a resistance of .
What would the resistance be if the temperature is increased to ?
This is a straightforward application of , since the original resistance of the filament is given as and the temperature change is .
If the filament is used in an incandescent light bulb , the initial current through the filament when the bulb is first energized will be higher than the current after the filament reaches the operating temperature .
Check Your Understanding A strain gauge is an electrical device to measure strain , as shown below .
It consists of a flexible , insulating backing that supports a conduction foil pattern .
The resistance of the foil changes as the backing is stretched .
How does the strain gauge resistance change ?
Is the strain gauge affected by temperature changes ?
Long cables can sometimes act like antennas , picking up electronic noise , which are signals from other equipment and appliances .
Coaxial cables are used for many applications that require this noise to be eliminated .
For example , they can be found in the home in cable TV connections or other audiovisual connections .
Coaxial cables consist of an inner conductor of radius surrounded by a second , outer concentric conductor with radius .
The space between the two is normally filled with an insulator such as polyethylene plastic .
A small amount of radial leakage current occurs between the two conductors .
Determine the resistance of a coaxial cable of length L .
We can not use the equation and integrate .
We first find an expression for dR and then integrate from to , directly .
Instead , we look at concentric cylindrical shells , with thickness dr , The resistance of a coaxial cable depends on its length , the inner and outer radii , and the resistivity of the material separating the two conductors .
Since this resistance is not infinite , a small leakage current occurs between the two conductors .
This leakage current leads to the attenuation ( or weakening ) of the signal being sent through the cable .
Check Your Understanding The resistance between the two conductors of a coaxial cable depends on the resistivity of the material separating the two conductors , the length of the cable and the inner and outer radius of the two conductor .
If you are designing a coaxial cable , how does the resistance between the two conductors depend on these variables ?
View this to see how the voltage applied and the resistance of the material the current flows through affects the current through the material .
You can visualize the collisions of the electrons and the atoms of the material effect the temperature of the material .
We have been discussing three electrical properties so far in this chapter : current , voltage , and resistance .
It turns out that many materials exhibit a simple relationship among the values for these properties , known as Ohm ’ s law .
Many other materials do not show this relationship , so despite being called Ohm ’ s law , it is not considered a law of nature , like Newton ’ s laws or the laws of thermodynamics .
But it is very useful for calculations involving materials that do obey Ohm ’ s law .
The current that flows through most substances is directly proportional to the voltage V applied to it .
The German physicist Georg Simon Ohm ( 1787–1854 ) was the first to demonstrate experimentally that the current in a metal wire is directly proportional to the voltage applied : This important relationship is the basis for Ohm ’ s law .
It can be viewed as a cause-and-effect relationship , with voltage the cause and current the effect .
This is an empirical law , which is to say that it is an experimentally observed phenomenon , like friction .
Such a linear relationship doesn ’ t always occur .
Any material , component , or device that obeys Ohm ’ s law , where the current through the device is proportional to the voltage applied , is known as an ohmic material or ohmic component .
Any material or component that does not obey Ohm ’ s law is known as a nonohmic material or nonohmic component .
In a paper published in 1827 , Georg Ohm described an experiment in which he measured voltage across and current through various simple electrical circuits containing various lengths of wire .
A similar experiment is shown in .
This experiment is used to observe the current through a resistor that results from an applied voltage .
In this simple circuit , a resistor is connected in series with a battery .
The voltage is measured with a voltmeter , which must be placed across the resistor ( in parallel with the resistor ) .
The current is measured with an ammeter , which must be in line with the resistor ( in series with the resistor ) .
In this updated version of Ohm ’ s original experiment , several measurements of the current were made for several different voltages .
When the battery was hooked up as in ( a ) , the current flowed in the clockwise direction and the readings of the voltmeter and ammeter were positive .
Does the behavior of the current change if the current flowed in the opposite direction ?
To get the current to flow in the opposite direction , the leads of the battery can be switched .
When the leads of the battery were switched , the readings of the voltmeter and ammeter readings were negative because the current flowed in the opposite direction , in this case , counterclockwise .
Results of a similar experiment are shown in .
In this experiment , the voltage applied across the resistor varies from −10.00 to +10.00 V , by increments of 1.00 V. The current through the resistor and the voltage across the resistor are measured .
A plot is made of the voltage versus the current , and the result is approximately linear .
The slope of the line is the resistance , or the voltage divided by the current .
This result is known as Ohm ’ s law : where V is the voltage measured in volts across the object in question , I is the current measured through the object in amps , and R is the resistance in units of ohms .
As stated previously , any device that shows a linear relationship between the voltage and the current is known as an ohmic device .
A resistor is therefore an ohmic device .
A carbon resistor at room temperature is attached to a 9.00-V battery and the current measured through the resistor is 3.00 mA .
( a ) What is the resistance of the resistor measured in ohms ?
( b ) If the temperature of the resistor is increased to by heating the resistor , what is the current through the resistor ?
( a ) The resistance can be found using Ohm ’ s law .
Ohm ’ s law states that , so the resistance can be found using .
( b ) First , the resistance is temperature dependent so the new resistance after the resistor has been heated can be found using .
The current can be found using Ohm ’ s law in the form .
Using Ohm ’ s law and solving for the resistance yields the resistance at room temperature : The resistance at can be found using where the temperature coefficient for .
The current through the heated resistor is A change in temperature of resulted in a 2.00 % change in current .
This may not seem like a very great change , but changing electrical characteristics can have a strong effect on the circuits .
For this reason , many electronic appliances , such as computers , contain fans to remove the heat dissipated by components in the electric circuits .
Check Your Understanding The voltage supplied to your house varies as resistor is connected across this voltage , will Ohm ’ s law still be valid ?
If a See how the relates to a simple circuit .
Adjust the voltage and resistance , and see the current change according to Ohm ’ s law .
The sizes of the symbols in the equation change to match the circuit diagram .
Nonohmic devices do not exhibit a linear relationship between the voltage and the current .
One such device is the semiconducting circuit element known as a diode .
A diode is a circuit device that allows current flow in only one direction .
A diagram of a simple circuit consisting of a battery , a diode , and a resistor is shown in .
Although we do not cover the theory of the diode in this section , the diode can be tested to see if it is an ohmic or a nonohmic device .
A plot of current versus voltage is shown in .
Note that the behavior of the diode is shown as current versus voltage , whereas the resistor operation was shown as voltage versus current .
A diode consists of an anode and a cathode .
When the anode is at a negative potential and the cathode is at a positive potential , as shown in part ( a ) , the diode is said to have reverse bias .
With reverse bias , the diode has an extremely large resistance and there is very little current flow—essentially zero current—through the diode and the resistor .
As the voltage applied to the circuit increases , the current remains essentially zero , until the voltage reaches the breakdown voltage and the diode conducts current , as shown in .
When the battery and the potential across the diode are reversed , making the anode positive and the cathode negative , the diode conducts and current flows through the diode if the voltage is greater than 0.7 V. The resistance of the diode is close to zero .
( This is the reason for the resistor in the circuit ; if it were not there , the current would become very large . )
You can see from the graph in that the voltage and the current do not have a linear relationship .
Thus , the diode is an example of a nonohmic device .
Ohm ’ s law is commonly stated as , but originally it was stated as a microscopic view , in terms of the current density , the conductivity , and the electrical field .
This microscopic view suggests the proportionality comes from the drift velocity of the free electrons in the metal that results from an applied electrical field .
As stated earlier , the current density is proportional to the applied electrical field .
The reformulation of Ohm ’ s law is credited to Gustav Kirchhoff , whose name we will see again in the next chapter .
In an electric circuit , electrical energy is continuously converted into other forms of energy .
For example , when a current flows in a conductor , electrical energy is converted into thermal energy within the conductor .
The electrical field , supplied by the voltage source , accelerates the free electrons , increasing their kinetic energy for a short time .
This increased kinetic energy is converted into thermal energy through collisions with the ions of the lattice structure of the conductor .
In , we defined power as the rate at which work is done by a force measured in watts .
Power can also be defined as the rate at which energy is transferred .
In this section , we discuss the time rate of energy transfer , or power , in an electric circuit .
Power is associated by many people with electricity .
Power transmission lines might come to mind .
We also think of light bulbs in terms of their power ratings in watts .
What is the expression for electric power ?
Let us compare a 25-W bulb with a 60-W bulb ( ( a ) ) .
The 60-W bulb glows brighter than the 25-W bulb .
Although it is not shown , a 60-W light bulb is also warmer than the 25-W bulb .
The heat and light is produced by from the conversion of electrical energy .
The kinetic energy lost by the electrons in collisions is converted into the internal energy of the conductor and radiation .
How are voltage , current , and resistance related to electric power ?
To calculate electric power , consider a voltage difference existing across a material .
The electric potential is higher than the electric potential at , and the voltage difference is negative .
As discussed in , an electrical field exists between the two potentials , which points from the higher potential to the lower potential .
Recall that the electrical potential is defined as the potential energy per charge , , and the charge loses potential energy moving through the potential difference .
If the charge is positive , the charge experiences a force due to the electrical field .
This force is necessary to keep the charge moving .
This force does not act to accelerate the charge through the entire distance because of the interactions of the charge with atoms and free electrons in the material .
The speed , and therefore the kinetic energy , of the charge do not increase during the entire trip across , and charge passing through area has the same drift velocity as the charge that passes through area .
However , work is done on the charge , by the electrical field , which changes the potential energy .
The lost electrical potential energy appears as thermal energy in the material .
On a microscopic scale , the energy transfer is due to collisions between the charge and the molecules of the material , which leads to an increase in temperature in the material .
The loss of potential energy results in an increase in the temperature of the material , which is dissipated as radiation .
In a resistor , it is dissipated as heat , and in a light bulb , it is dissipated as heat and light .
The power dissipated by the material as heat and light is equal to the time rate of change of the work : With a resistor , the voltage drop across the resistor is dissipated as heat .
Ohm ’ s law states that the voltage across the resistor is equal to the current times the resistance , .
The power dissipated by the resistor is therefore If a resistor is connected to a battery , the power dissipated as radiant energy by the wires and the resistor is equal to .
The power supplied from the battery is equal to current times the voltage , .
The electric power gained or lost by any device has the form The power dissipated by a resistor has the form Different insights can be gained from the three different expressions for electric power .
For example , implies that the lower the resistance connected to a given voltage source , the greater the power delivered .
Furthermore , since voltage is squared in , the effect of applying a higher voltage is perhaps greater than expected .
Thus , when the voltage is doubled to a 25-W bulb , its power nearly quadruples to about 100 W , burning it out .
If the bulb ’ s resistance remained constant , its power would be exactly 100 W , but at the higher temperature , its resistance is higher , too .
( a ) What is the power consumed by the motor ?
( b ) What is the power used in lifting the object ?
Ignore air resistance .
( c ) Assuming that the difference in the power consumed by the motor and the power used lifting the object are dissipated as heat by the resistance of the motor , estimate the resistance of the motor ?
( a ) The power consumed by the motor can be found using .
( b ) The power used in lifting the object at a constant speed can be found using , where the speed is the distance divided by the time .
The upward force supplied by the motor is equal to the weight of the object because the acceleration is constant .
( c ) The resistance of the motor can be found using .
The resistance of the motor is due to many windings of copper wire .
The power dissipated by the motor can be significant since the thermal power dissipated by the motor is proportional to the square of the current .
Check Your Understanding Electric motors have a reasonably high efficiency .
A 100-hp motor can have an efficiency of 90 % and a 1-hp motor can have an efficiency of 80 % .
Why is it important to use highperformance motors ?
A fuse is a device that protects a circuit from currents that are too high .
A fuse is basically a short piece of wire between two contacts .
As we have seen , when a current is running through a conductor , the kinetic energy of the charge carriers is converted into thermal energy in the conductor .
The piece of wire in the fuse is under tension and has a low melting point .
The wire is designed to heat up and break at the rated current .
The fuse is destroyed and must be replaced , but it protects the rest of the circuit .
Fuses act quickly , but there is a small time delay while the wire heats up and breaks .
Circuit breakers are also rated for a maximum current , and open to protect the circuit , but can be reset .
Circuit breakers react much faster .
The operation of circuit breakers is not within the scope of this chapter and will be discussed in later chapters .
Another method of protecting equipment and people is the ground fault circuit interrupter ( GFCI ) , which is common in bathrooms and kitchens .
The GFCI outlets respond very quickly to changes in current .
These outlets open when there is a change in magnetic field produced by current-carrying conductors , which is also beyond the scope of this chapter and is covered in a later chapter .
The more electric appliances you use and the longer they are left on , the higher your electric bill .
This familiar fact is based on the relationship between energy and power .
You pay for the energy used .
Since , we see that is the energy used by a device using power P for a time interval t .
If power is delivered at a constant rate , then then the energy can be found by .
For example , the more light bulbs burning , the greater P used ; the longer they are on , the greater t is .
The energy unit on electric bills is the kilowatt-hour , consistent with the relationship .
It is easy to estimate the cost of operating electrical appliances if you have some idea of their power consumption rate in watts or kilowatts , the time they are on in hours , and the cost per kilowatt-hour for your electric utility .
Kilowatt-hours , like all other specialized energy units such as food calories , can be converted into joules .
You can prove to yourself that .
The electrical energy ( E ) used can be reduced either by reducing the time of use or by reducing the power consumption of that appliance or fixture .
This not only reduces the cost but also results in a reduced impact on the environment .
Improvements to lighting are some of the fastest ways to reduce the electrical energy used in a home or business .
About 20 % of a home ’ s use of energy goes to lighting , and the number for commercial establishments is closer to 40 % .
Fluorescent lights are about four times more efficient than incandescent lights—this is true for both the long tubes and the compact fluorescent lights ( CFLs ) .
( See ( b ) . )
Thus , a 60-W incandescent bulb can be replaced by a 15-W CFL , which has the same brightness and color .
CFLs have a bent tube inside a globe or a spiral-shaped tube , all connected to a standard screw-in base that fits standard incandescent light sockets .
( Original problems with color , flicker , shape , and high initial investment for CFLs have been addressed in recent years . )
The heat transfer from these CFLs is less , and they last up to 10 times longer than incandescent bulbs .
The significance of an investment in such bulbs is addressed in the next example .
New white LED lights ( which are clusters of small LED bulbs ) are even more efficient ( twice that of CFLs ) and last five times longer than CFLs .
The typical replacement for a 100-W incandescent bulb is a 20-W LED bulb .
The 20-W LED bulb can provide the same amount of light output as the 100-W incandescent light bulb .
What is the cost savings for using the LED bulb in place of the incandescent bulb for one year , assuming $ 0.10 per kilowatt-hour is the average energy rate charged by the power company ?
Assume that the bulb is turned on for three hours a day .
( a ) Calculate the energy used during the year for each bulb , using .
( b ) Multiply the energy by the cost .
Calculate the power for each bulb .
Calculate the cost for each .
A LED bulb uses 80 % less energy than the incandescent bulb , saving $ 8.76 over the incandescent bulb for one year .
The LED bulb can cost $ 20.00 and the 100-W incandescent bulb can cost $ 0.75 , which should be calculated into the computation .
A typical lifespan of an incandescent bulb is 1200 hours and is 50,000 hours for the LED bulb .
The incandescent bulb would last 1.08 years at 3 hours a day and the LED bulb would last 45.66 years .
The initial cost of the LED bulb is high , but the cost to the home owner will be $ 0.69 for the incandescent bulbs versus $ 0.44 for the LED bulbs per year .
( Note that the LED bulbs are coming down in price . )
The cost savings per year is approximately $ 8.50 , and that is just for one bulb .
Check Your Understanding Is the efficiency of the various light bulbs the only consideration when comparing the various light bulbs ?
Changing light bulbs from incandescent bulbs to CFL or LED bulbs is a simple way to reduce energy consumption in homes and commercial sites .
CFL bulbs operate with a much different mechanism than do incandescent lights .
The mechanism is complex and beyond the scope of this chapter , but here is a very general description of the mechanism .
CFL bulbs contain argon and mercury vapor housed within a spiral-shaped tube .
The CFL bulbs use a “ ballast ” that increases the voltage used by the CFL bulb .
The ballast produce an electrical current , which passes through the gas mixture and excites the gas molecules .
The excited gas molecules produce ultraviolet ( UV ) light , which in turn stimulates the fluorescent coating on the inside of the tube .
This coating fluoresces in the visible spectrum , emitting visible light .
Traditional fluorescent tubes and CFL bulbs had a short time delay of up to a few seconds while the mixture was being “ warmed up ” and the molecules reached an excited state .
It should be noted that these bulbs do contain mercury , which is poisonous , but if the bulb is broken , the mercury is never released .
Even if the bulb is broken , the mercury tends to remain in the fluorescent coating .
The amount is also quite small and the advantage of the energy saving may outweigh the disadvantage of using mercury .
The CFL light bulbs are being replaced with LED light bulbs , where LED stands for “ light-emitting diode. ” The diode was briefly discussed as a nonohmic device , made of semiconducting material , which essentially permits current flow in one direction .
LEDs are a special type of diode made of semiconducting materials infused with impurities in combinations and concentrations that enable the extra energy from the movement of the electrons during electrical excitation to be converted into visible light .
Semiconducting devices will be explained in greater detail in .
Commercial LEDs are quickly becoming the standard for commercial and residential lighting , replacing incandescent and CFL bulbs .
They are designed for the visible spectrum and are constructed from gallium doped with arsenic and phosphorous atoms .
The color emitted from an LED depends on the materials used in the semiconductor and the current .
In the early years of LED development , small LEDs found on circuit boards were red , green , and yellow , but LED light bulbs can now be programmed to produce millions of colors of light as well as many different hues of white light .
The energy savings can be significant when replacing an incandescent light bulb or a CFL light bulb with an LED light .
Light bulbs are rated by the amount of power that the bulb consumes , and the amount of light output is measured in lumens .
The lumen ( lm ) is the SI -derived unit of luminous flux and is a measure of the total quantity of visible light emitted by a source .
A 60-W incandescent light bulb can be replaced with a 13to 15-W CFL bulb or a 6to 8-W LED bulb , all three of which have a light output of approximately 800 lm .
A table of light output for some commonly used light bulbs appears in .
The life spans of the three types of bulbs are significantly different .
An LED bulb has a life span of 50,000 hours , whereas the CFL has a lifespan of 8000 hours and the incandescent lasts a mere 1200 hours .
The LED bulb is the most durable , easily withstanding rough treatment such as jarring and bumping .
The incandescent light bulb has little tolerance to the same treatment since the filament and glass can easily break .
The CFL bulb is also less durable than the LED bulb because of its glass construction .
The amount of heat emitted is 3.4 btu/h for the 8-W LED bulb , 85 btu/h for the 60-W incandescent bulb , and 30 btu/h for the CFL bulb .
As mentioned earlier , a major drawback of the CFL bulb is that it contains mercury , a neurotoxin , and must be disposed of as hazardous waste .
From these data , it is easy to understand why the LED light bulb is quickly becoming the standard in lighting .
In this chapter , we have discussed relationships between voltages , current , resistance , and power .
shows a summary of the relationships between these measurable quantities for ohmic devices .
( Recall that ohmic devices follow Ohm ’ s law . )
For example , if you need to calculate the power , use the pink section , which shows that , , and .
Which equation you use depends on what values you are given , or you measure .
For example if you are given the current and the resistance , use .
Although all the possible combinations may seem overwhelming , don ’ t forget that they all are combinations of just two equations , Ohm ’ s law and power .
Touch the power supply of your laptop computer or some other device .
It probably feels slightly warm .
That heat is an unwanted byproduct of the process of converting household electric power into a current that can be used by your device .
Although electric power is reasonably efficient , other losses are associated with it .
As discussed in the section on power and energy , transmission of electric power produces line losses .
These line losses exist whether the power is generated from conventional power plants ( using coal , oil , or gas ) , nuclear plants , solar plants , hydroelectric plants , or wind farms .
These losses can be reduced , but not eliminated , by transmitting using a higher voltage .
It would be wonderful if these line losses could be eliminated , but that would require transmission lines that have zero resistance .
In a world that has a global interest in not wasting energy , the reduction or elimination of this unwanted thermal energy would be a significant achievement .
Is this possible ?
In 1911 , Heike Kamerlingh Onnes of Leiden University , a Dutch physicist , was looking at the temperature dependence of the resistance of the element mercury .
He cooled the sample of mercury and noticed the familiar behavior of a linear dependence of resistance on temperature ; as the temperature decreased , the resistance decreased .
Kamerlingh Onnes continued to cool the sample of mercury , using liquid helium .
As the temperature approached , the resistance abruptly went to zero .
This temperature is known as the critical temperature for mercury .
The sample of mercury entered into a phase where the resistance was absolutely zero .
This phenomenon is known as superconductivity .
( Note : If you connect the leads of a three-digit ohmmeter across a conductor , the reading commonly shows up as .
The resistance of the conductor is not actually zero , it is less than . )
There are various methods to measure very small resistances , such as the four-point method , but an ohmmeter is not an acceptable method to use for testing resistance in superconductivity .
As research continued , several other materials were found to enter a superconducting phase , when the temperature reached near absolute zero .
In 1941 , an alloy of niobium-nitride was found that could become superconducting at and in 1953 , vanadium-silicon was found to become superconductive at The temperatures for the transition into superconductivity were slowly creeping higher .
Strangely , many materials that make good conductors , such as copper , silver , and gold , do not exhibit superconductivity .
Imagine the energy savings if transmission lines for electric power-generating stations could be made to be superconducting at temperatures near room temperature !
A resistance of zero ohms means no losses and a great boost to reducing energy consumption .
The problem is that is still very cold and in the range of liquid helium temperatures .
At this temperature , it is not cost effective to transmit electrical energy because of the cooling requirements .
A large jump was seen in 1986 , when a team of researchers , headed by Dr. Ching Wu Chu of Houston University , fabricated a brittle , ceramic compound with a transition temperature of .
The ceramic material , composed of yttrium barium copper oxide ( YBCO ) , was an insulator at room temperature .
Although this temperature still seems quite cold , it is near the boiling point of liquid nitrogen , a liquid commonly used in refrigeration .
There were and are many engineering problems to overcome .
For example , unlike traditional electrical cables , which are flexible and have a decent tensile strength , ceramics are brittle and would break rather than stretch under pressure .
Processes that are rather simple with traditional cables , such as making connections , become difficult when working with ceramics .
The problems are difficult and complex , and material scientists and engineers are coming up with innovative solutions .
An interesting consequence of the resistance going to zero is that once a current is established in a superconductor , it persists without an applied voltage source .
Current loops in a superconductor have been set up and the current loops have been observed to persist for years without decaying .
Zero resistance is not the only interesting phenomenon that occurs as the materials reach their transition temperatures .
A second effect is the exclusion of magnetic fields .
This is known as the Meissner effect .
A light , permanent magnet placed over a superconducting sample will levitate in a stable position above the superconductor .
High-speed trains have been developed that levitate on strong superconducting magnets , eliminating the friction normally experienced between the train and the tracks .
In Japan , the Yamanashi Maglev test line opened on April 3 , 1997 .
In April 2015 , the MLX01 test vehicle attained a speed of 374 mph ( 603 km/h ) .
shows a select list of elements , compounds , and high-temperature superconductors , along with the critical temperatures for which they become superconducting .
Each section is sorted from the highest critical temperature to the lowest .
Also listed is the critical magnetic field for some of the materials .
This is the strength of the magnetic field that destroys superconductivity .
Finally , the type of the superconductor is listed .
There are two types of superconductors .
There are 30 pure metals that exhibit zero resistivity below their critical temperature and exhibit the Meissner effect , the property of excluding magnetic fields from the interior of the superconductor while the superconductor is at a temperature below the critical temperature .
These metals are called Type I superconductors .
The superconductivity exists only below their critical temperatures and below a critical magnetic field strength .
Type I superconductors are well described by the BCS theory ( described next ) .
Type I superconductors have limited practical applications because the strength of the critical magnetic field needed to destroy the superconductivity is quite low .
Type II superconductors are found to have much higher critical magnetic fields and therefore can carry much higher current densities while remaining in the superconducting state .
A collection of various ceramics containing barium-copper-oxide have much higher critical temperatures for the transition into a superconducting state .
Superconducting materials that belong to this subcategory of the Type II superconductors are often categorized as high-temperature superconductors .
Type I superconductors , along with some Type II superconductors can be modeled using the BCS theory , proposed by John Bardeen , Leon Cooper , and Robert Schrieffer .
Although the theory is beyond the scope of this chapter , a short summary of the theory is provided here .
( More detail is provided in . )
The theory considers pairs of electrons and how they are coupled together through lattice-vibration interactions .
Through the interactions with the crystalline lattice , electrons near the Fermi energy level feel a small attractive force and form pairs ( Cooper pairs ) , and the coupling is known as a phonon interaction .
Single electrons are fermions , which are particles that obey the Pauli exclusion principle .
The Pauli exclusion principle in quantum mechanics states that two identical fermions ( particles with half-integer spin ) can not occupy the same quantum state simultaneously .
Each electron has four quantum numbers .
As the material enters a superconducting state , pairs of electrons act more like bosons , which can condense into the same energy level and need not obey the Pauli exclusion principle .
The electron pairs have a slightly lower energy and leave an energy gap above them on the order of 0.001 eV .
This energy gap inhibits collision interactions that lead to ordinary resistivity .
When the material is below the critical temperature , the thermal energy is less than the band gap and the material exhibits zero resistivity .
Superconductors can be used to make superconducting magnets .
These magnets are 10 times stronger than the strongest electromagnets .
These magnets are currently in use in magnetic resonance imaging ( MRI ) , which produces high-quality images of the body interior without dangerous radiation .
Another interesting application of superconductivity is the SQUID ( superconducting quantum interference device ) .
A SQUID is a very sensitive magnetometer used to measure extremely subtle magnetic fields .
The operation of the SQUID is based on superconducting loops containing Josephson junctions .
A Josephson junction is the result of a theoretical prediction made by B. D. Josephson in an article published in 1962 .
In the article , Josephson described how a supercurrent can flow between two pieces of superconductor separated by a thin layer of insulator .
This phenomenon is now called the Josephson effect .
The SQUID consists of a superconducting current loop containing two Josephson junctions , as shown in .
When the loop is placed in even a very weak magnetic field , there is an interference effect that depends on the strength of the magnetic field .
Superconductivity is a fascinating and useful phenomenon .
At critical temperatures near the boiling point of liquid nitrogen , superconductivity has special applications in MRIs , particle accelerators , and high-speed trains .
Will we reach a state where we can have materials enter the superconducting phase at near room temperatures ?
It seems a long way off , but if scientists in 1911 were asked if we would reach liquid-nitrogen temperatures with a ceramic , they might have thought it implausible .
In the preceding few chapters , we discussed electric components , including capacitors , resistors , and diodes .
In this chapter , we use these electric components in circuits .
A circuit is a collection of electrical components connected to accomplish a specific task .
shows an amplifier circuit , which takes a small-amplitude signal and amplifies it to power the speakers in earbuds .
Although the circuit looks complex , it actually consists of a set of series , parallel , and series-parallel circuits .
The second section of this chapter covers the analysis of series and parallel circuits that consist of resistors .
Later in this chapter , we introduce the basic equations and techniques to analyze any circuit , including those that are not reducible through simplifying parallel and series elements .
But first , we need to understand how to power a circuit .
If you forget to turn off your car lights , they slowly dim as the battery runs down .
Why don ’ t they suddenly blink off when the battery ’ s energy is gone ?
Their gradual dimming implies that the battery output voltage decreases as the battery is depleted .
The reason for the decrease in output voltage for depleted batteries is that all voltage sources have two fundamental parts—a source of electrical energy and an internal resistance .
In this section , we examine the energy source and the internal resistance .
Voltage has many sources , a few of which are shown in .
All such devices create a potential difference and can supply current if connected to a circuit .
A special type of potential difference is known as electromotive force ( emf ) .
The emf is not a force at all , but the term ‘ electromotive force ’ is used for historical reasons .
It was coined by Alessandro Volta in the 1800s , when he invented the first battery , also known as the voltaic pile .
Because the electromotive force is not a force , it is common to refer to these sources simply as sources of emf ( pronounced as the letters “ ee-em-eff ” ) , instead of sources of electromotive force .
If the electromotive force is not a force at all , then what is the emf and what is a source of emf ?
To answer these questions , consider a simple circuit of a 12-V lamp attached to a 12-V battery , as shown in .
The battery can be modeled as a two-terminal device that keeps one terminal at a higher electric potential than the second terminal .
The higher electric potential is sometimes called the positive terminal and is labeled with a plus sign .
The lower-potential terminal is sometimes called the negative terminal and labeled with a minus sign .
This is the source of the emf .
When the emf source is not connected to the lamp , there is no net flow of charge within the emf source .
Once the battery is connected to the lamp , charges flow from one terminal of the battery , through the lamp ( causing the lamp to light ) , and back to the other terminal of the battery .
If we consider positive ( conventional ) current flow , positive charges leave the positive terminal , travel through the lamp , and enter the negative terminal .
Positive current flow is useful for most of the circuit analysis in this chapter , but in metallic wires and resistors , electrons contribute the most to current , flowing in the opposite direction of positive current flow .
Therefore , it is more realistic to consider the movement of electrons for the analysis of the circuit in .
The electrons leave the negative terminal , travel through the lamp , and return to the positive terminal .
In order for the emf source to maintain the potential difference between the two terminals , negative charges ( electrons ) must be moved from the positive terminal to the negative terminal .
The emf source acts as a charge pump , moving negative charges from the positive terminal to the negative terminal to maintain the potential difference .
This increases the potential energy of the charges and , therefore , the electric potential of the charges .
The force on the negative charge from the electric field is in the opposite direction of the electric field , as shown in .
In order for the negative charges to be moved to the negative terminal , work must be done on the negative charges .
This requires energy , which comes from chemical reactions in the battery .
The potential is kept high on the positive terminal and low on the negative terminal to maintain the potential difference between the two terminals .
The emf is equal to the when there is no current flowing .
An ideal battery is an emf source that maintains a constant terminal voltage , independent of the current between the two terminals .
An ideal battery has no internal resistance , and the terminal voltage is equal to the emf of the battery .
In the next section , we will show that a real battery does have internal resistance and the terminal voltage is always less than the emf of the battery .
The combination of chemicals and the makeup of the terminals in a battery determine its emf .
The lead acid battery used in cars and other vehicles is one of the most common combinations of chemicals .
shows a single cell ( one of six ) of this battery .
The cathode ( positive ) terminal of the cell is connected to a lead oxide plate , whereas the anode ( negative ) terminal is connected to a lead plate .
Both plates are immersed in sulfuric acid , the electrolyte for the system .
Knowing a little about how the chemicals in a lead-acid battery interact helps in understanding the potential created by the battery .
shows the result of a single chemical reaction .
Two electrons are placed on the anode , making it negative , provided that the cathode supplies two electrons .
This leaves the cathode positively charged , because it has lost two electrons .
In short , a separation of charge has been driven by a chemical reaction .
Note that the reaction does not take place unless there is a complete circuit to allow two electrons to be supplied to the cathode .
Under many circumstances , these electrons come from the anode , flow through a resistance , and return to the cathode .
Note also that since the chemical reactions involve substances with resistance , it is not possible to create the emf without an internal resistance .
The amount of resistance to the flow of current within the voltage source is called the internal resistance .
The internal resistance r of a battery can behave in complex ways .
It generally increases as a battery is depleted , due to the oxidation of the plates or the reduction of the acidity of the electrolyte .
However , internal resistance may also depend on the magnitude and direction of the current through a voltage source , its temperature , and even its history .
The internal resistance of rechargeable nickel-cadmium cells , for example , depends on how many times and how deeply they have been depleted .
A simple model for a battery consists of an idealized emf source and an internal resistance r .
Suppose an external resistor , known as the load resistance R , is connected to a voltage source such as a battery , as in .
The figure shows a model of a battery with an emf , an internal resistance r , and a load resistor R connected across its terminals .
Using conventional current flow , positive charges leave the positive terminal of the battery , travel through the resistor , and return to the negative terminal of the battery .
A graph of the potential difference across each element the circuit is shown in .
A current I runs through the circuit , and the potential drop across the internal resistor is equal to Ir .
The terminal voltage is equal to , which is equal to the potential drop across the load resistor .
As with potential energy , it is the change in voltage that is important .
When the term “ voltage ” is used , we assume that it is actually the change in the potential , or .
However , is often omitted for convenience .
The current through the load resistor is .
We see from this expression that the smaller the internal resistance r , the greater the current the voltage source supplies to its load R .
As batteries are depleted , r increases .
If r becomes a significant fraction of the load resistance , then the current is significantly reduced , as the following example illustrates .
A given battery has a 12.00-V emf and an internal resistance of .
( a ) Calculate its terminal voltage when connected to a load .
( b ) What is the terminal voltage when connected to a load ?
( c ) What power does the load dissipate ?
( d ) If the internal resistance grows to , find the current , terminal voltage , and power dissipated by a load .
The analysis above gave an expression for current when internal resistance is taken into account .
Once the current is found , the terminal voltage can be calculated by using the equation .
Once current is found , we can also find the power dissipated by the resistor .
Similarly , with , the current is The terminal voltage is now The terminal voltage exhibits a more significant reduction compared with emf , implying is a heavy load for this battery .
A “ heavy load ” signifies a larger draw of current from the source but not a larger resistance .
The power dissipated by the load can be found using the formula .
Entering the known values gives Note that this power can also be obtained using the expression ( 10.0 V in this case ) .
, where V is the terminal voltage Here , the internal resistance has increased , perhaps due to the depletion of the battery , to the point where it is as great as the load resistance .
The internal resistance of a battery can increase for many reasons .
For example , the internal resistance of a rechargeable battery increases as the number of times the battery is recharged increases .
The increased internal resistance may have two effects on the battery .
First , the terminal voltage will decrease .
Second , the battery may overheat due to the increased power dissipated by the internal resistance .
Check Your Understanding If you place a wire directly across the two terminal of a battery , effectively shorting out the terminals , the battery will begin to get hot .
Why do you suppose this happens ?
Battery testers , such as those in , use small load resistors to intentionally draw current to determine whether the terminal potential drops below an acceptable level .
Although it is difficult to measure the internal resistance of a battery , battery testers can provide a measurement of the internal resistance of the battery .
If internal resistance is high , the battery is weak , as evidenced by its low terminal voltage .
Some batteries can be recharged by passing a current through them in the direction opposite to the current they supply to an appliance .
This is done routinely in cars and in batteries for small electrical appliances and electronic devices .
The voltage output of the battery charger must be greater than the emf of the battery to reverse the current through it .
This causes the terminal voltage of the battery to be greater than the emf , since and I is now negative .
It is important to understand the consequences of the internal resistance of emf sources , such as batteries and solar cells , but often , the analysis of circuits is done with the terminal voltage of the battery , as we have done in the previous sections .
The terminal voltage is referred to as simply as V , dropping the subscript “ terminal. ” This is because the internal resistance of the battery is difficult to measure directly and can change over time .
In , we described the term ‘ resistance ’ and explained the basic design of a resistor .
Basically , a resistor limits the flow of charge in a circuit and is an ohmic device where Most circuits have more than one resistor .
If several resistors are connected together and connected to a battery , the current supplied by the battery depends on the equivalent resistance of the circuit .
The equivalent resistance of a combination of resistors depends on both their individual values and how they are connected .
The simplest combinations of resistors are series and parallel connections .
In a series circuit , the output current of the first resistor flows into the input of the second resistor ; therefore , the current is the same in each resistor .
In a parallel circuit , all of the resistor leads on one side of the resistors are connected together and all the leads on the other side are connected together .
In the case of a parallel configuration , each resistor has the same potential drop across it , and the currents through each resistor may be different , depending on the resistor .
The sum of the individual currents equals the current that flows into the parallel connections .
Resistors are said to be in series whenever the current flows through the resistors sequentially .
Consider , which shows three resistors in series with an applied voltage equal to Since there is only one path for the charges to flow through , the current is the same through each resistor .
The equivalent resistance of a set of resistors in a series connection is equal to the algebraic sum of the individual resistances .
In , the current coming from the voltage source flows through each resistor , so the current through each resistor is the same .
The current through the circuit depends on the voltage supplied by the voltage source and the resistance of the resistors .
For each resistor , a potential drop occurs that is equal to the loss of electric potential energy as a current travels through each resistor .
Any number of resistors can be connected in series .
If N resistors are connected in series , the equivalent resistance is One result of components connected in a series circuit is that if something happens to one component , it affects all the other components .
For example , if several lamps are connected in series and one bulb burns out , all the other lamps go dark .
A battery with a terminal voltage of 9 V is connected to a circuit consisting of four and one resistors all in series .
Assume the battery has negligible internal resistance .
( a ) Calculate the equivalent resistance of the circuit .
( b ) Calculate the current through each resistor .
( c ) Calculate the potential drop across each resistor .
( d ) Determine the total power dissipated by the resistors and the power supplied by the battery .
In a series circuit , the equivalent resistance is the algebraic sum of the resistances .
The current through the circuit can be found from Ohm ’ s law and is equal to the voltage divided by the equivalent resistance .
The potential drop across each resistor can be found using Ohm ’ s law .
The power dissipated by each resistor can be found using , and the total power dissipated by the resistors is equal to the sum of the power dissipated by each resistor .
The power supplied by the battery can be found using .
The power dissipated by a resistor is equal to , and the power supplied by the battery is equal to : There are several reasons why we would use multiple resistors instead of just one resistor with a resistance equal to the equivalent resistance of the circuit .
Perhaps a resistor of the required size is not available , or we need to dissipate the heat generated , or we want to minimize the cost of resistors .
Each resistor may cost a few cents to a few dollars , but when multiplied by thousands of units , the cost saving may be appreciable .
Check Your Understanding Some strings of miniature holiday lights are made to short out when a bulb burns out .
The device that causes the short is called a shunt , which allows current to flow around the open circuit .
A “ short ” is like putting a piece of wire across the component .
The bulbs are usually grouped in series of nine bulbs .
If too many bulbs burn out , the shunts eventually open .
What causes this ?
Let ’ s briefly summarize the major features of resistors in series : Series resistances add together to get the equivalent resistance : The same current flows through each resistor in series .
Individual resistors in series do not get the total source voltage , but divide it .
The total potential drop across a series configuration of resistors is equal to the sum of the potential drops across each resistor .
shows resistors in parallel , wired to a voltage source .
Resistors are in parallel when one end of all the resistors are connected by a continuous wire of negligible resistance and the other end of all the resistors are also connected to one another through a continuous wire of negligible resistance .
The potential drop across each resistor is the same .
Current through each resistor can be found using Ohm ’ s law where the voltage is constant across each resistor .
For example , an automobile ’ s headlights , radio , and other systems are wired in parallel , so that each subsystem utilizes the full voltage of the source and can operate completely independently .
The same is true of the wiring in your house or any building .
The current flowing from the voltage source in depends on the voltage supplied by the voltage source and the equivalent resistance of the circuit .
In this case , the current flows from the voltage source and enters a junction , or node , where the circuit splits flowing through resistors and .
In , the junction rule gives .
There are two loops in this circuit , which leads to the equations and .
When resistors are connected in parallel , more current flows from the source than would flow for any of them individually , so the total resistance is lower .
Three resistors are connected in parallel .
The parallel connection is attached to a voltage source .
( a ) What is the equivalent resistance ?
( b ) Find the current supplied by the source to the parallel circuit .
( c ) Calculate the currents in each resistor and show that these add together to equal the current output of the source .
( d ) Calculate the power dissipated by each resistor .
( e ) Find the power output of the source and show that it equals the total power dissipated by the resistors .
and ( a ) The total resistance for a parallel combination of resistors is found using ( Note that in these calculations , each intermediate answer is shown with an extra digit . )
( b ) The current supplied by the source can be found from Ohm ’ s law , substituting for the total resistance ( c ) The individual currents are easily calculated from Ohm ’ s law voltage .
The total current is the sum of the individual currents : , since each resistor gets the full .
( d ) The power dissipated by each resistor can be found using any of the equations relating power to current , voltage , and resistance , since all three are known .
Let us use since each resistor gets full voltage .
( e ) The total power can also be calculated in several ways , use .
The total resistance for a parallel combination of resistors is found using .
Entering known values gives The total resistance with the correct number of significant digits is As predicted , is less than the smallest individual resistance .
The total current can be found from Ohm ’ s law , substituting for the total resistance .
This gives Current I for each device is much larger than for the same devices connected in series ( see the previous example ) .
A circuit with parallel connections has a smaller total resistance than the resistors connected in series .
The individual currents are easily calculated from Ohm ’ s law , since each resistor gets the full voltage .
Let us use voltage .
Thus , Similarly , and The total power can also be calculated in several ways .
Choosing and entering the total current yields Total power dissipated by the resistors is also 18.00 W : Notice that the total power dissipated by the resistors equals the power supplied by the source .
Check Your Understanding Consider the same potential difference applied to the same three resistors connected in series .
Would the equivalent resistance of the series circuit be higher , lower , or equal to the three resistor in parallel ?
Would the current through the series circuit be higher , lower , or equal to the current provided by the same voltage applied to the parallel circuit ?
How would the power dissipated by the resistor in series compare to the power dissipated by the resistors in parallel ?
Check Your Understanding How would you use a river and two waterfalls to model a parallel configuration of two resistors ?
How does this analogy break down ?
Let us summarize the major features of resistors in parallel : Equivalent resistance is found from and is smaller than any individual resistance in the combination .
The potential drop across each resistor in parallel is the same .
Parallel resistors do not each get the total current ; they divide it .
The current entering a parallel combination of resistors is equal to the sum of the current through each resistor in parallel .
In this chapter , we introduced the equivalent resistance of resistors connect in series and resistors connected in parallel .
You may recall that in , we introduced the equivalent capacitance of capacitors connected in series and parallel .
Circuits often contain both capacitors and resistors .
summarizes the equations used for the equivalent resistance and equivalent capacitance for series and parallel connections .
More complex connections of resistors are often just combinations of series and parallel connections .
Such combinations are common , especially when wire resistance is considered .
In that case , wire resistance is in series with other resistances that are in parallel .
Combinations of series and parallel can be reduced to a single equivalent resistance using the technique illustrated in .
Various parts can be identified as either series or parallel connections , reduced to their equivalent resistances , and then further reduced until a single equivalent resistance is left .
The process is more time consuming than difficult .
Here , we note the equivalent resistance as Notice that resistors and are in series .
They can be combined into a single equivalent resistance .
One method of keeping track of the process is to include the resistors as subscripts .
Here the equivalent resistance of and is The circuit now reduces to three resistors , shown in ( c ) .
Redrawing , we now see that resistors and constitute a parallel circuit .
Those two resistors can be reduced to an equivalent resistance : This step of the process reduces the circuit to two resistors , shown in in ( d ) .
Here , the circuit reduces to two resistors , which in this case are in series .
These two resistors can be reduced to an equivalent resistance , which is the equivalent resistance of the circuit : The main goal of this circuit analysis is reached , and the circuit is now reduced to a single resistor and single voltage source .
Now we can analyze the circuit .
The potential drops are and The final analysis is to look at the power supplied by the voltage source and the power dissipated by the resistors .
The power dissipated by the resistors is in any process .
Therefore , The total energy is constant supplied by the voltage source is Analyzing the power supplied to the circuit and the power dissipated by the resistors is a good check for the validity of the analysis ; they should be equal .
the power shows resistors wired in a combination of series and parallel .
We can consider to be the resistance of wires leading to and ( a ) Find the equivalent resistance of the circuit .
( b ) What is the potential drop across resistor ?
( c ) Find the current through resistor .
( d ) What power is dissipated by ?
The current through is equal to the current from the battery .
The potential drop across the resistor ( which represents the resistance in the connecting wires ) can be found using Ohm ’ s law .
( c ) The current through can be found using Ohm ’ s law ( d ) Using Ohm ’ s law the power dissipated by the resistor can also be found using The voltage across can be found using , .
To find the equivalent resistance of the circuit , notice that the parallel connection of and is in series with , so the equivalent resistance is The total resistance of this combination is intermediate between the pure series and pure parallel values ( and , respectively ) .
To find the current through , we must first find the voltage applied to it .
The power dissipated by is given by The analysis of complex circuits can often be simplified by reducing the circuit to a voltage source and an equivalent resistance .
Even if the entire circuit can not be reduced to a single voltage source and a single equivalent resistance , portions of the circuit may be reduced , greatly simplifying the analysis .
Check Your Understanding Consider the electrical circuits in your home .
Give at least two examples of circuits that must use a combination of series and parallel circuits to operate efficiently .
One implication of this last example is that resistance in wires reduces the current and power delivered to a resistor .
If wire resistance is relatively large , as in a worn ( or a very long ) extension cord , then this loss can be significant .
If a large current is drawn , the IR drop in the wires can also be significant and may become apparent from the heat generated in the cord .
For example , when you are rummaging in the refrigerator and the motor comes on , the refrigerator light dims momentarily .
Similarly , you can see the passenger compartment light dim when you start the engine of your car ( although this may be due to resistance inside the battery itself ) .
What is happening in these high-current situations is illustrated in .
The device represented by has a very low resistance , so when it is switched on , a large current flows .
This increased current causes a larger IR drop in the wires represented by , reducing the voltage across the light bulb ( which is ) , which then dims noticeably .
Draw a clear circuit diagram , labeling all resistors and voltage sources .
This step includes a list of the known values for the problem , since they are labeled in your circuit diagram .
Identify exactly what needs to be determined in the problem ( identify the unknowns ) .
A written list is useful .
Determine whether resistors are in series , parallel , or a combination of both series and parallel .
Examine the circuit diagram to make this assessment .
Resistors are in series if the same current must pass sequentially through them .
Use the appropriate list of major features for series or parallel connections to solve for the unknowns .
There is one list for series and another for parallel .
Check to see whether the answers are reasonable and consistent .
are connected to two resistors that are connected in parallel Two resistors connected in series .
The series-parallel combination is connected to a battery .
Each resistor has a resistance of 10.00 Ohms .
The wires connecting the resistors and battery have negligible resistance .
A current of 2.00 Amps runs through resistor What is the voltage supplied by the voltage source ?
Use the steps in the preceding problem-solving strategy to find the solution for this example .
Draw a clear circuit diagram .
The unknown is the voltage of the battery .
In order to find the voltage supplied by the battery , the equivalent resistance must be found .
In this circuit , we already know that the resistors and are in series and the resistors and are in parallel .
The equivalent resistance of the parallel configuration of the resistors and is in series with the series configuration of resistors and .
The voltage supplied by the battery can be found by multiplying the current from the battery and the equivalent resistance of the circuit .
The current from the battery is equal to the current through and is equal to 2.00 A .
We need to find the equivalent resistance by reducing the circuit .
To reduce the circuit , resistance is This parallel combination is in series with the other two resistors , so the equivalent resistance of the circuit is The voltage supplied by the battery is therefore the two resistors in parallel .
The equivalent first consider One way to check the consistency of your results is to calculate the power supplied by the battery and the power dissipated by the resistors .
The power supplied by the battery is Since they are in series , the current through equals the current through Since , the current through each will be 1.00 Amps .
The power dissipated by the resistors is equal to the sum of the power dissipated by each resistor : Since the power dissipated by the resistors equals the power supplied by the battery , our solution seems consistent .
If a problem has a combination of series and parallel , as in this example , it can be reduced in steps by using the preceding problem-solving strategy and by considering individual groups of series or parallel connections .
When finding for a parallel connection , the reciprocal must be taken with care .
In addition , units and numerical results must be reasonable .
Equivalent series resistance should be greater , whereas equivalent parallel resistance should be smaller , for example .
Power should be greater for the same devices in parallel compared with series , and so on .
We have just seen that some circuits may be analyzed by reducing a circuit to a single voltage source and an equivalent resistance .
Many complex circuits can not be analyzed with the series-parallel techniques developed in the preceding sections .
In this section , we elaborate on the use of Kirchhoff ’ s rules to analyze more complex circuits .
For example , the circuit in is known as a multi-loop circuit , which consists of junctions .
A junction , also known as a node , is a connection of three or more wires .
In this circuit , the previous methods can not be used , because not all the resistors are in clear series or parallel configurations that can be reduced .
Give it a try .
The resistors and are in series and can be reduced to an equivalent resistance .
The same is true of resistors and .
But what do you do then ?
Even though this circuit can not be analyzed using the methods already learned , two circuit analysis rules can be used to analyze any circuit , simple or complex .
The rules are known as Kirchhoff ’ s rules , after their inventor Gustav Kirchhoff ( 1824–1887 ) .
Kirchhoff ’ s first rule—the junction rule .
The sum of all currents entering a junction must equal the sum of all currents leaving the junction : Kirchhoff ’ s second rule—the loop rule .
The algebraic sum of changes in potential around any closed circuit path ( loop ) must be zero : We now provide explanations of these two rules , followed by problem-solving hints for applying them and a worked example that uses them .
Kirchhoff ’ s first rule ( the junction rule ) applies to the charge entering and leaving a junction .
As stated earlier , a junction , or node , is a connection of three or more wires .
Current is the flow of charge , and charge is conserved ; thus , whatever charge flows into the junction must flow out .
Although it is an over-simplification , an analogy can be made with water pipes connected in a plumbing junction .
If the wires in were replaced by water pipes , and the water was assumed to be incompressible , the volume of water flowing into the junction must equal the volume of water flowing out of the junction .
Kirchhoff ’ s second rule ( the loop rule ) applies to potential differences .
Kirchhoff ’ s loop rule states that the algebraic sum of potential differences , including voltage supplied by the voltage sources and resistive elements , in any loop must be equal to zero .
For example , consider a simple loop with no junctions , as in .
The circuit consists of a voltage source and three external load resistors .
The labels a , b , c , and d serve as references , and have no other significance .
The usefulness of these labels will become apparent soon .
The loop is designated as Loop abcda , and the labels help keep track of the voltage differences as we travel around the circuit .
Start at point a and travel to point b .
The voltage of the voltage source is added to the equation and the potential drop of the resistor is subtracted .
From point b to c , the potential drop across is subtracted .
From c to d , the potential drop across is subtracted .
From points d to a , nothing is done because there are no components .
shows a graph of the voltage as we travel around the loop .
Voltage increases as we cross the battery , whereas voltage decreases as we travel across a resistor .
The potential drop , or change in the electric potential , is equal to the current through the resistor times the resistance of the resistor .
Since the wires have negligible resistance , the voltage remains constant as we cross the wires connecting the components .
Then Kirchhoff ’ s loop rule states The loop equation can be used to find the current through the loop : This loop could have been analyzed using the previous methods , but we will demonstrate the power of Kirchhoff ’ s method in the next section .
By applying Kirchhoff ’ s rules , we generate a set of linear equations that allow us to find the unknown values in circuits .
These may be currents , voltages , or resistances .
Each time a rule is applied , it produces an equation .
If there are as many independent equations as unknowns , then the problem can be solved .
Using Kirchhoff ’ s method of analysis requires several steps , as listed in the following procedure .
Label points in the circuit diagram using lowercase letters a , b , c , … .
These labels simply help with orientation .
Locate the junctions in the circuit .
The junctions are points where three or more wires connect .
Label each junction with the currents and directions into and out of it .
Make sure at least one current points into the junction and at least one current points out of the junction .
Choose the loops in the circuit .
Every component must be contained in at least one loop , but a component may be contained in more than one loop .
Apply the junction rule .
Again , some junctions should not be included in the analysis .
You need only use enough nodes to include every current .
Apply the loop rule .
Use the map in .
Let ’ s examine some steps in this procedure more closely .
When locating the junctions in the circuit , do not be concerned about the direction of the currents .
If the direction of current flow is not obvious , choosing any direction is sufficient as long as at least one current points into the junction and at least one current points out of the junction .
If the arrow is in the opposite direction of the conventional current flow , the result for the current in question will be negative but the answer will still be correct .
The number of nodes depends on the circuit .
Each current should be included in a node and thus included in at least one junction equation .
Do not include nodes that are not linearly independent , meaning nodes that contain the same information .
There are two junctions in this circuit : Junction b and Junction e .
Points a , c , d , and f are not junctions , because a junction must have three or more connections .
The equation for Junction b is , and the equation for Junction e is .
These are equivalent equations , so it is necessary to keep only one of them .
When choosing the loops in the circuit , you need enough loops so that each component is covered once , without repeating loops .
shows four choices for loops to solve a sample circuit ; choices ( a ) , ( b ) , and ( c ) have a sufficient amount of loops to solve the circuit completely .
Option ( d ) reflects more loops than necessary to solve the circuit .
Consider the circuit in ( a ) .
Let us analyze this circuit to find the current through each resistor .
First , label the circuit as shown in part ( b ) .
Next , determine the junctions .
In this circuit , points b and e each have three wires connected , making them junctions .
Start to apply Kirchhoff ’ s junction rule by drawing arrows representing the currents and labeling each arrow , as shown in ( b ) .
Junction b shows that and Junction e shows that .
Since Junction e gives the same information of Junction b , it can be disregarded .
This circuit has three unknowns , so we need three linearly independent equations to analyze it .
Next we need to choose the loops .
In , Loop abefa includes the voltage source and resistors and .
The loop starts at point a , then travels through points b , e , and f , and then back to point a .
The second loop , Loop ebcde , starts at point e and includes resistors and , and the voltage source .
Now we can apply Kirchhoff ’ s loop rule , using the map in .
Starting at point a and moving to point b , the resistor is crossed in the same direction as the current flow , so the potential drop is subtracted .
Moving from point b to point e , the resistor is crossed in the same direction as the current flow so the potential drop is subtracted .
Moving from point e to point f , the voltage source is crossed from the negative terminal to the positive terminal , so is added .
There are no components between points f and a .
The sum of the voltage differences must equal zero : Finally , we check loop ebcde .
We start at point e and move to point b , crossing in the opposite direction as the current flow .
The potential drop is added .
Next , we cross and in the same direction as the current flow and subtract the potential drops and Note that the current is the same through resistors and , because they are connected in series .
Finally , the voltage source is crossed from the positive terminal to the negative terminal , and the voltage source is subtracted .
The sum of these voltage differences equals zero and yields the loop equation We now have three equations , which we can solve for the three unknowns .
To solve the three equations for the three unknown currents , start by eliminating current .
First add Eq .
( 1 ) times to Eq .
( 2 ) .
The result is labeled as Eq .
( 4 ) : Next , subtract Eq .
( 3 ) from Eq .
( 2 ) .
The result is labeled as Eq .
( 5 ) : .
Adding seven times Eq .
( 4 ) and three times Eq .
( 5 ) results in We can solve Eqs .
( 4 ) and ( 5 ) for current yields One way to check that the solutions are consistent is to check the power supplied by the voltage sources and the power dissipated by the resistors : Using Eq .
Finally , Eq .
results ( 4 ) ( 1 ) or in Note that the solution for the current is negative .
This is the correct answer , but suggests that the arrow originally drawn in the junction analysis is the direction opposite of conventional current flow .
The power supplied by the second voltage source is 58 W and not −58 W. Find the currents flowing in the circuit in .
This circuit is sufficiently complex that the currents can not be found using Ohm ’ s law and the series-parallel techniques—it is necessary to use Kirchhoff ’ s rules .
Currents have been labeled and in the figure , and assumptions have been made about their directions .
Locations on the diagram have been labeled with letters a through h .
In the solution , we apply the junction and loop rules , seeking three independent equations to allow us to solve for the three unknown currents .
Applying the junction and loop rules yields the following three equations .
We have three unknowns , so three equations are required .
Simplify the equations by placing the unknowns on one side of the equations .
Simplify the equations .
The first loop equation can be simplified by dividing both sides by 3.00 .
The second loop equation can be simplified by dividing both sides by 6.00 .
The results are A method to check the calculations is to compute the power dissipated by the resistors and the power supplied by the voltage sources : The power supplied equals the power dissipated by the resistors .
Check Your Understanding In considering the following schematic and the power supplied and consumed by a circuit , will a voltage source always provide power to the circuit , or can a voltage source consume power ?
Find the current flowing in the circuit in .
This circuit can be analyzed using Kirchhoff ’ s rules .
There is only one loop and no nodes .
Choose the direction of current flow .
For this example , we will use the clockwise direction from point a to point b .
Consider Loop abcda and use to write the loop equation .
Note that according to , battery will be added and battery will be subtracted .
Applying the junction rule yields the following three equations .
We have one unknown , so one equation is required : Simplify the equations by placing the unknowns on one side of the equations .
Use the values given in the figure .
The power dissipated or consumed by the circuit equals the power supplied to the circuit , but notice that the current in the battery is flowing through the battery from the positive terminal to the negative terminal and consumes power .
The power supplied equals the power dissipated by the resistors and consumed by the battery Check Your Understanding When using Kirchhoff ’ s laws , you need to decide which loops to use and the direction of current flow through each loop .
In analyzing the circuit in , the direction of current flow was chosen to be clockwise , from point a to point b .
How would the results change if the direction of the current was chosen to be counterclockwise , from point b to point a ?
Many devices require more than one battery .
Multiple voltage sources , such as batteries , can be connected in series configurations , parallel configurations , or a combination of the two .
In series , the positive terminal of one battery is connected to the negative terminal of another battery .
Any number of voltage sources , including batteries , can be connected in series .
Two batteries connected in series are shown in .
Using Kirchhoff ’ s loop rule for the circuit in part ( b ) gives the result When voltage sources are in series , their internal resistances can be added together and their emfs can be added together to get the total values .
Series connections of voltage sources are common—for example , in flashlights , toys , and other appliances .
Usually , the cells are in series in order to produce a larger total emf .
In , the terminal voltage is Note that the same current I is found in each battery because they are connected in series .
The disadvantage of series connections of cells is that their internal resistances are additive .
Batteries are connected in series to increase the voltage supplied to the circuit .
For instance , an LED flashlight may have two AAA cell batteries , each with a terminal voltage of 1.5 V , to provide 3.0 V to the flashlight .
Any number of batteries can be connected in series .
For N batteries in series , the terminal voltage is equal to where the equivalent resistance is .
When a load is placed across voltage sources in series , as in , we can find the current : As expected , the internal resistances increase the equivalent resistance .
Voltage sources , such as batteries , can also be connected in parallel .
shows two batteries with identical emfs in parallel and connected to a load resistance .
When the batteries are connect in parallel , the positive terminals are connected together and the negative terminals are connected together , and the load resistance is connected to the positive and negative terminals .
Normally , voltage sources in parallel have identical emfs .
In this simple case , since the voltage sources are in parallel , the total emf is the same as the individual emfs of each battery .
Consider the Kirchhoff analysis of the circuit in ( b ) .
There are two loops and a node at point b and .
Node b : .
Loop abcfa : Loop fcdef : Solving for the current through the load resistor results in equal to the potential drop across the load resistor , where .
The parallel connection reduces the internal resistance .
The terminal voltage is and thus can produce a larger current .
Any number of batteries can be connected in parallel .
For N batteries in parallel , the terminal voltage is equal to where the equivalent resistance is .
As an example , some diesel trucks use two 12-V batteries in parallel ; they produce a total emf of 12 V but can deliver the larger current needed to start a diesel engine .
In summary , the terminal voltage of batteries in series is equal to the sum of the individual emfs minus the sum of the internal resistances times the current .
When batteries are connected in parallel , they usually have equal emfs and the terminal voltage is equal to the emf minus the equivalent internal resistance times the current , where the equivalent internal resistance is smaller than the individual internal resistances .
Batteries are connected in series to increase the terminal voltage to the load .
Batteries are connected in parallel to increase the current to the load .
Another example dealing with multiple voltage sources is that of combinations of solar cells—wired in both series and parallel combinations to yield a desired voltage and current .
Photovoltaic generation , which is the conversion of sunlight directly into electricity , is based upon the photoelectric effect .
The photoelectric effect is beyond the scope of this chapter and is covered in , but in general , photons hitting the surface of a solar cell create an electric current in the cell .
Most solar cells are made from pure silicon .
Most single cells have a voltage output of about 0.5 V , while the current output is a function of the amount of sunlight falling on the cell ( the incident solar radiation known as the insolation ) .
Under bright noon sunlight , a current per unit area of about of cell surface area is produced by typical single-crystal cells .
Individual solar cells are connected electrically in modules to meet electrical energy needs .
They can be wired together in series or in parallel—connected like the batteries discussed earlier .
A solar-cell array or module usually consists of between 36 and 72 cells , with a power output of 50 W to 140 W. Solar cells , like batteries , provide a direct current ( dc ) voltage .
Current from a dc voltage source is unidirectional .
Most household appliances need an alternating current ( ac ) voltage .
Ohm ’ s law and Kirchhoff ’ s method are useful to analyze and design electrical circuits , providing you with the voltages across , the current through , and the resistance of the components that compose the circuit .
To measure these parameters require instruments , and these instruments are described in this section .
Whereas voltmeters measure voltage , ammeters measure current .
Some of the meters in automobile dashboards , digital cameras , cell phones , and tuner-amplifiers are actually voltmeters or ammeters .
The internal construction of the simplest of these meters and how they are connected to the system they monitor give further insight into applications of series and parallel connections .
To measure the current through a device or component , the ammeter is placed in series with the device or component .
A series connection is used because objects in series have the same current passing through them .
( See , where the ammeter is represented by the symbol A . )
Ammeters need to have a very low resistance , a fraction of a milliohm .
If the resistance is not negligible , placing the ammeter in the circuit would change the equivalent resistance of the circuit and modify the current that is being measured .
Since the current in the circuit travels through the meter , ammeters normally contain a fuse to protect the meter from damage from currents which are too high .
A voltmeter is connected in parallel with whatever device it is measuring .
A parallel connection is used because objects in parallel experience the same potential difference .
( See , where the voltmeter is represented by the symbol V. ) Since voltmeters are connected in parallel , the voltmeter must have a very large resistance .
Digital voltmeters convert the analog voltage into a digital value to display on a digital readout .
Inexpensive voltmeters have resistances on the order of whereas high-precision voltmeters have resistances on the order of .
The value of the resistance may vary , depending on which scale is used on the meter .
You may encounter two types of meters in the physics lab : analog and digital .
The term ‘ analog ’ refers to signals or information represented by a continuously variable physical quantity , such as voltage or current .
An analog meter uses a galvanometer , which is essentially a coil of wire with a small resistance , in a magnetic field , with a pointer attached that points to a scale .
Current flows through the coil , causing the coil to rotate .
To use the galvanometer as an ammeter , a small resistance is placed in parallel with the coil .
For a voltmeter , a large resistance is placed in series with the coil .
A digital meter uses a component called an analog-to-digital ( A to D ) converter and expresses the current or voltage as a series of the digits 0 and 1 , which are used to run a digital display .
Most analog meters have been replaced by digital meters .
Check Your Understanding Digital meters are able to detect smaller currents than analog meters employing galvanometers .
How does this explain their ability to measure voltage and current more accurately than analog meters ?
In this simulation , you may construct circuits with resistors , voltage sources , ammeters and voltmeters to test your knowledge of circuit design .
An ohmmeter is an instrument used to measure the resistance of a component or device .
The operation of the ohmmeter is based on Ohm ’ s law .
Traditional ohmmeters contained an internal voltage source ( such as a battery ) that would be connected across the component to be tested , producing a current through the component .
A galvanometer was then used to measure the current and the resistance was deduced using Ohm ’ s law .
Modern digital meters use a constant current source to pass current through the component , and the voltage difference across the component is measured .
In either case , the resistance is measured using Ohm ’ s law where the voltage is known and the current is measured , or the current is known and the voltage is measured .
The component of interest should be isolated from the circuit ; otherwise , you will be measuring the equivalent resistance of the circuit .
An ohmmeter should never be connected to a “ live ” circuit , one with a voltage source connected to it and current running through it .
Doing so can damage the meter .
When you use a flash camera , it takes a few seconds to charge the capacitor that powers the flash .
The light flash discharges the capacitor in a tiny fraction of a second .
Why does charging take longer than discharging ?
This question and several other phenomena that involve charging and discharging capacitors are discussed in this module .
An RC circuit is a circuit containing resistance and capacitance .
As presented in , the capacitor is an electrical component that stores electric charge , storing energy in an electric field .
( a ) shows a simple RC circuit that employs a dc ( direct current ) voltage source , a resistor R , a capacitor C , and a two-position switch .
The circuit allows the capacitor to be charged or discharged , depending on the position of the switch .
When the switch is moved to position A , the capacitor charges , resulting in the circuit in part ( b ) .
When the switch is moved to position B , the capacitor discharges through the resistor .
We can use Kirchhoff ’ s loop rule to understand the charging of the capacitor .
This results in the equation This equation can be used to model the charge as a function of time as the capacitor charges .
Capacitance is defined as .
Using Ohm ’ s law , the potential drop across the resistor is , and the current is defined as so the voltage across the capacitor is This differential equation can be integrated to find an equation for the charge on the capacitor as a function of time .
Let , then The result is Simplifying results in an equation for the charge on the charging capacitor as a function of time : A graph of the charge on the capacitor versus time is shown in ( a ) .
First note that as time approaches infinity , the exponential goes to zero , so the charge approaches the maximum charge and has units of coulombs .
The units of RC are seconds , units of time .
This quantity is known as the time constant : At time , the charge is equal to of the maximum charge .
Notice that the time rate change of the charge is the slope at a point of the charge versus time plot .
The slope of the graph is large at time and approaches zero as time increases .
As the charge on the capacitor increases , the current through the resistor decreases , as shown in ( b ) .
The current through the resistor can be found by taking the time derivative of the charge .
At time At time , the current through the resistor is the current through the resistor is .
As time approaches infinity , the current approaches zero .
The voltage difference across the capacitor increases as ( c ) and ( d ) show the voltage differences across the capacitor and the resistor , respectively .
A graph of the charge on the capacitor as a function of time is shown in ( a ) .
Using Kirchhoff ’ s loop rule to analyze the circuit as the capacitor discharges results in the equation , which simplifies to and integrating the loop equation yields an equation for the charge on the capacitor as a function of time : .
Using the definition of current Here , Q is the initial charge on the capacitor and is the time constant of the circuit .
As shown in the graph , the charge decreases exponentially from the initial charge , approaching zero as time approaches infinity .
The current as a function of time can be found by taking the time derivative of the charge : The negative sign shows that the current flows in the opposite direction of the current found when the capacitor is charging .
( b ) shows an example of a plot of charge versus time and current versus time .
A plot of the voltage difference across the capacitor and the voltage difference across the resistor as a function of time are shown in parts ( c ) and ( d ) of the figure .
Note that the magnitudes of the charge , current , and voltage all decrease exponentially , approaching zero as time increases .
Now we can explain why the flash camera mentioned at the beginning of this section takes so much longer to charge than discharge : The resistance while charging is significantly greater than while discharging .
The internal resistance of the battery accounts for most of the resistance while charging .
As the battery ages , the increasing internal resistance makes the charging process even slower .
One application of an RC circuit is the relaxation oscillator , as shown below .
The relaxation oscillator consists of a voltage source , a resistor , a capacitor , and a neon lamp .
The neon lamp acts like an open circuit ( infinite resistance ) until the potential difference across the neon lamp reaches a specific voltage .
At that voltage , the lamp acts like a short circuit ( zero resistance ) , and the capacitor discharges through the neon lamp and produces light .
In the relaxation oscillator shown , the voltage source charges the capacitor until the voltage across the capacitor is 80 V. When this happens , the neon in the lamp breaks down and allows the capacitor to discharge through the lamp , producing a bright flash .
After the capacitor fully discharges through the neon lamp , it begins to charge again , and the process repeats .
Assuming that the time it takes the capacitor to discharge is negligible , what is the time interval between flashes ?
In this example , the neon lamp will flash every 8.13 seconds , a frequency of The relaxation oscillator has many other practical uses .
It is often used in electronic circuits , where the neon lamp is replaced by a transistor or a device known as a tunnel diode .
The description of the transistor and tunnel diode is beyond the scope of this chapter , but you can think of them as voltage controlled switches .
They are normally open switches , but when the right voltage is applied , the switch closes and conducts .
The “ switch ” can be used to turn on another circuit , turn on a light , or run a small motor .
A relaxation oscillator can be used to make the turn signals of your car blink or your cell phone to vibrate .
RC circuits have many applications .
They can be used effectively as timers for applications such as intermittent windshield wipers , pace makers , and strobe lights .
Some models of intermittent windshield wipers use a variable resistor to adjust the interval between sweeps of the wiper .
Increasing the resistance increases the RC time constant , which increases the time between the operation of the wipers .
Another application is the pacemaker .
The heart rate is normally controlled by electrical signals , which cause the muscles of the heart to contract and pump blood .
When the heart rhythm is abnormal ( the heartbeat is too high or too low ) , pace makers can be used to correct this abnormality .
Pacemakers have sensors that detect body motion and breathing to increase the heart rate during physical activities , thus meeting the increased need for blood and oxygen , and an RC timing circuit can be used to control the time between voltage signals to the heart .
Looking ahead to the study of ac circuits , ac voltages vary as sine functions with specific frequencies .
Periodic variations in voltage , or electric signals , are often recorded by scientists .
These voltage signals could come from music recorded by a microphone or atmospheric data collected by radar .
Occasionally , these signals can contain unwanted frequencies known as “ noise. ” RC filters can be used to filter out the unwanted frequencies .
In the study of electronics , a popular device known as a 555 timer provides timed voltage pulses .
The time between pulses is controlled by an RC circuit .
These are just a few of the countless applications of RC circuits .
A relaxation oscillator is used to control a pair of windshield wipers .
The relaxation oscillator consists of a 10.00-mF capacitor and a variable resistor known as a rheostat .
A knob connected to the variable resistor allows the resistance to be adjusted from to The output of the capacitor is used to control a voltage-controlled switch .
The switch is normally open , but when the output voltage reaches 10.00 V , the switch closes , energizing an electric motor and discharging the capacitor .
The motor causes the windshield wipers to sweep once across the windshield and the capacitor begins to charge again .
To what resistance should the rheostat be adjusted for the period of the wiper blades be 10.00 seconds ?
where The capacitance , output voltage , The resistance considers the equation and voltage of the battery are given .
We need to solve this equation for the resistance .
The output voltage will be 10.00 V and the voltage of the battery is 12.00 V. The capacitance is given as 10.00 mF .
Solving for the resistance yields Increasing the resistance increases the time delay between operations of the windshield wipers .
When the resistance is zero , the windshield wipers run continuously .
At the maximum resistance , the period of the operation of the wipers is : The RC circuit has thousands of uses and is a very important circuit to study .
Not only can it be used to time circuits , it can also be used to filter out unwanted frequencies in a circuit and used in power supplies , like the one for your computer , to help turn ac voltage to dc voltage .
Electricity presents two known hazards : thermal and shock .
A thermal hazard is one in which an excessive electric current causes undesired thermal effects , such as starting a fire in the wall of a house .
A shock hazard occurs when an electric current passes through a person .
Shocks range in severity from painful , but otherwise harmless , to heart-stopping lethality .
In this section , we consider these hazards and the various factors affecting them in a quantitative manner .
We also examine systems and devices for preventing electrical hazards .
Electric power causes undesired heating effects whenever electric energy is converted into thermal energy at a rate faster than it can be safely dissipated .
A classic example of this is the short circuit , a low-resistance path between terminals of a voltage source .
An example of a short circuit is shown in .
A toaster is plugged into a common household electrical outlet .
Insulation on wires leading to an appliance has worn through , allowing the two wires to come into contact , or “ short. ” As a result , thermal energy can quickly raise the temperature of surrounding materials , melting the insulation and perhaps causing a fire .
The circuit diagram shows a symbol that consists of a sine wave enclosed in a circle .
This symbol represents an alternating current ( ac ) voltage source .
In an ac voltage source , the voltage oscillates between a positive and negative maximum amplitude .
Up to now , we have been considering direct current ( dc ) voltage sources , but many of the same concepts are applicable to ac circuits .
Another serious thermal hazard occurs when wires supplying power to an appliance are overloaded .
Electrical wires and appliances are often rated for the maximum current they can safely handle .
The term “ overloaded ” refers to a condition where the current exceeds the rated maximum current .
As current flows through a wire , the power dissipated in the supply wires is where is the resistance of the wires and I is the current flowing through the wires .
If either I or is too large , the wires overheat .
Fuses and circuit breakers are used to limit excessive currents .
Electric shock is the physiological reaction or injury caused by an external electric current passing through the body .
The effect of an electric shock can be negative or positive .
When a current with a magnitude above 300 mA passes through the heart , death may occur .
Most electrical shock fatalities occur because a current causes ventricular fibrillation , a massively irregular and often fatal , beating of the heart .
On the other hand , a heart attack victim , whose heart is in fibrillation , can be saved by an electric shock from a defibrillator .
The effects of an undesirable electric shock can vary in severity : a slight sensation at the point of contact , pain , loss of voluntary muscle control , difficulty breathing , heart fibrillation , and possibly death .
The loss of voluntary muscle control can cause the victim to not be able to let go of the source of the current .
A dangerous condition occurs when the body is in contact with a voltage source and “ ground. ” The term “ ground ” refers to a large sink or source of electrons , for example , the earth ( thus , the name ) .
When there is a direct path to ground , large currents will pass through the parts of the body with the lowest resistance and a direct path to ground .
A safety precaution used by many professions is the wearing of insulated shoes .
Insulated shoes prohibit a pathway to ground for electrons through the feet by providing a large resistance .
Whenever working with high-power tools , or any electric circuit , ensure that you do not provide a pathway for current flow ( especially across the heart ) .
A common safety precaution is to work with one hand , reducing the possibility of providing a current path through the heart .
Very small currents pass harmlessly and unfelt through the body .
This happens to you regularly without your knowledge .
The threshold of sensation is only 1 mA and , although unpleasant , shocks are apparently harmless for currents less than 5 mA .
A great number of safety rules take the 5-mA value for the maximum allowed shock .
At 5–30 mA and above , the current can stimulate sustained muscular contractions , much as regular nerve impulses do .
Very large currents ( above 300 mA ) cause the heart and diaphragm of the lung to contract for the duration of the shock .
Both the heart and respiration stop .
Both often return to normal following the shock .
Current is the major factor determining shock severity .
A larger voltage is more hazardous , but since the severity of the shock depends on the combination of voltage and resistance .
For example , a person with dry skin has a resistance of about .
If he comes into contact with 120-V ac , a current passes harmlessly through him .
The same person soaking wet may have a resistance of and the same 120 V will produce a current of 12 mA—above the “ can ’ t let go ” threshold and potentially dangerous .
( a ) shows the schematic for a simple ac circuit with no safety features .
This is not how power is distributed in practice .
Modern household and industrial wiring requires the three-wire system , shown schematically in part ( b ) , which has several safety features , with live , neutral , and ground wires .
First is the familiar circuit breaker ( or fuse ) to prevent thermal overload .
Second is a protective case around the appliance , such as a toaster or refrigerator .
The case ’ s safety feature is that it prevents a person from touching exposed wires and coming into electrical contact with the circuit , helping prevent shocks .
There are three connections to ground shown in ( b ) .
Recall that a ground connection is a low-resistance path directly to ground .
The two ground connections on the neutral wire force it to be at zero volts relative to ground , giving the wire its name .
This wire is therefore safe to touch even if its insulation , usually white , is missing .
The neutral wire is the return path for the current to follow to complete the circuit .
Furthermore , the two ground connections supply an alternative path through ground ( a good conductor ) to complete the circuit .
The ground connection closest to the power source could be at the generating plant , whereas the other is at the user ’ s location .
The third ground is to the case of the appliance , through the green ground wire , forcing the case , too , to be at zero volts .
The live or hot wire ( hereafter referred to as “ live/hot ” ) supplies voltage and current to operate the appliance .
shows a more pictorial version of how the three-wire system is connected through a three-prong plug to an appliance .
Insulating plastic is color-coded to identify live/hot , neutral , and ground wires , but these codes vary around the world .
It is essential to determine the color code in your region .
Striped coatings are sometimes used for the benefit of those who are colorblind .
Grounding the case solves more than one problem .
The simplest problem is worn insulation on the live/hot wire that allows it to contact the case , as shown in .
Lacking a ground connection , a severe shock is possible .
This is particularly dangerous in the kitchen , where a good connection to ground is available through water on the floor or a water faucet .
With the ground connection intact , the circuit breaker will trip , forcing repair of the appliance .
A ground fault circuit interrupter ( GFCI ) is a safety device found in updated kitchen and bathroom wiring that works based on electromagnetic induction .
GFCIs compare the currents in the live/hot and neutral wires .
When live/hot and neutral currents are not equal , it is almost always because current in the neutral is less than in the live/hot wire .
Then some of the current , called a leakage current , is returning to the voltage source by a path other than through the neutral wire .
It is assumed that this path presents a hazard .
GFCIs are usually set to interrupt the circuit if the leakage current is greater than 5 mA , the accepted maximum harmless shock .
Even if the leakage current goes safely to ground through an intact ground wire , the GFCI will trip , forcing repair of the leakage .
For the past few chapters , we have been studying electrostatic forces and fields , which are caused by electric charges at rest .
These electric fields can move other free charges , such as producing a current in a circuit ; however , the electrostatic forces and fields themselves come from other static charges .
In this chapter , we see that when an electric charge moves , it generates other forces and fields .
These additional forces and fields are what we commonly call magnetism .
Before we examine the origins of magnetism , we first describe what it is and how magnetic fields behave .
Once we are more familiar with magnetic effects , we can explain how they arise from the behavior of atoms and molecules , and how magnetism is related to electricity .
The connection between electricity and magnetism is fascinating from a theoretical point of view , but it is also immensely practical , as shown by an industrial electromagnet that can lift thousands of pounds of metal .
Magnetism has been known since the time of the ancient Greeks , but it has always been a bit mysterious .
You can see electricity in the flash of a lightning bolt , but when a compass needle points to magnetic north , you can ’ t see any force causing it to rotate .
People learned about magnetic properties gradually , over many years , before several physicists of the nineteenth century connected magnetism with electricity .
In this section , we review the basic ideas of magnetism and describe how they fit into the picture of a magnetic field .
Magnets are commonly found in everyday objects , such as toys , hangers , elevators , doorbells , and computer devices .
Experimentation on these magnets shows that all magnets have two poles : One is labeled north ( N ) and the other is labeled south ( S ) .
Magnetic poles repel if they are alike ( both N or both S ) , they attract if they are opposite ( one N and the other S ) , and both poles of a magnet attract unmagnetized pieces of iron .
An important point to note here is that you can not isolate an individual magnetic pole .
Every piece of a magnet , no matter how small , which contains a north pole must also contain a south pole .
Visit this for an interactive demonstration of magnetic north and south poles .
An example of a magnet is a compass needle .
It is simply a thin bar magnet suspended at its center , so it is free to rotate in a horizontal plane .
Earth itself also acts like a very large bar magnet , with its south-seeking pole near the geographic North Pole .
The north pole of a compass is attracted toward Earth ’ s geographic North Pole because the magnetic pole that is near the geographic North Pole is actually a south magnetic pole .
Confusion arises because the geographic term “ North Pole ” has come to be used ( incorrectly ) for the magnetic pole that is near the North Pole .
Thus , “ north magnetic pole ” is actually a misnomer—it should be called the south magnetic pole .
[ Note that the orientation of Earth ’ s magnetic field is not permanent but changes ( “ flips ” ) after long time intervals .
Eventually , Earth ’ s north magnetic pole may be located near its geographic North Pole . ]
Back in 1819 , the Danish physicist Hans Oersted was performing a lecture demonstration for some students and noticed that a compass needle moved whenever current flowed in a nearby wire .
Further investigation of this phenomenon convinced Oersted that an electric current could somehow cause a magnetic force .
He reported this finding to an 1820 meeting of the French Academy of Science .
Soon after this report , Oersted ’ s investigations were repeated and expanded upon by other scientists .
Within 10 years of Oersted ’ s discovery , Michael Faraday found that the relative motion of a magnet and a metallic wire induced current in the wire .
This finding showed not only that a current has a magnetic effect , but that a magnet can generate electric current .
You will see later that the names of Biot , Savart , Ampère , and Faraday are linked to some of the fundamental laws of electromagnetism .
The evidence from these various experiments led Ampère to propose that electric current is the source of all magnetic phenomena .
To explain permanent magnets , he suggested that matter contains microscopic current loops that are somehow aligned when a material is magnetized .
Today , we know that permanent magnets are actually created by the alignment of spinning electrons , a situation quite similar to that proposed by Ampère .
This model of permanent magnets was developed by Ampère almost a century before the atomic nature of matter was understood .
( For a full quantum mechanical treatment of magnetic spins , see and . )
Today , magnetism plays many important roles in our lives .
Physicists ’ understanding of magnetism has enabled the development of technologies that affect both individuals and society .
The electronic tablet in your purse or backpack , for example , wouldn ’ t have been possible without the applications of magnetism and electricity on a small scale .
Weak changes in a magnetic field in a thin film of iron and chromium were discovered to bring about much larger changes in resistance , called giant magnetoresistance .
Information can then be recorded magnetically based on the direction in which the iron layer is magnetized .
As a result of the discovery of giant magnetoresistance and its applications to digital storage , the 2007 Nobel Prize in Physics was awarded to Albert Fert from France and Peter Grunberg from Germany .
All electric motors—with uses as diverse as powering refrigerators , starting cars , and moving elevators—contain magnets .
Generators , whether producing hydroelectric power or running bicycle lights , use magnetic fields .
Recycling facilities employ magnets to separate iron from other refuse .
Research into using magnetic containment of fusion as a future energy source has been continuing for several years .
Magnetic resonance imaging ( MRI ) has become an important diagnostic tool in the field of medicine , and the use of magnetism to explore brain activity is a subject of contemporary research and development .
The list of applications also includes computer hard drives , tape recording , detection of inhaled asbestos , and levitation of high-speed trains .
Magnetism is involved in the structure of atomic energy levels , as well as the motion of cosmic rays and charged particles trapped in the Van Allen belts around Earth .
Once again , we see that all these disparate phenomena are linked by a small number of underlying physical principles .
We have outlined the properties of magnets , described how they behave , and listed some of the applications of magnetic properties .
Even though there are no such things as isolated magnetic charges , we can still define the attraction and repulsion of magnets as based on a field .
In this section , we define the magnetic field , determine its direction based on the right-hand rule , and discuss how to draw magnetic field lines .
A magnetic field is defined by the force that a charged particle experiences moving in this field , after we account for the gravitational and any additional electric forces possible on the charge .
The magnitude of this force is proportional to the amount of charge q , the speed of the charged particle v , and the magnitude of the applied magnetic field .
The direction of this force is perpendicular to both the direction of the moving charged particle and the direction of the applied magnetic field .
The magnitude of the force is determined from the definition of the cross product as it relates to the magnitudes of each of the vectors .
In other words , the magnitude of the force satisfies where θ is the angle between the velocity and the magnetic field .
The SI unit for magnetic field strength B is called the tesla ( T ) after the eccentric but brilliant inventor Nikola Tesla ( 1856–1943 ) , where A smaller unit , called the gauss ( G ) , where is sometimes used .
The strongest permanent magnets have fields near 2 T ; superconducting electromagnets may attain 10 T or more .
Earth ’ s magnetic field on its surface is only about or 0.5 G. The direction of the magnetic force is perpendicular to the plane formed by and as determined by the right-hand rule-1 ( or RHR-1 ) , which is illustrated in .
Orient your right hand so that your fingers curl in the plane defined by the velocity and magnetic field vectors .
Using your right hand , sweep from the velocity toward the magnetic field with your fingers through the smallest angle possible .
The magnetic force is directed where your thumb is pointing .
If the charge was negative , reverse the direction found by these steps .
Visit this for additional practice with the direction of magnetic fields .
There is no magnetic force on static charges .
However , there is a magnetic force on charges moving at an angle to a magnetic field .
When charges are stationary , their electric fields do not affect magnets .
However , when charges move , they produce magnetic fields that exert forces on other magnets .
When there is relative motion , a connection between electric and magnetic forces emerges—each affects the other .
An alpha-particle moves through a uniform magnetic field whose magnitude is 1.5 T. The field is directly parallel to the positive z -axis of the rectangular coordinate system of .
We can thus use the equation or to calculate the force .
The direction of the force is determined by RHR-1 .
First , to determine the direction , start with your fingers pointing in the positive x -direction .
Sweep your fingers upward in the direction of magnetic field .
Your thumb should point in the negative y -direction .
This should match the mathematical answer .
To calculate the force , we use the given charge , velocity , and magnetic field and the definition of the magnetic force in cross-product form to calculate : First , to determine the directionality , start with your fingers pointing in the negative y -direction .
Sweep your fingers upward in the direction of magnetic field as in the previous problem .
Your thumb should be open in the negative x -direction .
This should match the mathematical answer .
To calculate the force , we use the given charge , velocity , and magnetic field and the definition of the magnetic force in cross-product form to calculate : An alternative approach is to use to find the magnitude of the force .
This applies for both parts ( a ) and ( b ) .
Since the velocity is perpendicular to the magnetic field , the angle between them is 90 degrees .
Therefore , the magnitude of the force is : Since the velocity and magnetic field are parallel to each other , there is no orientation of your hand that will result in a force direction .
Therefore , the force on this moving charge is zero .
This is confirmed by the cross product .
When you cross two vectors pointing in the same direction , the result is equal to zero .
First , to determine the direction , your fingers could point in any orientation ; however , you must sweep your fingers upward in the direction of the magnetic field .
As you rotate your hand , notice that the thumb can point in any x or y -direction possible , but not in the z -direction .
This should match the mathematical answer .
The velocity in this question , however , has three components .
The z -component of the velocity can be neglected , because it is parallel to the magnetic field and therefore generates no force .
The magnitude of the velocity is calculated from the x and y -components .
The angle between the velocity in the xy -plane and the magnetic field in the z -plane is 90 degrees .
Therefore , the force is calculated to be : This is the same magnitude of force calculated by unit vectors .
The cross product in this formula results in a third vector that must be perpendicular to the other two .
Other physical quantities , such as angular momentum , also have three vectors that are related by the cross product .
Note that typical force values in magnetic force problems are much larger than the gravitational force .
Therefore , for an isolated charge , the magnetic force is the dominant force governing the charge ’ s motion .
Check Your Understanding Repeat the previous problem with the magnetic field in the x -direction rather than in the z -direction .
Check your answers with RHR-1 .
The representation of magnetic fields by magnetic field lines is very useful in visualizing the strength and direction of the magnetic field .
As shown in , each of these lines forms a closed loop , even if not shown by the constraints of the space available for the figure .
The field lines emerge from the north pole ( N ) , loop around to the south pole ( S ) , and continue through the bar magnet back to the north pole .
Magnetic field lines have several hard-and-fast rules : The direction of the magnetic field is tangent to the field line at any point in space .
A small compass will point in the direction of the field line .
The strength of the field is proportional to the closeness of the lines .
It is exactly proportional to the number of lines per unit area perpendicular to the lines ( called the areal density ) .
Magnetic field lines can never cross , meaning that the field is unique at any point in space .
Magnetic field lines are continuous , forming closed loops without a beginning or end .
They are directed from the north pole to the south pole .
The last property is related to the fact that the north and south poles can not be separated .
It is a distinct difference from electric field lines , which generally begin on positive charges and end on negative charges or at infinity .
If isolated magnetic charges ( referred to as magnetic monopoles ) existed , then magnetic field lines would begin and end on them .
A charged particle experiences a force when moving through a magnetic field .
What happens if this field is uniform over the motion of the charged particle ?
What path does the particle follow ?
In this section , we discuss the circular motion of the charged particle as well as other motion that results from a charged particle entering a magnetic field .
The simplest case occurs when a charged particle moves perpendicular to a uniform B -field .
If the field is in a vacuum , the magnetic field is the dominant factor determining the motion .
Since the magnetic force is perpendicular to the direction of travel , a charged particle follows a curved path in a magnetic field .
The particle continues to follow this curved path until it forms a complete circle .
Another way to look at this is that the magnetic force is always perpendicular to velocity , so that it does no work on the charged particle .
The particle ’ s kinetic energy and speed thus remain constant .
The direction of motion is affected but not the speed .
The time for the charged particle to go around the circular path is defined as the period , which is the same as the distance traveled ( the circumference ) divided by the speed .
Based on this and , we can derive the period of motion as If the velocity is not perpendicular to the magnetic field , then we can compare each component of the velocity separately with the magnetic field .
The component of the velocity perpendicular to the magnetic field produces a magnetic force perpendicular to both this velocity and the field : where is the angle between v and B .
The component parallel to the magnetic field creates constant motion along the same direction as the magnetic field , also shown in .
The parallel motion determines the pitch p of the helix , which is the distance between adjacent turns .
This distance equals the parallel component of the velocity times the period : The result is a helical motion , as shown in the following figure .
While the charged particle travels in a helical path , it may enter a region where the magnetic field is not uniform .
In particular , suppose a particle travels from a region of strong magnetic field to a region of weaker field , then back to a region of stronger field .
The particle may reflect back before entering the stronger magnetic field region .
This is similar to a wave on a string traveling from a very light , thin string to a hard wall and reflecting backward .
If the reflection happens at both ends , the particle is trapped in a so-called magnetic bottle .
Trapped particles in magnetic fields are found in the Van Allen radiation belts around Earth , which are part of Earth ’ s magnetic field .
These belts were discovered by James Van Allen while trying to measure the flux of cosmic rays on Earth ( high-energy particles that come from outside the solar system ) to see whether this was similar to the flux measured on Earth .
Van Allen found that due to the contribution of particles trapped in Earth ’ s magnetic field , the flux was much higher on Earth than in outer space .
Aurorae , like the famous aurora borealis ( northern lights ) in the Northern Hemisphere , are beautiful displays of light emitted as ions recombine with electrons entering the atmosphere as they spiral along magnetic field lines .
( The ions are primarily oxygen and nitrogen atoms that are initially ionized by collisions with energetic particles in Earth ’ s atmosphere . )
Aurorae have also been observed on other planets , such as Jupiter and Saturn .
A research group is investigating short-lived radioactive isotopes .
They need to design a way to transport alphaparticles ( helium nuclei ) from where they are made to a place where they will collide with another material to form an isotope .
The beam of alpha-particles bends through a 90-degree region with a uniform magnetic field of 0.050 T .
( a ) In what direction should the magnetic field be applied ?
( b ) How much time does it take the alpha-particles to traverse the uniform magnetic field region ?
The direction of the magnetic field is shown by the RHR-1 .
Your fingers point in the direction of v , and your thumb needs to point in the direction of the force , to the left .
Therefore , since the alpha-particles are positively charged , the magnetic field must point down .
The period of the alpha-particle going around the circle is Because the particle is only going around a quarter of a circle , we can take 0.25 times the period to find the time it takes to go around this path .
Let ’ s start by focusing on the alpha-particle entering the field near the bottom of the picture .
First , point your thumb up the page .
In order for your palm to open to the left where the centripetal force ( and hence the magnetic force ) points , your fingers need to change orientation until they point into the page .
This is the direction of the applied magnetic field .
The period of the charged particle going around a circle is calculated by using the given mass , charge , and magnetic field in the problem .
If we could increase the magnetic field applied in the region , this would shorten the time even more .
The path the particles need to take could be shortened , but this may not be economical given the experimental setup .
Check Your Understanding A uniform magnetic field of magnitude 1.5 T is directed horizontally from west to east .
( a ) What is the magnetic force on a proton at the instant when it is moving vertically downward in the field with a speed of ( b ) Compare this force with the weight w of a proton .
A proton enters a uniform magnetic field of with a speed of At what angle must the magnetic field be from the velocity so that the pitch of the resulting helical motion is equal to the radius of the helix ?
The pitch of the motion relates to the parallel velocity times the period of the circular motion , whereas the radius relates to the perpendicular velocity component .
After setting the radius and the pitch equal to each other , solve for the angle between the magnetic field and velocity or The pitch is given by , the period is given by , and the radius of circular motion is given by .
Note that the velocity in the radius equation is related to only the perpendicular velocity , which is where the circular motion occurs .
If this angle were only circular motion would occur and there would be no movement of the circles perpendicular to the motion .
That is what creates the helical motion .
Moving charges experience a force in a magnetic field .
If these moving charges are in a wire—that is , if the wire is carrying a current—the wire should also experience a force .
However , before we discuss the force exerted on a current by a magnetic field , we first examine the magnetic field generated by an electric current .
We are studying two separate effects here that interact closely : A current-carrying wire generates a magnetic field and the magnetic field exerts a force on the currentcarrying wire .
When discussing historical discoveries in magnetism , we mentioned Oersted ’ s finding that a wire carrying an electrical current caused a nearby compass to deflect .
A connection was established that electrical currents produce magnetic fields .
( This connection between electricity and magnetism is discussed in more detail in . )
The compass needle near the wire experiences a force that aligns the needle tangent to a circle around the wire .
Therefore , a current-carrying wire produces circular loops of magnetic field .
To determine the direction of the magnetic field generated from a wire , we use a second right-hand rule .
In RHR-2 , your thumb points in the direction of the current while your fingers wrap around the wire , pointing in the direction of the magnetic field produced .
If the magnetic field were coming at you or out of the page , we represent this with a dot .
If the magnetic field were going into the page , we represent this with an These symbols come from considering a vector arrow : An arrow pointed toward you , from your perspective , would look like a dot or the tip of an arrow .
Electric current is an ordered movement of charge .
A current-carrying wire in a magnetic field must therefore experience a force due to the field .
To investigate this force , let ’ s consider the infinitesimal section of wire as shown in .
Note that it is actually the net force exerted by the field on the charge carriers themselves .
The direction of this force is given by RHR-1 , where you point your fingers in the direction of the current and curl them toward the field .
Your thumb then points in the direction of the force .
To determine the magnetic force on a wire of arbitrary length and shape , we must integrate over the entire wire .
If the wire section happens to be straight and B is uniform , the equation differentials become absolute quantities , giving us This is the force on a straight , current-carrying wire in a uniform magnetic field .
A wire of length 50 cm and mass 10 g is suspended in a horizontal plane by a pair of flexible leads .
The wire is then subjected to a constant magnetic field of magnitude 0.50 T , which is directed as shown .
What are the magnitude and direction of the current in the wire needed to remove the tension in the supporting leads ?
From the free-body diagram in the figure , the tensions in the supporting leads go to zero when the gravitational and magnetic forces balance each other .
Using the RHR-1 , we find that the magnetic force points up .
We can then determine the current I by equating the two forces .
Equate the two forces of weight and magnetic force on the wire : Thus , This large magnetic field creates a significant force on a length of wire to counteract the weight of the wire .
A long , rigid wire lying along the y -axis carries a 5.0-A current flowing in the positive y -direction .
( a ) If a constant magnetic field of magnitude 0.30 T is directed along the positive x -axis , what is the magnetic force per unit length on the wire ?
( b ) If a constant magnetic field of 0.30 T is directed 30 degrees from the + x -axis towards the + y -axis , what is the magnetic force per unit length on the wire ?
The magnetic force on a current-carrying wire in a magnetic field is given by For part a , since the current and magnetic field are perpendicular in this problem , we can simplify the formula to give us the magnitude and find the direction through the RHR-1 .
The angle θ is 90 degrees , which means Also , the length can be divided over to the left-hand side to find the force per unit length .
For part b , the current times length is written in unit vector notation , as well as the magnetic field .
After the cross product is taken , the directionality is evident by the resulting unit vector .
We start with the general formula for the magnetic force on a wire .
We are looking for the force per unit length , so we divide by the length to bring it to the left-hand side .
We also set The solution therefore is Directionality : Point your fingers in the positive y -direction and curl your fingers in the positive x -direction .
Your thumb will point in the direction .
Therefore , with directionality , the solution is The current times length and the magnetic field are written in unit vector notation .
Then , we take the cross product to find the force : This large magnetic field creates a significant force on a small length of wire .
As the angle of the magnetic field becomes more closely aligned to the current in the wire , there is less of a force on it , as seen from comparing parts a and b .
Check Your Understanding A straight , flexible length of copper wire is immersed in a magnetic field that is directed into the page .
( a ) If the wire ’ s current runs in the + x -direction , which way will the wire bend ?
( b ) Which way will the wire bend if the current runs in the – x -direction ?
A circular current loop of radius R carrying a current I is placed in the xy -plane .
A constant uniform magnetic field cuts through the loop parallel to the y -axis .
Find the magnetic force on the upper half of the loop , the lower half of the loop , and the total force on the loop .
The magnetic force on the upper loop should be written in terms of the differential force acting on each segment of the loop .
If we integrate over each differential piece , we solve for the overall force on that section of the loop .
The force on the lower loop is found in a similar manner , and the total force is the addition of these two forces .
A differential force on an arbitrary piece of wire located on the upper ring is : where is the angle between the magnetic field direction ( + y ) and the segment of wire .
The total force on any closed loop in a uniform magnetic field is zero .
Even though each piece of the loop has a force acting on it , the net force on the system is zero .
( Note that there is a net torque on the loop , which we consider in the next section . )
Motors are the most common application of magnetic force on current-carrying wires .
Motors contain loops of wire in a magnetic field .
When current is passed through the loops , the magnetic field exerts torque on the loops , which rotates a shaft .
Electrical energy is converted into mechanical work in the process .
Once the loop ’ s surface area is aligned with the magnetic field , the direction of current is reversed , so there is a continual torque on the loop .
This reversal of the current is done with commutators and brushes .
The commutator is set to reverse the current flow at set points to keep continual motion in the motor .
A basic commutator has three contact areas to avoid and dead spots where the loop would have zero instantaneous torque at that point .
The brushes press against the commutator , creating electrical contact between parts of the commutator during the spinning motion .
In a uniform magnetic field , a current-carrying loop of wire , such as a loop in a motor , experiences both forces and torques on the loop .
shows a rectangular loop of wire that carries a current I and has sides of lengths a and b .
The loop is in a uniform magnetic field : The magnetic force on a straight current-carrying wire of length l is given To find the net force on the loop , we have to apply this equation to each of the four sides .
The force on by side 1 is where the direction has been determined with the RHR-1 .
To find the net torque on the current loop shown in , we first consider and Since they have the same line of action and are equal and opposite , the sum of their torques about any axis is zero ( see ) .
The point O is a distance x from side 2 and a distance from side 4 of the loop .
The moment arms of and are and respectively , so the net torque on the loop is This simplifies to where is the area of the loop .
Notice that this torque is independent of x ; it is therefore independent of where point O is located in the plane of the current loop .
Consequently , the loop experiences the same torque from the magnetic field about any axis in the plane of the loop and parallel to the x -axis .
Using a calculation analogous to that found in for an electric dipole , the potential energy of a magnetic dipole is A circular current loop of radius 2.0 cm carries a current of 2.0 mA .
( a ) What is the magnitude of its magnetic dipole moment ?
( b ) If the dipole is oriented at 30 degrees to a uniform magnetic field of magnitude 0.50 T , what is the magnitude of the torque it experiences and what is its potential energy ?
The dipole moment is defined by the current times the area of the loop .
The area of the loop can be calculated from the area of the circle .
The torque on the loop and potential energy are calculated from identifying the magnetic moment , magnetic field , and angle oriented in the field .
The magnetic moment μ is calculated by the current times the area of the loop or The torque and potential energy are calculated by identifying the magnetic moment , magnetic field , and the angle between these two vectors .
The calculations of these quantities are : The concept of magnetic moment at the atomic level is discussed in the next chapter .
The concept of aligning the magnetic moment with the magnetic field is the functionality of devices like magnetic motors , whereby switching the external magnetic field results in a constant spinning of the loop as it tries to align with the field to minimize its potential energy .
Check Your Understanding In what orientation would a magnetic dipole have to be to produce ( a ) a maximum torque in a magnetic field ?
( b ) A maximum energy of the dipole ?
In 1879 , E.H. Hall devised an experiment that can be used to identify the sign of the predominant charge carriers in a conducting material .
From a historical perspective , this experiment was the first to demonstrate that the charge carriers in most metals are negative .
Visit this to find more information about the Hall effect .
We investigate the Hall effect by studying the motion of the free electrons along a metallic strip of width l in a constant magnetic field .
The electrons are moving from left to right , so the magnetic force they experience pushes them to the bottom edge of the strip .
This leaves an excess of positive charge at the top edge of the strip , resulting in an electric field E directed from top to bottom .
The charge concentration at both edges builds up until the electric force on the electrons in one direction is balanced by the magnetic force on them in the opposite direction .
Equilibrium is reached when : where e is the magnitude of the electron charge , is the drift speed of the electrons , and E is the magnitude of the electric field created by the separated charge .
Solving this for the drift speed results in A scenario where the electric and magnetic fields are perpendicular to one another is called a crossed-field situation .
If these fields produce equal and opposite forces on a charged particle with the velocity that equates the forces , these particles are able to pass through an apparatus , called a velocity selector , undeflected .
This velocity is represented in .
Any other velocity of a charged particle sent into the same fields would be deflected by the magnetic force or electric force .
Going back to the Hall effect , if the current in the strip is I , then from , we know that where n is the number of charge carriers per volume and A is the cross-sectional area of the strip .
Combining the equations for and I results in The field E is related to the potential difference V between the edges of the strip by The quantity V is called the Hall potential and can be measured with a voltmeter .
Finally , combining the equations for I and E gives us where the upper edge of the strip in is positive with respect to the lower edge .
We can also combine and to get an expression for the Hall voltage in terms of the magnetic field : What if the charge carriers are positive , as in ?
For the same current I , the magnitude of V is still given by .
However , the upper edge is now negative with respect to the lower edge .
Therefore , by simply measuring the sign of V , we can determine the sign of the majority charge carriers in a metal .
Hall potential measurements show that electrons are the dominant charge carriers in most metals .
However , Hall potentials indicate that for a few metals , such as tungsten , beryllium , and many semiconductors , the majority of charge carriers are positive .
It turns out that conduction by positive charge is caused by the migration of missing electron sites ( called holes ) on ions .
Conduction by holes is studied later in .
The Hall effect can be used to measure magnetic fields .
If a material with a known density of charge carriers n is placed in a magnetic field and V is measured , then the field can be determined from .
In research laboratories where the fields of electromagnets used for precise measurements have to be extremely steady , a “ Hall probe ” is commonly used as part of an electronic circuit that regulates the field .
An electron beam enters a crossed-field velocity selector with magnetic and electric fields of 2.0 mT and respectively .
( a ) What must the velocity of the electron beam be to traverse the crossed fields undeflected ?
If the electric field is turned off , ( b ) what is the acceleration of the electron beam and ( c ) what is the radius of the circular motion that results ?
The electron beam is not deflected by either of the magnetic or electric fields if these forces are balanced .
Based on these balanced forces , we calculate the velocity of the beam .
Without the electric field , only the magnetic force is used in Newton ’ s second law to find the acceleration .
Lastly , the radius of the path is based on the resulting circular motion from the magnetic force .
The velocity of the unperturbed beam of electrons with crossed fields is calculated by : The acceleration is calculated from the net force from the magnetic field , equal to mass times acceleration .
Therefore , only those electrons at this specific velocity would make it through .
shows a silver ribbon whose cross section is 1.0 cm by 0.20 cm .
The ribbon carries a current of 100 A from left to right , and it lies in a uniform magnetic field of magnitude 1.5 T. Using a density value of electrons per cubic meter for silver , find the Hall potential between the edges of the ribbon .
Since the majority of charge carriers are electrons , the polarity of the Hall voltage is that indicated in the figure .
The value of the Hall voltage is calculated using : When calculating the Hall voltage , we need to know the current through the material , the magnetic field , the length , the number of charge carriers , and the area .
Since all of these are given , the Hall voltage is calculated as : As in this example , the Hall potential is generally very small , and careful experimentation with sensitive equipment is required for its measurement .
Check Your Understanding A Hall probe consists of a copper strip , electrons per cubic meter , which is 2.0 cm wide and 0.10 cm thick .
What is the magnetic field when I = 50 A and the Hall potential is ( a ) and ( b ) Being able to manipulate and sort charged particles allows deeper experimentation to understand what matter is made of .
We first look at a mass spectrometer to see how we can separate ions by their charge-to-mass ratio .
Then we discuss cyclotrons as a method to accelerate charges to very high energies .
The mass spectrometer is a device that separates ions according to their charge-to-mass ratios .
One particular version , the Bainbridge mass spectrometer , is illustrated in .
Ions produced at a source are first sent through a velocity selector , where the magnetic force is equally balanced with the electric force .
These ions all emerge with the same speed since any ion with a different velocity is deflected preferentially by either the electric or magnetic force , and ultimately blocked from the next stage .
They then enter a uniform magnetic field where they travel in a circular path whose radius R is given by .
The radius is measured by a particle detector located as shown in the figure .
The relationship between the charge-to-mass ratio q / m and the radius R is determined by combining and : measured values of R can be used with this equation to Since most ions are singly charged determine the mass of ions .
With modern instruments , masses can be determined to one part in An interesting use of a spectrometer is as part of a system for detecting very small leaks in a research apparatus .
In lowtemperature physics laboratories , a device known as a dilution refrigerator uses a mixture of He-3 , He-4 , and other cryogens to reach temperatures well below 1 K. The performance of the refrigerator is severely hampered if even a minute leak between its various components occurs .
Consequently , before it is cooled down to the desired temperature , the refrigerator is subjected to a leak test .
A small quantity of gaseous helium is injected into one of its compartments , while an adjacent , but supposedly isolated , compartment is connected to a high-vacuum pump to which a mass spectrometer is attached .
A heated filament ionizes any helium atoms evacuated by the pump .
The detection of these ions by the spectrometer then indicates a leak between the two compartments of the dilution refrigerator .
In conjunction with gas chromatography , mass spectrometers are used widely to identify unknown substances .
While the gas chromatography portion breaks down the substance , the mass spectrometer separates the resulting ionized molecules .
This technique is used with fire debris to ascertain the cause , in law enforcement to identify illegal drugs , in security to identify explosives , and in many medicinal applications .
The cyclotron was developed by E.O .
Lawrence to accelerate charged particles ( usually protons , deuterons , or alphaparticles ) to large kinetic energies .
These particles are then used for nuclear-collision experiments to produce radioactive isotopes .
A cyclotron is illustrated in .
The particles move between two flat , semi-cylindrical metallic containers D1 and D2 , called dees .
The dees are enclosed in a larger metal container , and the apparatus is placed between the poles of an electromagnet that provides a uniform magnetic field .
Air is removed from the large container so that the particles neither lose energy nor are deflected because of collisions with air molecules .
The dees are connected to a highfrequency voltage source that provides an alternating electric field in the small region between them .
Because the dees are made of metal , their interiors are shielded from the electric field .
Suppose a positively charged particle is injected into the gap between the dees when D2 is at a positive potential relative to D1 .
The particle is then accelerated across the gap and enters D1 after gaining kinetic energy qV , where V is the average potential difference the particle experiences between the dees .
When the particle reenters the gap , D1 is positive with respect to D2 , and the particle is again accelerated across the gap , thereby gaining a kinetic energy qV .
The particle then enters D2 , circulates in a slightly larger circle , and emerges from D2 after spending a time T /2 in this dee .
This process repeats until the orbit of the particle reaches the boundary of the dees .
At that point , the particle ( actually , a beam of particles ) is extracted from the cyclotron and used for some experimental purpose .
The operation of the cyclotron depends on the fact that , in a uniform magnetic field , a particle ’ s orbital period is independent of its radius and its kinetic energy .
Consequently , the period of the alternating voltage source need only be set at the one value given by .
With that setting , the electric field accelerates particles every time they are between the dees .
Above this energy , relativistic effects become important , which causes the orbital period to increase with the radius .
Up to energies of several hundred MeV , the relativistic effects can be compensated for by making the magnetic field gradually increase with the radius of the orbit .
However , for higher energies , much more elaborate methods must be used to accelerate particles .
Particles are accelerated to very high energies with either linear accelerators or synchrotrons .
The linear accelerator accelerates particles continuously with the electric field of an electromagnetic wave that travels down a long evacuated tube .
The Stanford Linear Accelerator ( SLAC ) is about 3.3 km long and accelerates electrons and positrons ( positively charged electrons ) to energies of 50 GeV .
The synchrotron is constructed so that its bending magnetic field increases with particle speed in such a way that the particles stay in an orbit of fixed radius .
The world ’ s highest-energy synchrotron is located at CERN , which is on the Swiss-French border near Geneva .
CERN has been of recent interest with the verified discovery of the Higgs Boson ( see ) .
This synchrotron can accelerate beams of approximately protons to energies of about GeV .
A cyclotron used to accelerate alpha-particles has a radius of 0.50 m and a magnetic field of 1.8 T. ( a ) What is the period of revolution of the alpha-particles ?
( b ) What is their maximum kinetic energy ?
The period of revolution is approximately the distance traveled in a circle divided by the speed .
Identifying that the magnetic force applied is the centripetal force , we can derive the period formula .
The kinetic energy can be found from the maximum speed of the beam , corresponding to the maximum radius within the cyclotron .
In the preceding chapter , we saw that a moving charged particle produces a magnetic field .
This connection between electricity and magnetism is exploited in electromagnetic devices , such as a computer hard drive .
In fact , it is the underlying principle behind most of the technology in modern society , including telephones , television , computers , and the internet .
In this chapter , we examine how magnetic fields are created by arbitrary distributions of electric current , using the BiotSavart law .
Then we look at how current-carrying wires create magnetic fields and deduce the forces that arise between two current-carrying wires due to these magnetic fields .
We also study the torques produced by the magnetic fields of current loops .
We then generalize these results to an important law of electromagnetism , called Ampère ’ s law .
We examine some devices that produce magnetic fields from currents in geometries based on loops , known as solenoids and toroids .
Finally , we look at how materials behave in magnetic fields and categorize materials based on their responses to magnetic fields .
We have seen that mass produces a gravitational field and also interacts with that field .
Charge produces an electric field and also interacts with that field .
Since moving charge ( that is , current ) interacts with a magnetic field , we might expect that it also creates that field—and it does .
The equation used to calculate the magnetic field produced by a current is known as the Biot-Savart law .
It is an empirical law named in honor of two scientists who investigated the interaction between a straight , current-carrying wire and a permanent magnet .
This law enables us to calculate the magnitude and direction of the magnetic field produced by a current in a wire .
The Biot-Savart law states that at any point P , the magnetic field due to an element of a current-carrying wire is given by The constant is known as the permeability of free space and is exactly in the SI system .
The infinitesimal wire segment is in the same direction as the current I ( assumed positive ) , r is the distance from to P and is a unit vector that points from to P , as shown in the figure .
then The field produced by a current The magnetic field due to an element of a current-carrying wire is given by Since this is a vector integral , contributions from different current elements may not point in the same direction .
Consequently , the integral is often difficult to evaluate , even for fairly simple geometries .
The following strategy may be helpful .
To solve Biot-Savart law problems , the following steps are helpful : Identify that the Biot-Savart law is the chosen method to solve the given problem .
If there is symmetry in the problem comparing and Ampère ’ s law may be the preferred method to solve the question .
Draw the current element length and the unit vector noting that points in the direction of the current and points from the current element toward the point where the field is desired .
Calculate the cross product The resultant vector gives the direction of the magnetic field according to the Biot-Savart law .
Use and substitute all given quantities into the expression to solve for the magnetic field .
Note all variables that remain constant over the entire length of the wire may be factored out of the integration .
Use the right-hand rule to verify the direction of the magnetic field produced from the current or to write down the direction of the magnetic field if only the magnitude was solved for in the previous part .
A short wire of length 1.0 cm carries a current of 2.0 A in the vertical direction .
The rest of the wire is shielded so it does not add to the magnetic field produced by the wire .
Calculate the magnetic field at point P , which is 1 meter from the wire in the x -direction .
We can determine the magnetic field at point P using the Biot-Savart law .
Since the current segment is much smaller than the distance x , we can drop the integral from the expression .
The angle is calculated using a tangent function .
Using the numbers given , we can calculate the magnetic field at P .
The angle between and is calculated from trigonometry , knowing the distances l and x from the problem : The magnetic field at point P is calculated by the Biot-Savart law : From the right-hand rule and the Biot-Savart law , the field is directed into the page .
This approximation is only good if the length of the line segment is very small compared to the distance from the current element to the point .
If not , the integral form of the Biot-Savart law must be used over the entire line segment to calculate the magnetic field .
Check Your Understanding Using , at what distance would P have to be to measure a magnetic field half of the given answer ?
A wire carries a current I in a circular arc with radius R swept through an arbitrary angle .
Calculate the magnetic field at the center of this arc at point P .
We can determine the magnetic field at point P using the Biot-Savart law .
The radial and path length directions are always at a right angle , so the cross product turns into multiplication .
We also know that the distance along the path dl is related to the radius times the angle ( in radians ) .
Then we can pull all constants out of the integration and solve for the magnetic field .
The Biot-Savart law starts with the following equation : As we integrate along the arc , all the contributions to the magnetic field are in the same direction ( out of the page ) , so we can work with the magnitude of the field .
The cross product turns into multiplication because the path dl and the radial direction are perpendicular .
We can also substitute the arc length formula , : The current and radius can be pulled out of the integral because they are the same regardless of where we are on the path .
This leaves only the integral over the angle , The angle varies on the wire from 0 to ; hence , the result is The direction of the magnetic field at point P is determined by the right-hand rule , as shown in the previous chapter .
If there are other wires in the diagram along with the arc , and you are asked to find the net magnetic field , find each contribution from a wire or arc and add the results by superposition of vectors .
Make sure to pay attention to the direction of each contribution .
Also note that in a symmetric situation , like a straight or circular wire , contributions from opposite sides of point P cancel each other .
Check Your Understanding The wire loop forms a full circle of radius R and current I .
What is the magnitude of the magnetic field at the center ?
How much current is needed to produce a significant magnetic field , perhaps as strong as Earth ’ s field ?
Surveyors will tell you that overhead electric power lines create magnetic fields that interfere with their compass readings .
Indeed , when Oersted discovered in 1820 that a current in a wire affected a compass needle , he was not dealing with extremely large currents .
How does the shape of wires carrying current affect the shape of the magnetic field created ?
We noted in Chapter 28 that a current loop created a magnetic field similar to that of a bar magnet , but what about a straight wire ?
We can use the Biot-Savart law to answer all of these questions , including determining the magnetic field of a long straight wire .
shows a section of an infinitely long , straight wire that carries a current I .
What is the magnetic field at a point P , located a distance R from the wire ?
Let ’ s begin by considering the magnetic field due to the current element located at the position x .
Using the righthand rule 1 from the previous chapter , points out of the page for any element along the wire .
At point P , therefore , the magnetic fields due to all current elements have the same direction .
This means that we can calculate the net field there by evaluating the scalar sum of the contributions of the elements .
With we have from the Biot-Savart law The wire is symmetrical about point O , so we can set the limits of the integration from zero to infinity and double the answer , rather than integrate from negative infinity to positive infinity .
Since the field decreases with distance from the wire , the spacing of the field lines must increase correspondingly with distance .
The direction of this magnetic field may be found with a second form of the right-hand rule ( illustrated in ) .
When there is no current in the wire , the needles align with Earth ’ s magnetic field .
However , when a large current is sent through the wire , the compass needles all point tangent to the circle .
Iron filings sprinkled on a horizontal surface also delineate the field lines , as shown in .
Three wires sit at the corners of a square , all carrying currents of 2 amps into the page as shown in .
Calculate the magnitude of the magnetic field at the other corner of the square , point P , if the length of each side of the square is 1 cm .
The magnetic field due to each wire at the desired point is calculated .
The diagonal distance is calculated using the Pythagorean theorem .
Next , the direction of each magnetic field ’ s contribution is determined by drawing a circle centered at the point of the wire and out toward the desired point .
The direction of the magnetic field contribution from that wire is tangential to the curve .
Lastly , working with these vectors , the resultant is calculated .
Wires 1 and 3 both have the same magnitude of magnetic field contribution at point P : Wire 2 has a longer distance and a magnetic field contribution at point P of : The vectors for each of these magnetic field contributions are shown .
This is not necessarily the case if the currents were different values or if the wires were located in different positions .
Regardless of the numerical results , working on the components of the vectors will yield the resulting magnetic field at the point in need .
Check Your Understanding Using , keeping the currents the same in wires 1 and 3 , what should the current be in wire 2 to counteract the magnetic fields from wires 1 and 3 so that there is no net magnetic field at point P ?
You might expect that two current-carrying wires generate significant forces between them , since ordinary currents produce magnetic fields and these fields exert significant forces on ordinary currents .
But you might not expect that the force between wires is used to define the ampere .
It might also surprise you to learn that this force has something to do with why large circuit breakers burn up when they attempt to interrupt large currents .
The force between two long , straight , and parallel conductors separated by a distance r can be found by applying what we have developed in the preceding sections .
shows the wires , their currents , the field created by one wire , and the consequent force the other wire experiences from the created field .
Let us consider the field produced by wire 1 and the force it exerts on wire 2 ( call the force ) .
Substituting the expression for into and rearranging terms gives The ratio F/l is the force per unit length between two parallel currents and separated by a distance r .
The force is attractive if the currents are in the same direction and repulsive if they are in opposite directions .
This force is responsible for the pinch effect in electric arcs and other plasmas .
The force exists whether the currents are in wires or not .
It is only apparent if the overall charge density is zero ; otherwise , the Coulomb repulsion overwhelms the magnetic attraction .
In an electric arc , where charges are moving parallel to one another , an attractive force squeezes currents into a smaller tube .
In large circuit breakers , such as those used in neighborhood power distribution systems , the pinch effect can concentrate an arc between plates of a switch trying to break a large current , burn holes , and even ignite the equipment .
Another example of the pinch effect is found in the solar plasma , where jets of ionized material , such as solar flares , are shaped by magnetic forces .
The definition of the ampere is based on the force between current-carrying wires .
Note that for long , parallel wires separated by 1 meter with each carrying 1 ampere , the force per meter is Since is exactly by definition , and because the force per meter is exactly This is the basis of the definition of the ampere .
Infinite-length wires are impractical , so in practice , a current balance is constructed with coils of wire separated by a few centimeters .
Force is measured to determine current .
This also provides us with a method for measuring the coulomb .
We measure the charge that flows for a current of one ampere in one second .
That is , For both the ampere and the coulomb , the method of measuring force between conductors is the most accurate in practice .
Two wires , both carrying current out of the page , have a current of magnitude 5.0 mA .
The first wire is located at ( 0.0 cm , 3.0 cm ) while the other wire is located at ( 4.0 cm , 0.0 cm ) as shown in .
What is the magnetic force per unit length of the first wire on the second and the second wire on the first ?
Each wire produces a magnetic field felt by the other wire .
The distance along the hypotenuse of the triangle between the wires is the radial distance used in the calculation to determine the force per unit length .
Since both wires have currents flowing in the same direction , the direction of the force is toward each other .
The distance between the wires results from finding the hypotenuse of a triangle : The force per unit length can then be calculated using the known currents in the wires : The force from the first wire pulls the second wire .
Whether the fields are identical or not , the forces that the wires exert on each other are always equal in magnitude and opposite in direction ( Newton ’ s third law ) .
Check Your Understanding Two wires , both carrying current out of the page , have a current of magnitude 2.0 mA and 3.0 mA , respectively .
The first wire is located at ( 0.0 cm , 5.0 cm ) while the other wire is located at ( 12.0 cm , 0.0 cm ) .
What is the magnitude of the magnetic force per unit length of the first wire on the second and the second wire on the first ?
The circular loop of has a radius R , carries a current I , and lies in the xz -plane .
What is the magnetic field due to the current at an arbitrary point P along the axis of the loop ?
We can use the Biot-Savart law to find the magnetic field due to a current .
We first consider arbitrary segments on opposite sides of the loop to qualitatively show by the vector results that the net magnetic field direction is along the central axis from the loop .
From there , we can use the Biot-Savart law to derive the expression for magnetic field .
Let P be a distance y from the center of the loop .
From the right-hand rule , the magnetic field at P , produced by the current element is directed at an angle above the y -axis as shown .
Since is parallel along the x -axis and is in the yz -plane , the two vectors are perpendicular , so we have where we have used Now consider the magnetic field due to the current element which is directly opposite on the loop .
The magnitude of is also given by , but it is directed at an angle below the y -axis .
The components of and perpendicular to the y -axis therefore cancel , and in calculating the net magnetic field , only the components along the y -axis need to be considered .
The components perpendicular to the axis of the loop sum to zero in pairs .
The magnetic field lines are shaped as shown in .
Notice that one field line follows the axis of the loop .
This is the field line we just found .
Also , very close to the wire , the field lines are almost circular , like the lines of a long straight wire .
Two loops of wire carry the same current of 10 mA , but flow in opposite directions as seen in .
The magnetic field at point P has been determined in .
Since the currents are flowing in opposite directions , the net magnetic field is the difference between the two fields generated by the coils .
Using the given quantities in the problem , the net magnetic field is then calculated .
Solving for the net magnetic field using and the given quantities in the problem yields Helmholtz coils typically have loops with equal radii with current flowing in the same direction to have a strong uniform field at the midpoint between the loops .
A similar application of the magnetic field distribution created by Helmholtz coils is found in a magnetic bottle that can temporarily trap charged particles .
See for a discussion on this .
Check Your Understanding Using , at what distance would you have to move the first coil to have zero measurable magnetic field at point P ?
A fundamental property of a static magnetic field is that , unlike an electrostatic field , it is not conservative .
A conservative field is one that does the same amount of work on a particle moving between two different points regardless of the path chosen .
Magnetic fields do not have such a property .
Instead , there is a relationship between the magnetic field and its source , electric current .
It is expressed in terms of the line integral of and is known as Ampère ’ s law .
This law can also be derived directly from the Biot-Savart law .
We now consider that derivation for the special case of an infinite , straight wire .
shows an arbitrary plane perpendicular to an infinite , straight wire whose current I is directed out of the page .
The magnetic field lines are circles directed counterclockwise and centered on the wire .
To begin , let ’ s consider over the closed paths M and N .
Notice that one path ( M ) encloses the wire , whereas the other ( N ) does not .
Over an arbitrary closed path , where I is the total current passing through any open surface S whose perimeter is the path of integration .
Only currents inside the path of integration need be considered .
To determine whether a specific current I is positive or negative , curl the fingers of your right hand in the direction of the path of integration , as shown in .
If I passes through S in the same direction as your extended thumb , I is positive ; if I passes through S in the direction opposite to your extended thumb , it is negative .
To calculate the magnetic field created from current in wire ( s ) , use the following steps : Identify the symmetry of the current in the wire ( s ) .
If there is no symmetry , use the Biot-Savart law to determine the magnetic field .
Determine the direction of the magnetic field created by the wire ( s ) by right-hand rule 2 .
Chose a path loop where the magnetic field is either constant or zero .
Calculate the current inside the loop .
Calculate the line integral around the closed loop .
Equate with and solve for Use Ampère ’ s law to calculate the magnetic field due to a steady current I in an infinitely long , thin , straight wire as shown in .
Consider an arbitrary plane perpendicular to the wire , with the current directed out of the page .
The possible magnetic field components in this plane , and are shown at arbitrary points on a circle of radius r centered on the wire .
Since the field is cylindrically symmetric , neither nor varies with the position on this circle .
Also from symmetry , the radial lines , if they exist , must be directed either all inward or all outward from the wire .
This means , however , that there must be a net magnetic flux across an arbitrary cylinder concentric Therefore , with the wire .
The radial component of the magnetic field must be zero because we can apply Ampère ’ s law to the circular path as shown .
Over this path is constant and parallel to so Thus Ampère ’ s law reduces to Finally , since is the only component of we can drop the subscript and write This agrees with the Biot-Savart calculation above .
Ampère ’ s law works well if you have a path to integrate over which has results that are easy to simplify .
For the infinite wire , this works easily with a path that is circular around the wire so that the magnetic field factors out of the integration .
If the path dependence looks complicated , you can always go back to the BiotSavart law and use that to find the magnetic field .
The radius of the long , straight wire of is a , and the wire carries a current that is distributed uniformly over its cross-section .
Find the magnetic field both inside and outside the wire .
This problem has the same geometry as , but the enclosed current changes as we move the integration path from outside the wire to inside the wire , where it doesn ’ t capture the entire current enclosed ( see ) .
For any circular path of radius r that is centered on the wire , From Ampère ’ s law , this equals the total current passing through any surface bounded by the path of integration .
Consider first a circular path that is inside the wire such as that shown in part ( a ) of .
We need the current I passing through the area enclosed by the path .
It ’ s equal to the current density J times the area enclosed .
Therefore , the current density of a part of the wire is equal to the current density in the whole area .
Using Ampère ’ s law , we obtain and the magnetic field inside the wire is Outside the wire , the situation is identical to that of the infinite thin wire of the previous example ; that is , The variation of B with r is shown in .
The results show that as the radial distance increases inside the thick wire , the magnetic field increases from zero to a familiar value of the magnetic field of a thin wire .
Outside the wire , the field drops off regardless of whether it was a thick or thin wire .
Use Ampère ’ s law to evaluate for the current configurations and paths in .
Ampère ’ s law states that where I is the total current passing through the enclosed loop .
The quickest way to evaluate the integral is to calculate by finding the net current through the loop .
Positive currents flow with your right-hand thumb if your fingers wrap around in the direction of the loop .
This will tell us the sign of the answer .
( a ) The current going downward through the loop equals the current going out of the loop , so the net current is zero .
Thus , ( b ) The only current to consider in this problem is 2A because it is the only current inside the loop .
The right-hand rule shows us the current going downward through the loop is in the positive direction .
Therefore , the answer is ( c ) The right-hand rule shows us the current going downward through the loop is in the positive direction .
There are of current going downward and –3 A going upward .
Therefore , the total current is 9 A and If the currents all wrapped around so that the same current went into the loop and out of the loop , the net current would be zero and no magnetic field would be present .
This is why wires are very close to each other in an electrical cord .
The currents flowing toward a device and away from a device in a wire equal zero total current flow through an Ampère loop around these wires .
Therefore , no stray magnetic fields can be present from cords carrying current .
Check Your Understanding Consider using Ampère ’ s law to calculate the magnetic fields of a finite straight wire and of a circular loop of wire .
Why is it not useful for these calculations ?
Two of the most common and useful electromagnetic devices are called solenoids and toroids .
In one form or another , they are part of numerous instruments , both large and small .
In this section , we examine the magnetic field typical of these devices .
A long wire wound in the form of a helical coil is known as a solenoid .
Solenoids are commonly used in experimental research requiring magnetic fields .
A solenoid is generally easy to wind , and near its center , its magnetic field is quite uniform and directly proportional to the current in the wire .
shows a solenoid consisting of N turns of wire tightly wound over a length L .
A current I is flowing along the wire of the solenoid .
The number of turns per unit length is N / L ; therefore , the number of turns in an infinitesimal length dy are ( N / L ) dy turns .
This produces a current We first calculate the magnetic field at the point P of .
This point is on the central axis of the solenoid .
We are basically cutting the solenoid into thin slices that are dy thick and treating each as a current loop .
Thus , dI is the current through each slice .
The magnetic field due to the current dI in dy can be found with the help of and : where we used to replace dI .
The resultant field at P is found by integrating along the entire length of the solenoid .
You can find the direction of with a right-hand rule : Curl your fingers in the direction of the current , and your thumb points along the magnetic field in the interior of the solenoid .
We now use these properties , along with Ampère ’ s law , to calculate the magnitude of the magnetic field at any location inside the infinite solenoid .
Consider the closed path of .
Along segment 1 , is uniform and parallel to the path .
Along segments 2 and 4 , is perpendicular to part of the path and vanishes over the rest of it .
Therefore , segments 2 and 4 do not contribute to the line integral in Ampère ’ s law .
Along segment 3 , because the magnetic field is zero outside the solenoid .
If you consider an Ampère ’ s law loop outside of the solenoid , the current flows in opposite directions on different segments of wire .
Therefore , there is no enclosed current and no magnetic field according to Ampère ’ s law .
Thus , there is no contribution to the line integral from segment 3 .
As a result , we find The solenoid has n turns per unit length , so the current that passes through the surface enclosed by the path is nlI .
Therefore , from Ampère ’ s law , and within the solenoid .
This agrees with what we found earlier for B on the central axis of the solenoid .
Here , however , the location of segment 1 is arbitrary , so we have found that this equation gives the magnetic field everywhere inside the infinite solenoid .
Outside the solenoid , one can draw an Ampère ’ s law loop around the entire solenoid .
This would enclose current flowing in both directions .
Therefore , the net current inside the loop is zero .
According to Ampère ’ s law , if the net current is zero , the magnetic field must be zero .
Therefore , for locations outside of the solenoid ’ s radius , the magnetic field is zero .
When a patient undergoes a magnetic resonance imaging ( MRI ) scan , the person lies down on a table that is moved into the center of a large solenoid that can generate very large magnetic fields .
The solenoid is capable of these high fields from high currents flowing through superconducting wires .
The large magnetic field is used to change the spin of protons in the patient ’ s body .
The time it takes for the spins to align or relax ( return to original orientation ) is a signature of different tissues that can be analyzed to see if the structures of the tissues is normal .
A solenoid has 300 turns wound around a cylinder of diameter 1.20 cm and length 14.0 cm .
If the current through the coils is 0.410 A , what is the magnitude of the magnetic field inside and near the middle of the solenoid ?
We are given the number of turns and the length of the solenoid so we can find the number of turns per unit length .
Therefore , the magnetic field inside and near the middle of the solenoid is given by .
Outside the solenoid , the magnetic field is zero .
The number of turns per unit length is The magnetic field produced inside the solenoid is This solution is valid only if the length of the solenoid is reasonably large compared with its diameter .
This example is a case where this is valid .
If the toroid has N windings and the current in the wire is I , what is the magnetic field both inside and outside the toroid ?
We begin by assuming cylindrical symmetry around the axis OO ’ .
Actually , this assumption is not precisely correct , for as part ( b ) of shows , the view of the toroidal coil varies from point to point ( for example , and ) on a circular path centered around OO ’ .
However , if the toroid is tightly wound , all points on the circle become essentially equivalent [ part ( c ) of ] , and cylindrical symmetry is an accurate approximation .
With this symmetry , the magnetic field must be tangent to and constant in magnitude along any circular path centered on OO ’ .
This allows us to write for each of the paths and shown in part ( d ) of , Ampère ’ s law relates this integral to the net current passing through any surface bounded by the path of integration .
As a result , there is a small field external to the coil ; however , the derivation above holds if the coils were circular .
For a circular path within the toroid ( path ) , the current in the wire cuts the surface N times , resulting in a net current NI through the surface .
We now find with Ampère ’ s law , and The magnetic field is directed in the counterclockwise direction for the windings shown .
When the current in the coils is reversed , the direction of the magnetic field also reverses .
The magnetic field inside a toroid is not uniform , as it varies inversely with the distance r from the axis OO ’ .
And why do certain substances become magnetized by a field , whereas others are unaffected ?
To answer such questions , we need an understanding of magnetism on a microscopic level .
Within an atom , every electron travels in an orbit and spins on an internal axis .
Both types of motion produce current loops and therefore magnetic dipoles .
For a particular atom , the net magnetic dipole moment is the vector sum of the magnetic dipole moments .
Values of for several types of atoms are given in .
Notice that some atoms have a zero net dipole moment and that the magnitudes of the nonvanishing moments are typically A handful of matter has approximately atoms and ions , each with its magnetic dipole moment .
If no external magnetic field is present , the magnetic dipoles are randomly oriented—as many are pointed up as down , as many are pointed east as west , and so on .
Consequently , the net magnetic dipole moment of the sample is zero .
However , if the sample is placed in a magnetic field , these dipoles tend to align with the field ( see ) , and this alignment determines how the sample responds to the field .
On the basis of this response , a material is said to be either paramagnetic , ferromagnetic , or diamagnetic .
In a paramagnetic material , only a small fraction ( roughly one-third ) of the magnetic dipoles are aligned with the applied field .
Since each dipole produces its own magnetic field , this alignment contributes an extra magnetic field , which enhances the applied field .
When a ferromagnetic material is placed in a magnetic field , its magnetic dipoles also become aligned ; furthermore , they become locked together so that a permanent magnetization results , even when the field is turned off or reversed .
This permanent magnetization happens in ferromagnetic materials but not paramagnetic materials .
Diamagnetic materials are composed of atoms that have no net magnetic dipole moment .
However , when a diamagnetic material is placed in a magnetic field , a magnetic dipole moment is directed opposite to the applied field and therefore produces a magnetic field that opposes the applied field .
We now consider each type of material in greater detail .
For simplicity , we assume our sample is a long , cylindrical piece that completely fills the interior of a long , tightly wound solenoid .
When there is no current in the solenoid , the magnetic dipoles in the sample are randomly oriented and produce no net magnetic field .
With a solenoid current , the magnetic field due to the solenoid exerts a torque on the dipoles that tends to align them with the field .
In competition with the aligning torque are thermal collisions that tend to randomize the orientations of the dipoles .
The relative importance of these two competing processes can be estimated by comparing the energies involved .
As a result , only a small fraction of the dipoles is aligned at any instant .
The four sketches of furnish a simple model of this alignment process .
In part ( a ) , before the field of the solenoid ( not shown ) containing the paramagnetic sample is applied , the magnetic dipoles are randomly oriented and there is no net magnetic dipole moment associated with the material .
With the introduction of the field , a partial alignment of the dipoles takes place , as depicted in part ( b ) .
The component of the net magnetic dipole moment that is perpendicular to the field vanishes .
We may then represent the sample by part ( c ) , which shows a collection of magnetic dipoles completely aligned with the field .
By treating these dipoles as current loops , we can picture the dipole alignment as equivalent to a current around the surface of the material , as in part ( d ) .
This fictitious surface current produces its own magnetic field , which enhances the field of the solenoid .
We can express the total magnetic field in the material as is the field due to the current in the solenoid and where the sample .
Now is usually proportional to a fact we express by is the field due to the surface current around where is a dimensionless quantity called the magnetic susceptibility .
Values of for some paramagnetic materials are given in .
Since the alignment of magnetic dipoles is so weak , is very small for paramagnetic materials .
The quantity is called the magnetic permeability of a material .
In terms of can be written as for the filled solenoid .
A magnetic field always induces a magnetic dipole in an atom .
This induced dipole points opposite to the applied field , so its magnetic field is also directed opposite to the applied field .
In paramagnetic and ferromagnetic materials , the induced magnetic dipole is masked by much stronger permanent magnetic dipoles of the atoms .
However , in diamagnetic materials , whose atoms have no permanent magnetic dipole moments , the effect of the induced dipole is observable .
We can now describe the magnetic effects of diamagnetic materials with the same model developed for paramagnetic materials .
In this case , however , the fictitious surface current flows opposite to the solenoid current , and the magnetic susceptibility is negative .
Values of for some diamagnetic materials are also given in .
Water is a common diamagnetic material .
Animals are mostly composed of water .
Experiments have been performed on and in diverging magnetic fields .
The water molecules are repelled from the applied magnetic field against gravity until the animal reaches an equilibrium .
The result is that the animal is levitated by the magnetic field .
Common magnets are made of a ferromagnetic material such as iron or one of its alloys .
Experiments reveal that a ferromagnetic material consists of tiny regions known as magnetic domains .
Their volumes typically range from to and they contain about to atoms .
Within a domain , the magnetic dipoles are rigidly aligned in the same direction by coupling among the atoms .
This coupling , which is due to quantum mechanical effects , is so strong that even thermal agitation at room temperature can not break it .
The result is that each domain has a net dipole moment .
Some materials have weaker coupling and are ferromagnetic only at lower temperatures .
If the domains in a ferromagnetic sample are randomly oriented , as shown in , the sample has no net magnetic dipole moment and is said to be unmagnetized .
Suppose that we fill the volume of a solenoid with an unmagnetized ferromagnetic sample .
When the magnetic field of the solenoid is turned on , the dipole moments of the domains rotate so that they align somewhat with the field , as depicted in .
In addition , the aligned domains tend to increase in size at the expense of unaligned ones .
The net effect of these two processes is the creation of a net magnetic dipole moment for the ferromagnet that is directed along the applied magnetic field .
This net magnetic dipole moment is much larger than that of a paramagnetic sample , and the domains , with their large numbers of atoms , do not become misaligned by thermal agitation .
Consequently , the field due to the alignment of the domains is quite large .
Besides iron , only four elements contain the magnetic domains needed to exhibit ferromagnetic behavior : cobalt , nickel , gadolinium , and dysprosium .
Many alloys of these elements are also ferromagnetic .
Ferromagnetic materials can be described using through , the paramagnetic equations .
However , the value of for ferromagnetic material is usually on the order of to and it also depends on the history of the magnetic field to which the material has been subject .
A typical plot of B ( the total field in the material ) versus ( the applied field ) for an initially unmagnetized piece of iron is shown in .
Some sample numbers are ( 1 ) for ; ( 2 ) for and and When is varied over a range of positive and negative values , B is found to behave as shown in .
Note that the same ( corresponding to the same current in the solenoid ) can produce different values of B in the material .
The magnetic field B produced in a ferromagnetic material by an applied field depends on the magnetic history of the material .
This effect is called hysteresis , and the curve of is called a hysteresis loop .
Notice that B does not disappear when ( i.e. , when the current in the solenoid is turned off ) .
The iron stays magnetized , which means that it has become a permanent magnet .
Like the paramagnetic sample of , the partial alignment of the domains in a ferromagnet is equivalent to a current flowing around the surface .
A bar magnet can therefore be pictured as a tightly wound solenoid with a large current circulating through its coils ( the surface current ) .
You can see in that this model fits quite well .
The fields of the bar magnet and the finite solenoid are strikingly similar .
The figure also shows how the poles of the bar magnet are identified .
A material used in your hard disk drives is called a spin valve , which has alternating layers of ferromagnetic ( aligning with the external magnetic field ) and antiferromagnetic ( each atom is aligned opposite to the next ) metals .
It was observed that a significant change in resistance was discovered based on whether an applied magnetic field was on the spin valve or not .
This large change in resistance creates a quick and consistent way for recording or reading information by an applied current .
A long coil is tightly wound around an iron cylinder whose magnetization curve is shown in .
( a ) If turns per centimeter , what is the applied field when ( b ) What is the net magnetic field for this same current ?
( c ) What is the magnetic susceptibility in this case ?
( a ) The magnetic field of a solenoid is calculated using .
( b ) The graph is read to determine the net magnetic field for this same current .
( c ) The magnetic susceptibility is calculated using .
The applied field of the coil is From inspection of the magnetization curve of , we see that , for this value of Notice that the internal field of the aligned atoms is much larger than the externally applied field .
The magnetic susceptibility is calculated to be Ferromagnetic materials have susceptibilities in the range of which compares well to our results here .
Paramagnetic materials have fractional susceptibilities , so their applied field of the coil is much greater than the magnetic field generated by the material .
Check Your Understanding Repeat the calculations from the previous example for We have been considering electric fields created by fixed charge distributions and magnetic fields produced by constant currents , but electromagnetic phenomena are not restricted to these stationary situations .
Most of the interesting applications of electromagnetism are , in fact , time-dependent .
To investigate some of these applications , we now remove the timeindependent assumption that we have been making and allow the fields to vary with time .
In this and the next several chapters , you will see a wonderful symmetry in the behavior exhibited by time-varying electric and magnetic fields .
Mathematically , this symmetry is expressed by an additional term in Ampère ’ s law and by another key equation of electromagnetism called Faraday ’ s law .
We also discuss how moving a wire through a magnetic field produces an emf or voltage .
Lastly , we describe applications of these principles , such as the card reader shown above .
The first productive experiments concerning the effects of time-varying magnetic fields were performed by Michael Faraday in 1831 .
One of his early experiments is represented in .
An emf is induced when the magnetic field in the coil is changed by pushing a bar magnet into or out of the coil .
Emfs of opposite signs are produced by motion in opposite directions , and the directions of emfs are also reversed by reversing poles .
The same results are produced if the coil is moved rather than the magnet—it is the relative motion that is important .
The faster the motion , the greater the emf , and there is no emf when the magnet is stationary relative to the coil .
Faraday also discovered that a similar effect can be produced using two circuits—a changing current in one circuit induces a current in a second , nearby circuit .
For example , when the switch is closed in circuit 1 of ( a ) , the ammeter needle of circuit 2 momentarily deflects , indicating that a short-lived current surge has been induced in that circuit .
The ammeter needle quickly returns to its original position , where it remains .
However , if the switch of circuit 1 is now suddenly opened , another short-lived current surge in the direction opposite from before is observed in circuit 2 .
Faraday realized that in both experiments , a current flowed in the circuit containing the ammeter only when the magnetic field in the region occupied by that circuit was changing .
As the magnet of the figure was moved , the strength of its magnetic field at the loop changed ; and when the current in circuit 1 was turned on or off , the strength of its magnetic field at circuit 2 changed .
Faraday was eventually able to interpret these and all other experiments involving magnetic fields that vary with time in terms of the following law : The emf induced is the negative change in the magnetic flux per unit time .
Any change in the magnetic field or change in orientation of the area of the coil with respect to the magnetic field induces a voltage ( emf ) .
The magnetic flux is a measurement of the amount of magnetic field lines through a given surface area , as seen in .
This definition is similar to the electric flux studied earlier .
This means that if we have then the induced emf or the voltage generated by a conductor or coil moving in a magnetic field is The negative sign describes the direction in which the induced emf drives current around a circuit .
However , that direction is most easily determined with a rule known as Lenz ’ s law , which we will discuss shortly .
Part ( a ) of depicts a circuit and an arbitrary surface S that it bounds .
Notice that S is an open surface .
It can be shown that any open surface bounded by the circuit in question can be used to evaluate For example , is the same for the various surfaces of part ( b ) of the figure .
The SI unit for magnetic flux is the weber ( Wb ) , Occasionally , the magnetic field unit is expressed as webers per square meter instead of teslas , based on this definition .
In many practical applications , the circuit of interest consists of a number N of tightly wound turns ( see ) .
Each turn experiences the same magnetic flux .
Therefore , the net magnetic flux through the circuits is N times the flux through one turn , and Faraday ’ s law is written as The square coil of has sides long and is tightly wound with turns of wire .
The resistance of the coil is The coil is placed in a spatially uniform magnetic field that is directed perpendicular to the face of the coil and whose magnitude is decreasing at a rate ( a ) What is the magnitude of the emf induced in the coil ?
( b ) What is the magnitude of the current circulating through the coil ?
The area vector , or direction , is perpendicular to area covering the loop .
We will choose this to be pointing downward so that is parallel to and that the flux turns into multiplication of magnetic field times area .
The area of the loop is not changing in time , so it can be factored out of the time derivative , leaving the magnetic field as the only quantity varying in time .
Lastly , we can apply Ohm ’ s law once we know the induced emf to find the current in the loop .
The flux through one turn is so we can calculate the magnitude of the emf from Faraday ’ s law .
Since the loop is a closed path , the result of this current would be a small amount of heating of the wires until the magnetic field stops changing .
This may increase the area of the loop slightly as the wires are heated .
Check Your Understanding A closely wound coil has a radius of 4.0 cm , 50 turns , and a total resistance of .
At what rate must a magnetic field perpendicular to the face of the coil change in order to produce Joule heating in the coil at a rate of 2.0 mW ?
The direction in which the induced emf drives current around a wire loop can be found through the negative sign .
However , it is usually easier to determine this direction with Lenz ’ s law , named in honor of its discoverer , Heinrich Lenz ( 1804–1865 ) .
( Faraday also discovered this law , independently of Lenz . )
We state Lenz ’ s law as follows : The direction of the induced emf drives current around a wire loop to always oppose the change in magnetic flux that causes the emf .
Lenz ’ s law can also be considered in terms of conservation of energy .
If pushing a magnet into a coil causes current , the energy in that current must have come from somewhere .
If the induced current causes a magnetic field opposing the increase in field of the magnet we pushed in , then the situation is clear .
We pushed a magnet against a field and did work on the system , and that showed up as current .
If it were not the case that the induced field opposes the change in the flux , the magnet would be pulled in produce a current without anything having done work .
Electric potential energy would have been created , violating the conservation of energy .
To determine an induced emf , you first calculate the magnetic flux and then obtain The magnitude of is given by Finally , you can apply Lenz ’ s law to determine the sense of .
This will be developed through examples that illustrate the following problem-solving strategy .
To use Lenz ’ s law to determine the directions of induced magnetic fields , currents , and emfs : Make a sketch of the situation for use in visualizing and recording directions .
Determine the direction of the applied magnetic field Determine whether its magnetic flux is increasing or decreasing .
Now determine the direction of the induced magnetic field The induced magnetic field tries to reinforce a magnetic flux that is decreasing or opposes a magnetic flux that is increasing .
Therefore , the induced magnetic field adds or subtracts to the applied magnetic field , depending on the change in magnetic flux .
Use right-hand rule 2 ( RHR-2 ; see ) to determine the direction of the induced current I that is responsible for the induced magnetic field The direction ( or polarity ) of the induced emf can now drive a conventional current in this direction .
Let ’ s apply Lenz ’ s law to the system of ( a ) .
We designate the “ front ” of the closed conducting loop as the region containing the approaching bar magnet , and the “ back ” of the loop as the other region .
As the north pole of the magnet moves toward the loop , the flux through the loop due to the field of the magnet increases because the strength of field lines directed from the front to the back of the loop is increasing .
A current is therefore induced in the loop .
By Lenz ’ s law , the direction of the induced current must be such that its own magnetic field is directed in a way to oppose the changing flux caused by the field of the approaching magnet .
Hence , the induced current circulates so that its magnetic field lines through the loop are directed from the back to the front of the loop .
By RHR-2 , place your thumb pointing against the magnetic field lines , which is toward the bar magnet .
Your fingers wrap in a counterclockwise direction as viewed from the bar magnet .
Alternatively , we can determine the direction of the induced current by treating the current loop as an electromagnet that opposes the approach of the north pole of the bar magnet .
This occurs when the induced current flows as shown , for then the face of the loop nearer the approaching magnet is also a north pole .
Part ( b ) of the figure shows the south pole of a magnet moving toward a conducting loop .
In this case , the flux through the loop due to the field of the magnet increases because the number of field lines directed from the back to the front of the loop is increasing .
To oppose this change , a current is induced in the loop whose field lines through the loop are directed from the front to the back .
Equivalently , we can say that the current flows in a direction so that the face of the loop nearer the approaching magnet is a south pole , which then repels the approaching south pole of the magnet .
By RHR-2 , your thumb points away from the bar magnet .
Your fingers wrap in a clockwise fashion , which is the direction of the induced current .
Another example illustrating the use of Lenz ’ s law is shown in .
When the switch is opened , the decrease in current through the solenoid causes a decrease in magnetic flux through its coils , which induces an emf in the solenoid .
This emf must oppose the change ( the termination of the current ) causing it .
Consequently , the induced emf has the polarity shown and drives in the direction of the original current .
This may generate an arc across the terminals of the switch as it is opened .
the magnet enters , passes through , and leaves the loop .
Check Your Understanding Find the direction of the induced current in the wire loop shown below as Check Your Understanding Verify the directions of the induced currents in .
A magnetic field is directed outward perpendicular to the plane of a circular coil of radius .
The field is cylindrically symmetrical with respect to the center of the coil , and its magnitude decays exponentially according to where B is in teslas and t is in seconds .
The magnetic field can be pulled out of the integration , leaving the flux as the product of the magnetic field times area .
We need to take the time derivative of the exponential function to calculate the emf using Faraday ’ s law .
Then we use Ohm ’ s law to calculate the current .
For all three times , the sense of ε is counterclockwise ; its magnitudes are From Ohm ’ s law , the respective currents are and An emf voltage is created by a changing magnetic flux over time .
If we know how the magnetic field varies with time over a constant area , we can take its time derivative to calculate the induced emf .
through the windings of a solenoid with turns per meter is changing at a rate The current ( See for a discussion of solenoids . )
The solenoid is 50-cm long and has a cross-sectional diameter of 3.0 cm .
A small coil consisting of closely wound turns wrapped in a circle of diameter 1.0 cm is placed in the middle of the solenoid such that the plane of the coil is perpendicular to the central axis of the solenoid .
Assuming that the infinite-solenoid approximation is valid at the location of the small coil , determine the magnitude of the emf induced in the coil .
The magnetic field in the middle of the solenoid is a uniform value of This field is producing a maximum magnetic flux through the coil as it is directed along the length of the solenoid .
Therefore , the magnetic flux through the coil is the product of the solenoid ’ s magnetic field times the area of the coil .
Faraday ’ s law involves a time derivative of the magnetic flux .
The only quantity varying in time is the current , the rest can be pulled out of the time derivative .
Lastly , we include the number of turns in the coil to determine the induced emf in the coil .
Since the field of the solenoid is given by the flux through each turn of the small coil is where d is the diameter of the coil .
The result is that the ring is fired vertically into the air .
Visit this for a demonstration of the jumping ring from MIT .
Magnetic flux depends on three factors : the strength of the magnetic field , the area through which the field lines pass , and the orientation of the field with the surface area .
If any of these quantities varies , a corresponding variation in magnetic flux occurs .
So far , we ’ ve only considered flux changes due to a changing field .
Now we look at another possibility : a changing area through which the field lines pass including a change in the orientation of the area .
Two examples of this type of flux change are represented in .
In part ( a ) , the flux through the rectangular loop increases as it moves into the magnetic field , and in part ( b ) , the flux through the rotating coil varies with the angle .
It ’ s interesting to note that what we perceive as the cause of a particular flux change actually depends on the frame of reference we choose .
It is often possible to describe a flux change through a coil that is moving in one particular reference frame in terms of a changing magnetic field in a second frame , where the coil is stationary .
However , referenceframe questions related to magnetic flux are beyond the level of this textbook .
We ’ ll avoid such complexities by always working in a frame at rest relative to the laboratory and explain flux variations as due to either a changing field or a changing area .
Now let ’ s look at a conducting rod pulled in a circuit , changing magnetic flux .
The area enclosed by the circuit ‘ MNOP ’ of is lx and is perpendicular to the magnetic field , so we can simplify the integration of into a multiplication of magnetic field and area .
This calculation of motionally induced emf is not restricted to a rod moving on conducting rails .
With as the starting point , it can be shown that holds for any change in flux caused by the motion of a conductor .
We saw in that the emf induced by a time-varying magnetic field obeys this same relationship , which is Faraday ’ s law .
Thus Faraday ’ s law holds for all flux changes , whether they are produced by a changing magnetic field , by motion , or by a combination of the two .
From an energy perspective , produces power and the resistor dissipates power .
Since the rod is moving at constant velocity , the applied force must balance the magnetic force on the rod when it is carrying the induced current I .
Thus the power produced is The power dissipated is In satisfying the principle of energy conservation , the produced and dissipated powers are equal .
This principle can be seen in the operation of a rail gun .
A rail gun is an electromagnetic projectile launcher that uses an apparatus similar to and is shown in schematic form in .
The conducting rod is replaced with a projectile or weapon to be fired .
So far , we ’ ve only heard about how motion causes an emf .
In a rail gun , the optimal shutting off/ramping down of a magnetic field decreases the flux in between the rails , causing a current to flow in the rod ( armature ) that holds the projectile .
This current through the armature experiences a magnetic force and is propelled forward .
Rail guns , however , are not used widely in the military due to the high cost of production and high currents : Nearly one million amps is required to produce enough energy for a rail gun to be an effective weapon .
We can calculate a motionally induced emf with Faraday ’ s law even when an actual closed circuit is not present .
We simply imagine an enclosed area whose boundary includes the moving conductor , calculate , and then find the emf from Faraday ’ s law .
For example , we can let the moving rod of be one side of the imaginary rectangular area represented by the dashed lines .
The area of the rectangle is lx , so the magnetic flux through it is Differentiating this equation , we obtain which is identical to the potential difference between the ends of the rod that we determined earlier .
Motional emfs in Earth ’ s weak magnetic field are not ordinarily very large , or we would notice voltage along metal rods , such as a screwdriver , during ordinary motions .
For example , a simple calculation of the motional emf of a 1.0-m rod moving at 3.0 m/s perpendicular to the Earth ’ s field gives This small value is consistent with experience .
There is a spectacular exception , however .
In 1992 and 1996 , attempts were made with the space shuttle to create large motional emfs .
The tethered satellite was to be let out on a 20-km length of wire , as shown in , to create a 5-kV emf by moving at orbital speed through Earth ’ s field .
This emf could be used to convert some of the shuttle ’ s kinetic and potential energy into electrical energy if a complete circuit could be made .
To complete the circuit , the stationary ionosphere was to supply a return path through which current could flow .
( The ionosphere is the rarefied and partially ionized atmosphere at orbital altitudes .
It conducts because of the ionization .
The ionosphere serves the same function as the stationary rails and connecting resistor in , without which there would not be a complete circuit . )
Drag on the current in the cable due to the magnetic force does the work that reduces the shuttle ’ s kinetic and potential energy , and allows it to be converted into electrical energy .
Both tests were unsuccessful .
In the first , the cable hung up and could only be extended a couple of hundred meters ; in the second , the cable broke when almost fully extended .
indicates feasibility in principle .
Calculate the motional emf induced along a 20.0-km conductor moving at an orbital speed of 7.80 km/s perpendicular to Earth ’ s magnetic field .
This is a great example of using the equation motional Entering the given values into gives The value obtained is greater than the 5-kV measured voltage for the shuttle experiment , since the actual orbital motion of the tether is not perpendicular to Earth ’ s field .
The 7.80-kV value is the maximum emf obtained when and so Part ( a ) of shows a metal rod OS that is rotating in a horizontal plane around point O .
The rod slides along a wire that forms a circular arc PST of radius r .
The system is in a constant magnetic field that is directed out of the page .
( a ) If you rotate the rod at a constant angular velocity , what is the current I in the closed loop OPSO ?
Assume that the resistor R furnishes all of the resistance in the closed loop .
( b ) Calculate the work per unit time that you do while rotating the rod and show that it is equal to the power dissipated in the resistor .
The torque is calculated by knowing the force on a rod and integrating it over the length of the rod .
Therefore , as part ( b ) of illustrates , the current circulates clockwise .
You rotate the rod by exerting a torque on it .
Since the rod rotates at constant angular velocity , this torque is equal and opposite to the torque exerted on the current in the rod by the original magnetic field .
The power dissipated in the resister is , which can be written as Therefore , we see that Hence , the power dissipated in the resistor is equal to the work per unit time done in rotating the rod .
An alternative way of looking at the induced emf from Faraday ’ s law is to integrate in space instead of time .
The solution , however , would be the same .
The motional emf is The velocity can be written as the angular velocity times the radius and the differential length written as dr .
Therefore , which is the same solution as before .
A rectangular coil of area A and N turns is placed in a uniform magnetic field as shown in .
The coil is rotated about the z -axis through its center at a constant angular velocity Obtain an expression for the induced emf in the coil .
According to the diagram , the angle between the perpendicular to the surface and the magnetic field is .
The dot product of simplifies to only the component of the magnetic field , namely where the magnetic field projects onto the unit area vector .
The magnitude of the magnetic field and the area of the loop are fixed over time , which makes the integration simplify quickly .
The induced emf is written out using Faraday ’ s law .
This is changes the function to time space rather than .
The induced emf therefore varies sinusoidally with time according to where If the magnetic field strength or area of the loop were also changing over time , these variables wouldn ’ t be able to be pulled out of the time derivative to simply the solution as shown .
This example is the basis for an electric generator , as we will give a full discussion in .
Which end of the rod is at a higher potential ?
Check Your Understanding A rod of length 10 cm moves at a speed of 10 m/s perpendicularly through a 1.5-T magnetic field .
What is the potential difference between the ends of the rod ?
The fact that emfs are induced in circuits implies that work is being done on the conduction electrons in the wires .
What can possibly be the source of this work ?
We know that it ’ s neither a battery nor a magnetic field , for a battery does not have to be present in a circuit where current is induced , and magnetic fields never do work on moving charges .
The answer is that the source of the work is an electric field that is induced in the wires .
The work done by in moving a unit charge completely around a circuit is the induced emf ε ; that is , where represents the line integral around the circuit .
Faraday ’ s law can be written in terms of the induced electric field as There is an important distinction between the electric field induced by a changing magnetic field and the electrostatic field produced by a fixed charge distribution .
Specifically , the induced electric field is nonconservative because it does net work in moving a charge over a closed path , whereas the electrostatic field is conservative and does no net work over a closed path .
Hence , electric potential can be associated with the electrostatic field , but not with the induced field .
The following equations represent the distinction between the two types of electric field : Our results can be summarized by combining these equations : What is the induced electric field in the circular coil of ( and ) at the three times indicated ?
Using cylindrical symmetry , the electric field integral simplifies into the electric field times the circumference of a circle .
Since we already know the induced emf , we can connect these two expressions by Faraday ’ s law to solve for the induced electric field .
The induced electric field in the coil is constant in magnitude over the cylindrical surface , similar to how Ampere ’ s law problems with cylinders are solved .
Since is tangent to the coil , When combined with , this gives The direction of is counterclockwise , and circulates in the same direction around the coil .
The values of E are When the magnetic flux through a circuit changes , a nonconservative electric field is induced , which drives current through the circuit .
But what happens if in free space where there isn ’ t a conducting path ?
The answer is that this case can be treated as if a conducting path were present ; that is , nonconservative electric fields are induced wherever whether or not there is a conducting path present .
These nonconservative electric fields always satisfy .
For example , if the circular coil of were removed , an electric field in free space at would still be directed counterclockwise , and its magnitude would still be 1.9 V/m at , 1.5 V/m at etc .
The existence of induced electric fields is certainly not restricted to wires in circuits .
( c ) What is the direction of the induced field at both locations ?
Assume that the infinite-solenoid approximation is valid throughout the regions of interest .
Using the formula for the magnetic field inside an infinite solenoid and Faraday ’ s law , we calculate the induced emf .
Since we have cylindrical symmetry , the electric field integral reduces to the electric field times the circumference of the integration path .
Then we solve for the electric field .
Hence , we have For a path of radius r inside the solenoid , so and the induced field is The magnetic field points into the page as shown in part ( b ) and is decreasing .
If either of the circular paths were occupied by conducting rings , the currents induced in them would circulate as shown , in conformity with Lenz ’ s law .
The induced electric field must be so directed as well .
In part ( b ) , note that increases with r inside and decreases as 1/ r outside the solenoid , as shown in .
Check Your Understanding Suppose that the coil of is a square rather than circular .
Can be used to calculate ( a ) the induced emf and ( b ) the induced electric field ?
Check Your Understanding What is the magnitude of the induced electric field in at if turns per meter , and Check Your Understanding The magnetic field shown below is confined to the cylindrical region shown and is changing with time .
Identify those paths for which Check Your Understanding A long solenoid of cross-sectional area is wound with 25 turns of wire per centimeter .
It is placed in the middle of a closely wrapped coil of 10 turns and radius 25 cm , as shown below .
( a ) What is the emf induced in the coil when the current through the solenoid is decreasing at a rate ( b ) What is the electric field induced in the coil ?
As discussed two sections earlier , a motional emf is induced when a conductor moves in a magnetic field or when a magnetic field moves relative to a conductor .
If motional emf can cause a current in the conductor , we refer to that current as an eddy current .
Eddy currents can produce significant drag , called magnetic damping , on the motion involved .
Consider the apparatus shown in , which swings a pendulum bob between the poles of a strong magnet .
( This is another favorite physics demonstration . )
If the bob is metal , significant drag acts on the bob as it enters and leaves the field , quickly damping the motion .
If , however , the bob is a slotted metal plate , as shown in part ( b ) of the figure , the magnet produces a much smaller effect .
There is no discernible effect on a bob made of an insulator .
Why does drag occur in both directions , and are there any uses for magnetic drag ?
shows what happens to the metal plate as it enters and leaves the magnetic field .
In both cases , it experiences a force opposing its motion .
As it enters from the left , flux increases , setting up an eddy current ( Faraday ’ s law ) in the counterclockwise direction ( Lenz ’ s law ) , as shown .
Only the right-hand side of the current loop is in the field , so an unopposed force acts on it to the left ( RHR-1 ) .
When the metal plate is completely inside the field , there is no eddy current if the field is uniform , since the flux remains constant in this region .
But when the plate leaves the field on the right , flux decreases , causing an eddy current in the clockwise direction that , again , experiences a force to the left , further slowing the motion .
A similar analysis of what happens when the plate swings from the right toward the left shows that its motion is also damped when entering and leaving the field .
When a slotted metal plate enters the field , an emf is induced by the change in flux , but it is less effective because the slots limit the size of the current loops .
Moreover , adjacent loops have currents in opposite directions , and their effects cancel .
When an insulating material is used , the eddy current is extremely small , so magnetic damping on insulators is negligible .
If eddy currents are to be avoided in conductors , then they must be slotted or constructed of thin layers of conducting material separated by insulating sheets .
One use of magnetic damping is found in sensitive laboratory balances .
To have maximum sensitivity and accuracy , the balance must be as friction-free as possible .
But if it is friction-free , then it will oscillate for a very long time .
Magnetic damping is a simple and ideal solution .
With magnetic damping , drag is proportional to speed and becomes zero at zero velocity .
Thus , the oscillations are quickly damped , after which the damping force disappears , allowing the balance to be very sensitive .
In most balances , magnetic damping is accomplished with a conducting disc that rotates in a fixed field .
Since eddy currents and magnetic damping occur only in conductors , recycling centers can use magnets to separate metals from other materials .
Trash is dumped in batches down a ramp , beneath which lies a powerful magnet .
Conductors in the trash are slowed by magnetic damping while nonmetals in the trash move on , separating from the metals .
This works for all metals , not just ferromagnetic ones .
A magnet can separate out the ferromagnetic materials alone by acting on stationary trash .
Other major applications of eddy currents appear in metal detectors and braking systems in trains and roller coasters .
Portable metal detectors consist of a primary coil carrying an alternating current and a secondary coil in which a current is induced .
An eddy current is induced in a piece of metal close to the detector , causing a change in the induced current within the secondary coil .
This can trigger some sort of signal , such as a shrill noise .
Braking using eddy currents is safer because factors such as rain do not affect the braking and the braking is smoother .
However , eddy currents can not bring the motion to a complete stop , since the braking force produced decreases as speed is reduced .
Thus , speed can be reduced from say 20 m/s to 5 m/s , but another form of braking is needed to completely stop the vehicle .
Generally , powerful rare-earth magnets such as neodymium magnets are used in roller coasters .
shows rows of magnets in such an application .
The vehicle has metal fins ( normally containing copper ) that pass through the magnetic field , slowing the vehicle down in much the same way as with the pendulum bob shown in .
Induction cooktops have electromagnets under their surface .
The magnetic field is varied rapidly , producing eddy currents in the base of the pot , causing the pot and its contents to increase in temperature .
Induction cooktops have high efficiencies and good response times but the base of the pot needs to be conductors , such as iron or steel , for induction to work .
A variety of important phenomena and devices can be understood with Faraday ’ s law .
In this section , we examine two of these .
Electric generators induce an emf by rotating a coil in a magnetic field , as briefly discussed in .
We now explore generators in more detail .
Consider the following example .
The generator coil shown in is rotated through one-fourth of a revolution ( from to in 15.0 ms .
The 200-turn circular coil has a 5.00-cm radius and is in a uniform 0.80-T magnetic field .
What is the emf induced ?
Faraday ’ s law of induction is used to find the emf induced : We recognize this situation as the same one in .
According to the diagram , the projection of the surface normal vector to the magnetic field is initially and this is inserted by the definition of the dot product .
The magnitude of the magnetic field and area of the loop are fixed over time , which makes the integration simplify quickly .
The induced emf is written out using Faraday ’ s law : We are given that loop is , , and The area of the Entering this value gives This is a practical average value , similar to the 120 V used in household power .
The emf calculated in is the average over one-fourth of a revolution .
What is the emf at any given instant ?
It varies with the angle between the magnetic field and a perpendicular to the coil .
We can get an expression for emf as a function of time by considering the motional emf on a rotating rectangular coil of width w and height l in a uniform magnetic field , as illustrated in .
Charges in the wires of the loop experience the magnetic force , because they are moving in a magnetic field .
Charges in the vertical wires experience forces parallel to the wire , causing currents .
But those in the top and bottom segments feel a force perpendicular to the wire , which does not cause a current .
We can thus find the induced emf by considering only the side wires .
Motional emf is given to be , where the velocity v is perpendicular to the magnetic field B .
Here the velocity is at an angle with B , so that its component perpendicular to B is v sin ( see ) .
Thus , in this case , the emf induced on each side is , and they are in the same direction .
The total emf around the loop is then This expression is valid , but it does not give emf as a function of time .
To find the time dependence of emf , we assume the coil rotates at a constant angular velocity .
This can also be expressed as where is the peak emf , since the maximum value of .
Note that the frequency of the oscillation is and the period is shows a graph of emf as a function of time , and it now seems reasonable that ac voltage is sinusoidal .
The fact that the peak emf is makes good sense .
The greater the number of coils , the larger their area , and the stronger the field , the greater the output voltage .
It is interesting that the faster the generator is spun ( greater ) , the greater the emf .
This is noticeable on bicycle generators—at least the cheaper varieties .
shows a scheme by which a generator can be made to produce pulsed dc .
More elaborate arrangements of multiple coils and split rings can produce smoother dc , although electronic rather than mechanical means are usually used to make ripple-free dc .
In real life , electric generators look a lot different from the figures in this section , but the principles are the same .
The source of mechanical energy that turns the coil can be falling water ( hydropower ) , steam produced by the burning of fossil fuels , or the kinetic energy of wind .
shows a cutaway view of a steam turbine ; steam moves over the blades connected to the shaft , which rotates the coil within the generator .
The generation of electrical energy from mechanical energy is the basic principle of all power that is sent through our electrical grids to our homes .
Generators illustrated in this section look very much like the motors illustrated previously .
This is not coincidental .
In fact , a motor becomes a generator when its shaft rotates .
Certain early automobiles used their starter motor as a generator .
In the next section , we further explore the action of a motor as a generator .
Generators convert mechanical energy into electrical energy , whereas motors convert electrical energy into mechanical energy .
Thus , it is not surprising that motors and generators have the same general construction .
A motor works by sending a current through a loop of wire located in a magnetic field .
As a result , the magnetic field exerts torque on the loop .
This rotates a shaft , thereby extracting mechanical work out of the electrical current sent in initially .
( Refer to for a discussion on motors that will help you understand more about them before proceeding . )
When the coil of a motor is turned , magnetic flux changes through the coil , and an emf ( consistent with Faraday ’ s law ) is induced .
The motor thus acts as a generator whenever its coil rotates .
This happens whether the shaft is turned by an external input , like a belt drive , or by the action of the motor itself .
That is , when a motor is doing work and its shaft is turning , an emf is generated .
Lenz ’ s law tells us the emf opposes any change , so that the input emf that powers the motor is opposed by the motor ’ s self-generated emf , called the back emf of the motor .
The generator output of a motor is the difference between the supply voltage and the back emf .
The back emf is zero when the motor is first turned on , meaning that the coil receives the full driving voltage and the motor draws maximum current when it is on but not turning .
As the motor turns faster , the back emf grows , always opposing the driving emf , and reduces both the voltage across the coil and the amount of current it draws .
This effect is noticeable in many common situations .
When a vacuum cleaner , refrigerator , or washing machine is first turned on , lights in the same circuit dim briefly due to the IR drop produced in feeder lines by the large current drawn by the motor .
When a motor first comes on , it draws more current than when it runs at its normal operating speed .
When a mechanical load is placed on the motor , like an electric wheelchair going up a hill , the motor slows , the back emf drops , more current flows , and more work can be done .
If the motor runs at too low a speed , the larger current can overheat it ( via resistive power in the coil , perhaps even burning it out .
On the other hand , if there is no mechanical load on the motor , it increases its angular velocity until the back emf is nearly equal to the driving emf .
Then the motor uses only enough energy to overcome friction .
Eddy currents in iron cores of motors can cause troublesome energy losses .
These are usually minimized by constructing the cores out of thin , electrically insulated sheets of iron .
The magnetic properties of the core are hardly affected by the lamination of the insulating sheet , while the resistive heating is reduced considerably .
Consider , for example , the motor coils represented in .
The coils have an equivalent resistance of and are driven by an emf of 48.0 V. Shortly after being turned on , they draw a current and thus dissipate of energy as heat transfer .
The total resistance of a series-wound dc motor is .
When connected to a 120-V source , the motor draws 10 A while running at constant angular velocity .
( a ) What is the back emf induced in the rotating coil , ( b ) What is the mechanical power output of the motor ?
( c ) How much power is dissipated in the resistance of the coils ?
( d ) What is the power output of the 120-V source ?
( e ) Suppose the load on the motor increases , causing it to slow down to the point where it draws 20 A .
Answer parts ( a ) through ( d ) for this situation .
The back emf is calculated based on the difference between the supplied voltage and the loss from the current through the resistance .
The power from each device is calculated from one of the power formulas based on the given information .
Notice that we have an energy balance in part ( d ) : Modern society has numerous applications of Faraday ’ s law of induction , as we will explore in this chapter and others .
At this juncture , let us mention several that involve recording information using magnetic fields .
Some computer hard drives apply the principle of magnetic induction .
Recorded data are made on a coated , spinning disk .
Historically , reading these data was made to work on the principle of induction .
However , most input information today is carried in digital rather than analog form—a series of 0s or 1s are written upon the spinning hard drive .
Therefore , most hard drive readout devices do not work on the principle of induction , but use a technique known as giant magnetoresistance .
Giant magnetoresistance is the effect of a large change of electrical resistance induced by an applied magnetic field to thin films of alternating ferromagnetic and nonmagnetic layers .
This is one of the first large successes of nanotechnology .
Graphics tablets , or tablet computers where a specially designed pen is used to draw digital images , also applies induction principles .
The tablets discussed here are labeled as passive tablets , since there are other designs that use either a batteryoperated pen or optical signals to write with .
The passive tablets are different than the touch tablets and phones many of us use regularly , but may still be found when signing your signature at a cash register .
Underneath the screen , shown in , are tiny wires running across the length and width of the screen .
The pen has a tiny magnetic field coming from the tip .
As the tip brushes across the screen , a changing magnetic field is felt in the wires which translates into an induced emf that is converted into the line you just drew .
Another application of induction is the magnetic stripe on the back of your personal credit card as used at the grocery store or the ATM machine .
This works on the same principle as the audio or video tape , in which a playback head reads personal information from your card .
Check out this to see how flashlights can use magnetic induction .
A magnet moves by your mechanical work through a wire .
The induced current charges a capacitor that stores the charge that will light the lightbulb even while you are not doing this mechanical work .
Electric and hybrid vehicles also take advantage of electromagnetic induction .
One limiting factor that inhibits widespread acceptance of 100 % electric vehicles is that the lifetime of the battery is not as long as the time you get to drive on a full tank of gas .
To increase the amount of charge in the battery during driving , the motor can act as a generator whenever the car is braking , taking advantage of the back emf produced .
This extra emf can be newly acquired stored energy in the car ’ s battery , prolonging the life of the battery .
Another contemporary area of research in which electromagnetic induction is being successfully implemented is transcranial magnetic stimulation ( TMS ) .
A host of disorders , including depression and hallucinations , can be traced to irregular localized electrical activity in the brain .
In transcranial magnetic stimulation , a rapidly varying and very localized magnetic field is placed close to certain sites identified in the brain .
The usage of TMS as a diagnostic technique is well established .
Check out this to see how rock-and-roll instruments like electric guitars use electromagnetic induction to get those strong beats .
magnetic field Faraday ’ s law In , we discussed how a time-varying magnetic flux induces an emf in a circuit .
In many of our calculations , this flux was due to an applied time-dependent magnetic field .
The reverse of this phenomenon also occurs : The current flowing in a circuit produces its own magnetic field .
In , we saw that induction is the process by which an emf is induced by changing magnetic flux .
So far , we have discussed some examples of induction , although some of these applications are more effective than others .
The smartphone charging mat in the chapter opener photo also works by induction .
Is there a useful physical quantity related to how “ effective ” a given device is ?
The answer is yes , and that physical quantity is inductance .
In this chapter , we look at the applications of inductance in electronic devices and how inductors are used in circuits .
Inductance is the property of a device that tells us how effectively it induces an emf in another device .
In other words , it is a physical quantity that expresses the effectiveness of a given device .
When two circuits carrying time-varying currents are close to one another , the magnetic flux through each circuit varies because of the changing current I in the other circuit .
Consequently , an emf is induced in each circuit by the changing current in the other .
This type of emf is therefore called a mutually induced emf , and the phenomenon that occurs is known as mutual inductance ( M ) .
As an example , let ’ s consider two tightly wound coils .
Coils 1 and 2 have and turns and carry currents and respectively .
It depends on the shapes and relative positions of the two coils , and it is independent of the currents in the coils .
The SI unit for mutual inductance M is called the henry ( H ) in honor of Joseph Henry ( 1799–1878 ) , an American scientist who discovered induced emf independently of Faraday .
Thus , we have .
From and , we can show that so we usually drop the subscripts associated with mutual inductance and write The emf developed in either coil is found by combining Faraday ’ s law and the definition of mutual inductance .
Since is the total flux through coil 2 due to , we obtain where we have used the fact that M is a time-independent constant because the geometry is time-independent .
Similarly , we have In , we can see the significance of the earlier description of mutual inductance ( M ) as a geometric quantity .
The value of M neatly encapsulates the physical properties of circuit elements and allows us to separate the physical layout of the circuit from the dynamic quantities , such as the emf and the current .
defines the mutual inductance in terms of properties in the circuit , whereas the previous definition of mutual inductance in is defined in terms of the magnetic flux experienced , regardless of circuit elements .
You should be careful when using and because do not necessarily represent the total emfs in the respective coils .
Each coil can also have an emf induced in it because of its self-inductance ( self-inductance will be discussed in more detail in a later section ) .
A large mutual inductance M may or may not be desirable .
We want a transformer to have a large mutual inductance .
But an appliance , such as an electric clothes dryer , can induce a dangerous emf on its metal case if the mutual inductance between its coils and the case is large .
One way to reduce mutual inductance is to counter-wind coils to cancel the magnetic field produced .
Digital signal processing is another example in which mutual inductance is reduced by counter-winding coils .
The rapid on/ off emf representing 1s and 0s in a digital circuit creates a complex time-dependent magnetic field .
An emf can be generated in neighboring conductors .
If that conductor is also carrying a digital signal , the induced emf may be large enough to switch 1s and 0s , with consequences ranging from inconvenient to disastrous .
shows a coil of turns and radius surrounding a long solenoid of length radius and turns .
( a ) What is the mutual inductance of the two coils ?
( b ) If , , , , and the current in the solenoid is changing at a rate of 200 A/s , what is the emf induced in the surrounding coil ?
There is no magnetic field outside the solenoid , and the field inside has magnitude and is directed parallel to the solenoid ’ s axis .
We can use this magnetic field to find the magnetic flux through the surrounding coil and then use this flux to calculate the mutual inductance for part ( a ) , using .
We solve part ( b ) by calculating the mutual inductance from the given quantities and using to calculate the induced emf .
In principle , we can also calculate M by finding the magnetic flux through the solenoid produced by the current in the surrounding coil .
This approach is much more difficult because is so complicated .
However , since we do know the result of this calculation .
Check Your Understanding A current flows through the solenoid of part ( b ) of .
What is the maximum emf induced in the surrounding coil ?
Mutual inductance arises when a current in one circuit produces a changing magnetic field that induces an emf in another circuit .
But can the magnetic field affect the current in the original circuit that produced the field ?
The answer is yes , and this is the phenomenon called self-inductance .
shows some of the magnetic field lines due to the current in a circular loop of wire .
If the current is constant , the magnetic flux through the loop is also constant .
However , if the current I were to vary with time—say , immediately after switch S is closed—then the magnetic flux would correspondingly change .
If the loop has N turns , this equation becomes By convention , the positive sense of the normal to the loop is related to the current by the right-hand rule , so in , the normal points downward .
With this convention , is positive in , so L always has a positive value .
For example , besides the wire loop , a long , straight wire has self-inductance , as does a coaxial cable .
A coaxial cable is most commonly used by the cable television industry and may also be found connecting to your cable modem .
Coaxial cables are used due to their ability to transmit electrical signals with minimal distortions .
Coaxial cables have two long cylindrical conductors that possess current and a self-inductance that may have undesirable effects .
A circuit element used to provide self-inductance is known as an inductor .
It is represented by the symbol shown in , which resembles a coil of wire , the basic form of the inductor .
shows several types of inductors commonly used in circuits .
In accordance with Lenz ’ s law , the negative sign in indicates that the induced emf across an inductor always has a polarity that opposes the change in the current .
For example , if the current flowing from A to B in ( a ) were increasing , the induced emf ( represented by the imaginary battery ) would have the polarity shown in order to oppose the increase .
If the current from A to B were decreasing , then the induced emf would have the opposite polarity , again to oppose the change in current ( ( b ) ) .
Finally , if the current through the inductor were constant , no emf would be induced in the coil .
One common application of inductance is to allow traffic signals to sense when vehicles are waiting at a street intersection .
An electrical circuit with an inductor is placed in the road underneath the location where a waiting car will stop .
The body of the car increases the inductance and the circuit changes , sending a signal to the traffic lights to change colors .
Similarly , metal detectors used for airport security employ the same technique .
A coil or inductor in the metal detector frame acts as both a transmitter and a receiver .
The pulsed signal from the transmitter coil induces a signal in the receiver .
The selfinductance of the circuit is affected by any metal object in the path .
Metal detectors can be adjusted for sensitivity and can also sense the presence of metal on a person .
Large induced voltages are found in camera flashes .
Camera flashes use a battery , two inductors that function as a transformer , and a switching system or oscillator to induce large voltages .
Recall from on oscillations that “ oscillation ” is defined as the fluctuation of a quantity , or repeated regular fluctuations of a quantity , between two extreme values around an average value .
Also recall ( from on electromagnetic induction ) that we need a changing magnetic field , brought about by a changing current , to induce a voltage in another coil .
The oscillator system does this many times as the battery voltage is boosted to over 1000 volts .
( You may hear the high-pitched whine from the transformer as the capacitor is being charged . )
A capacitor stores the high voltage for later use in powering the flash .
An induced emf of 2.0 V is measured across a coil of 50 closely wound turns while the current through it increases uniformly from 0.0 to 5.0 A in 0.10 s. ( a ) What is the self-inductance of the coil ?
( b ) With the current at 5.0 A , what is the flux through each turn of the coil ?
Both parts of this problem give all the information needed to solve for the self-inductance in part ( a ) or the flux through each turn of the coil in part ( b ) .
The equations needed are for part ( a ) and for part ( b ) .
If the current is not changing over time , the flux is not changing in time , so no emf is induced .
Check Your Understanding Current flows through the inductor in from B to A instead of from A to B as shown .
Is the current increasing or decreasing in order to produce the emf given in diagram ( a ) ?
In diagram ( b ) ?
Check Your Understanding A changing current induces an emf of 10 V across a 0.25-H inductor .
What is the rate at which the current is changing ?
A good approach for calculating the self-inductance of an inductor consists of the following steps : Assume a current I is flowing through the inductor .
Determine the magnetic field produced by the current .
If there is appropriate symmetry , you may be able to do this with Ampère ’ s law .
Obtain the magnetic flux , With the flux known , the self-inductance can be found from , .
To demonstrate this procedure , we now calculate the self-inductances of two inductors .
Consider a long , cylindrical solenoid with length l , cross-sectional area A , and N turns of wire .
We assume that the length of the solenoid is so much larger than its diameter that we can take the magnetic field to be throughout the interior of the solenoid , that is , we ignore end effects in the solenoid .
Notice that the self-inductance of a long solenoid depends only on its physical properties ( such as the number of turns of wire per unit length and the volume ) , and not on the magnetic field or the current .
This is true for inductors in general .
A toroid with a rectangular cross-section is shown in .
The inner and outer radii of the toroid are is the height of the toroid .
Applying Ampère ’ s law in the same manner as we did in for a toroid with a circular cross-section , we find the magnetic field inside a rectangular toroid is also given by where r is the distance from the central axis of the toroid .
Because the field changes within the toroid , we must calculate the flux by integrating over the toroid ’ s cross-section .
Using the infinitesimal cross-sectional area element shown in , we obtain Now from , we obtain for the self-inductance of a rectangular toroid As expected , the self-inductance is a constant determined by only the physical properties of the toroid .
Check Your Understanding ( a ) Calculate the self-inductance of a solenoid that is tightly wound with wire of diameter 0.10 cm , has a cross-sectional area of , and is 40 cm long .
( b ) If the current through the solenoid decreases uniformly from 10 to 0 A in 0.10 s , what is the emf induced between the ends of the solenoid ?
Check Your Understanding ( a ) What is the magnetic flux through one turn of a solenoid of selfinductance when a current of 3.0 A flows through it ?
Assume that the solenoid has 1000 turns and is wound from wire of diameter 1.0 mm .
( b ) What is the cross-sectional area of the solenoid ?
The energy of a capacitor is stored in the electric field between its plates .
Similarly , an inductor has the capability to store energy , but in its magnetic field .
This energy can be found by integrating the magnetic energy density , over the appropriate volume .
To understand where this formula comes from , let ’ s consider the long , cylindrical solenoid of the previous section .
Again using the infinite solenoid approximation , we can assume that the magnetic field is essentially constant and given by everywhere inside the solenoid .
Thus , the energy stored in a solenoid or the magnetic energy density times volume is equivalent to With the substitution of , this becomes Although derived for a special case , this equation gives the energy stored in the magnetic field of any inductor .
We can see this by considering an arbitrary inductor through which a changing current is passing .
The capacitance per unit length of the cable has already been calculated .
Now ( a ) determine the magnetic energy stored per unit length of the coaxial cable and ( b ) use this result to find the self-inductance per unit length of the cable .
The magnetic field both inside and outside the coaxial cable is determined by Ampère ’ s law .
Based on this magnetic field , we can use to calculate the energy density of the magnetic field .
The magnetic energy is calculated by an integral of the magnetic energy density times the differential volume over the cylindrical shell .
After the integration is carried out , we have a closed-form solution for part ( a ) .
The selfinductance per unit length is determined based on this result and .
We determine the magnetic field between the conductors by applying Ampère ’ s law to the dashed circular path shown in ( b ) .
All the magnetic energy of the cable is therefore stored between the two conductors .
From , where L is the self-inductance of a length l of the coaxial cable .
Equating the previous two equations , we find that the self-inductance per unit length of the cable is The inductance per unit length depends only on the inner and outer radii as seen in the result .
To increase the inductance , we could either increase the outer radius .
In the limit as the two radii become equal , the inductance goes to zero .
In this limit , there is no coaxial cable .
Also , the magnetic energy per unit length from part ( a ) is proportional to the square of the current .
or decrease the inner radius Check Your Understanding How much energy is stored in the inductor of after the current reaches its maximum value ?
A circuit with resistance and self-inductance is known as an RL circuit .
When is opened and is closed , the circuit becomes a single-loop circuit with only a resistor and an inductor ( ( c ) ) .
We first consider the RL circuit of ( b ) .
Once is closed and is open , the source of emf produces a current in the circuit .
If there were no self-inductance in the circuit , the current would rise immediately to a steady value of However , from Faraday ’ s law , the increasing current produces an emf across the inductor .
In accordance with Lenz ’ s law , the induced emf counteracts the increase in the current and is directed as shown in the figure .
As a result , I ( t ) starts at zero and increases asymptotically to its final value .
Applying Kirchhoff ’ s loop rule to this circuit , we obtain which is a first-order differential equation for I ( t ) .
Notice its similarity to the equation for a capacitor and resistor in series ( See ) .
Similarly , the solution to can be found by making substitutions in the equations relating the capacitor to the inductor .
This gives where is the inductive time constant of the circuit .
The current I ( t ) is plotted in ( a ) .
It starts at zero , and as , I ( t ) approaches asymptotically .
The induced emf is directly proportional to dI / dt , or the slope of the curve .
Hence , while at its greatest immediately after the switches are thrown , the induced emf decreases to zero with time as the current approaches its final value of The circuit then becomes equivalent to a resistor connected across a source of emf .
At from , the current in the circuit is , which is of the final value .
The smaller the inductive time constant approaches .
We can find the time dependence of the induced voltage across the inductor in this circuit by using and : the more rapidly the current The magnitude of this function is plotted in ( b ) .
The greatest value of it occurs when dI/dt is greatest , which is immediately after is closed and is opened .
In the approach to steady state , dI/dt decreases to zero .
As a result , the voltage across the inductor also vanishes as The time constant also tells us how quickly the induced voltage decays .
At voltage is the magnitude of the induced the more rapidly the voltage decreases .
The voltage across the inductor therefore drops to about of its initial value after one time constant .
The shorter the time constant After enough time has elapsed so that the current has essentially reached its final value , the positions of the switches in ( a ) are reversed , giving us the circuit in part ( c ) .
At the current in the circuit is With Kirchhoff ’ s loop rule , we obtain The solution to this equation is similar to the solution of the equation for a discharging capacitor , with similar substitutions .
The current at time t is then The current starts at and decreases with time as the energy stored in the inductor is depleted .
The time dependence of the voltage across the inductor can be determined from This voltage is initially , and it decays to zero like the current .
The energy stored in the magnetic field of the inductor , also decreases exponentially with time , as it is dissipated by Joule heating in the resistance of the circuit .
In the circuit of ( a ) , let With closed and open ( ( b ) ) , ( a ) what is the time constant of the circuit ?
( b ) What are the current in the circuit and the magnitude of the induced emf across the inductor at , and as ?
The time constant for an inductor and resistor in a series circuit is calculated using .
The current through and voltage across the inductor are calculated by the scenarios detailed from and .
The circuit would quickly reach the asymptotic values for both of these .
After the current in the RL circuit of has reached its final value , the positions of the switches are reversed so that the circuit becomes the one shown in ( c ) .
( a ) How long does it take the current to drop to half its initial value ?
( b ) How long does it take before the energy stored in the inductor is reduced to of its maximum value ?
The current in the inductor will now decrease as the resistor dissipates this energy .
Therefore , the current falls as an exponential decay .
We can also use that same relationship as a substitution for the energy in an inductor formula to find how the energy decreases at different time intervals .
With the switches reversed , the current decreases according to At a time t when the current is one-half its initial value , we have and where we have used the inductive time constant found in .
Otherwise , we start with a lower initial current , which will decay by the same relationship .
Check Your Understanding Verify that RC and L/R have the dimensions of time .
Check Your Understanding ( a ) If the current in the circuit of in ( b ) increases to of its final value after 5.0 s , what is the inductive time constant ?
( b ) If , what is the value of the selfinductance ?
( c ) If the resistor is replaced with a resister , what is the time taken for the current to reach of its final value ?
Check Your Understanding For the circuit of in ( b ) , show that when steady state is reached , the difference in the total energies produced by the battery and dissipated in the resistor is equal to the energy stored in the magnetic field of the coil .
It is worth noting that both capacitors and inductors store energy , in their electric and magnetic fields , respectively .
A circuit containing both an inductor ( L ) and a capacitor ( C ) can oscillate without a source of emf by shifting the energy stored in the circuit between the electric and magnetic fields .
Thus , the concepts we develop in this section are directly applicable to the exchange of energy between the electric and magnetic fields in electromagnetic waves , or light .
We start with an idealized circuit of zero resistance that contains an inductor and a capacitor , an LC circuit .
An LC circuit is shown in .
If the capacitor contains a charge before the switch is closed , then all the energy of the circuit is initially stored in the electric field of the capacitor ( ( a ) ) .
This energy is When the switch is closed , the capacitor begins to discharge , producing a current in the circuit .
The current , in turn , creates a magnetic field in the inductor .
The net effect of this process is a transfer of energy from the capacitor , with its diminishing electric field , to the inductor , with its increasing magnetic field .
In ( b ) , the capacitor is completely discharged and all the energy is stored in the magnetic field of the inductor .
Since the inductor resists a change in current , current continues to flow , even though the capacitor is discharged .
This continued current causes the capacitor to charge with opposite polarity .
The electric field of the capacitor increases while the magnetic field of the inductor diminishes , and the overall effect is a transfer of energy from the inductor back to the capacitor .
From the law of energy conservation , the maximum charge that the capacitor re-acquires is However , as ( c ) shows , the capacitor plates are charged opposite to what they were initially .
When fully charged , the capacitor once again transfers its energy to the inductor until it is again completely discharged , as shown in ( d ) .
Then , in the last part of this cyclic process , energy flows back to the capacitor , and the initial state of the circuit is restored .
We have followed the circuit through one complete cycle .
Its electromagnetic oscillations are analogous to the mechanical oscillations of a mass at the end of a spring .
In this latter case , energy is transferred back and forth between the mass , which has kinetic energy , and the spring , which has potential energy .
With the absence of friction in the massspring system , the oscillations would continue indefinitely .
Similarly , the oscillations of an LC circuit with no resistance would continue forever if undisturbed ; however , this ideal zero-resistance LC circuit is not practical , and any LC circuit will have at least a small resistance , which will radiate and lose energy over time .
The frequency of the oscillations in a resistance-free LC circuit may be found by analogy with the mass-spring system .
For the circuit , , the total electromagnetic energy U is For the mass-spring system , , the total mechanical energy E is The equivalence of the two systems is clear .
To go from the mechanical to the electromagnetic system , we simply replace m by L , v by i , k by 1/ C , and x by q .
In an LC circuit , the self-inductance is H and the capacitance is F. At all of the energy is stored in the capacitor , which has charge C. ( a ) What is the angular frequency of the oscillations in the circuit ?
( b ) What is the maximum current flowing through circuit ?
( c ) How long does it take the capacitor to become completely discharged ?
( d ) Find an equation that represents q ( t ) .
The angular frequency of the LC circuit is given by .
To find the maximum current , the maximum energy in the capacitor is set equal to the maximum energy in the inductor .
The time for the capacitor to become discharged if it is initially charged is a quarter of the period of the cycle , so if we calculate the period of the oscillation , we can find out what a quarter of that is to find this time .
Lastly , knowing the initial charge and angular frequency , we can set up a cosine equation to find q ( t ) .
From , the angular frequency of the oscillations is The current is at its maximum when all the energy is stored in the inductor .
From the law of energy conservation , so This result can also be found by an analogy to simple harmonic motion , where current and charge are the velocity and position of an oscillator .
The capacitor becomes completely discharged in one-fourth of a cycle , or during a time T /4 , where T is the period of the oscillations .
Since the time taken for the capacitor to become fully discharged is so Using , we obtain The capacitor is completely charged at Thus , and The energy relationship set up in part ( b ) is not the only way we can equate energies .
At most times , some energy is stored in the capacitor and some energy is stored in the inductor .
We can put both terms on each side of the equation .
By examining the circuit only when there is no charge on the capacitor or no current in the inductor , we simplify the energy equation .
Check Your Understanding The angular frequency of the oscillations in an LC circuit is rad/s .
( a ) If , what is C ?
( b ) Suppose that at all the energy is stored in the inductor .
What is the value of ( c ) A second identical capacitor is connected in parallel with the original capacitor .
What is the angular frequency of this circuit ?
When the switch is closed in the RLC circuit of ( a ) , the capacitor begins to discharge and electromagnetic energy is dissipated by the resistor at a rate .
With U given by , we have where i and q are time-dependent functions .
This reduces to This equation is analogous to which is the equation of motion for a damped mass-spring system ( you first encountered this equation in ) .
As we saw in that chapter , it can be shown that the solution to this differential equation takes three forms , depending on whether the angular frequency of the undamped spring is greater than , equal to , or less than b /2 m .
Therefore , the result can be underdamped , critically damped , or overdamped .
By analogy , the solution q ( t ) to the RLC differential equation has the same feature .
Here we look only at the case of under-damping .
By replacing m by L , b by R , k by 1/ C , and x by q in , and assuming , we obtain where the angular frequency of the oscillations is given by This underdamped solution is shown in ( b ) .
Notice that the amplitude of the oscillations decreases as energy is dissipated in the resistor .
can be confirmed experimentally by measuring the voltage across the capacitor as a function of time .
This voltage , multiplied by the capacitance of the capacitor , then gives q ( t ) .
Try an that allows you to graph current and voltage as a function of time .
You can add inductors and capacitors to work with any combination of R , L , and C circuits with both dc and ac sources .
Try out a that has many problems with both dc and ac sources that will help you practice circuit problems .
Check Your Understanding In an RLC circuit , ( a ) Is the circuit underdamped , critically damped , or overdamped ?
( b ) If the circuit starts oscillating with a charge of on the capacitor , how much energy has been dissipated in the resistor by the time the oscillations cease ?
Electric power is delivered to our homes by alternating current ( ac ) through high-voltage transmission lines .
As explained in , transformers can then change the amplitude of the alternating potential difference to a more useful form .
This lets us transmit power at very high voltages , minimizing resistive heating losses in the lines , and then furnish that power to homes at lower , safer voltages .
Because constant potential differences are unaffected by transformers , this capability is more difficult to achieve with direct-current transmission .
In this chapter , we use Kirchhoff ’ s laws to analyze four simple circuits in which ac flows .
We have discussed the use of the resistor , capacitor , and inductor in circuits with batteries .
These components are also part of ac circuits .
However , because ac is required , the constant source of emf supplied by a battery is replaced by an ac voltage source , which produces an oscillating emf .
Most examples dealt with so far in this book , particularly those using batteries , have constant-voltage sources .
Thus , once the current is established , it is constant .
Direct current ( dc ) is the flow of electric charge in only one direction .
It is the steady state of a constant-voltage circuit .
Most well-known applications , however , use a time-varying voltage source .
Alternating current ( ac ) is the flow of electric charge that periodically reverses direction .
An ac is produced by an alternating emf , which is generated in a power plant , as described in .
If the ac source varies periodically , particularly sinusoidally , the circuit is known as an ac circuit .
Examples include the commercial and residential power that serves so many of our needs .
The ac voltages and frequencies commonly used in businesses and homes vary around the world .
In a typical house , the potential difference between the two sides of an electrical outlet alternates sinusoidally with a frequency of 60 or 50 Hz and an amplitude of 156 or 311 V , depending on whether you live in the United States or Europe , respectively .
shows graphs of voltage and current versus time for typical dc and ac power in the United States .
Suppose we hook up a resistor to an ac voltage source and determine how the voltage and current vary in time across the resistor .
shows a schematic of a simple circuit with an ac voltage source .
The voltage fluctuates sinusoidally with time at a fixed frequency , as shown , on either the battery terminals or the resistor .
Therefore , the ac voltage , or the “ voltage at a plug , ” can be given by where v is the voltage at time t , is the peak voltage , and is the angular frequency in radians per second .
For this example , the voltage and current are said to be in phase , meaning that their sinusoidal functional forms have peaks , troughs , and nodes in the same place .
They oscillate in sync with each other , as shown in ( b ) .
In these equations , and throughout this chapter , we use lowercase letters ( such as i ) to indicate instantaneous values and capital letters ( such as I ) to indicate maximum , or peak , values .
Current in the resistor alternates back and forth just like the driving voltage , since .
If the resistor is a fluorescent light bulb , for example , it brightens and dims 120 times per second as the current repeatedly goes through zero .
A 120-Hz flicker is too rapid for your eyes to detect , but if you wave your hand back and forth between your face and a fluorescent light , you will see the stroboscopic effect of ac .
Check Your Understanding If a European ac voltage source is considered , what is the time difference between the zero crossings on an ac voltage-versus-time graph ?
In this section , we study simple models of ac voltage sources connected to three circuit components : ( 1 ) a resistor , ( 2 ) a capacitor , and ( 3 ) an inductor .
The power furnished by an ac voltage source has an emf given by as shown in .
This sine function assumes we start recording the voltage when it is at a time of A phase constant may be involved that shifts the function when we start measuring voltages , similar to the phase constant in the waves we studied in .
However , because we are free to choose when we start examining the voltage , we can ignore this phase constant for now .
We can measure this voltage across the circuit components using one of two methods : ( 1 ) a quantitative approach based on our knowledge of circuits , or ( 2 ) a graphical approach that is explained in the coming sections .
First , consider a resistor connected across an ac voltage source .
From Kirchhoff ’ s loop rule , the instantaneous voltage across the resistor of ( a ) is and the instantaneous current through the resistor is Here , is the amplitude of the time-varying current .
Plots of and are shown in ( b ) .
Both curves reach their maxima and minima at the same times , that is , the current through and the voltage across the resistor are in phase .
Graphical representations of the phase relationships between current and voltage are often useful in the analysis of ac circuits .
Such representations are called phasor diagrams .
The phasor diagram for is shown in ( a ) , with the current on the vertical axis .
The arrow ( or phasor ) is rotating counterclockwise at a constant angular frequency so we are viewing it at one instant in time .
If the length of the arrow corresponds to the current amplitude the projection of the rotating arrow onto the vertical axis is which is the instantaneous current .
The vertical axis on a phasor diagram could be either the voltage or the current , depending on the phasor that is being examined .
In addition , several quantities can be depicted on the same phasor diagram .
For example , both the current and the voltage are shown in the diagram of ( b ) .
Since they have the same frequency and are in phase , their phasors point in the same direction and rotate together .
The relative lengths of the two phasors are arbitrary because they represent different quantities ; however , the ratio of the lengths of the two phasors can be represented by the resistance , since one is a voltage phasor and the other is a current phasor .
Now let ’ s consider a capacitor connected across an ac voltage source .
From Kirchhoff ’ s loop rule , the instantaneous voltage across the capacitor of ( a ) is Recall that the charge in a capacitor is given by This is true at any time measured in the ac cycle of voltage .
Consequently , the instantaneous charge on the capacitor is Since the current in the circuit is the rate at which charge enters ( or leaves ) the capacitor , where is the current amplitude .
As a result , they have the same unit , the ohm .
Keep in mind , however , that a capacitor stores and discharges electric energy , whereas a resistor dissipates it .
The quantity is known as the capacitive reactance of the capacitor , or the opposition of a capacitor to a change in current .
It depends inversely on the frequency of the ac source—high frequency leads to low capacitive reactance .
A comparison of the expressions for and shows that there is a phase difference of between them .
When these two quantities are plotted together , the current peaks a quarter cycle ( or ) ahead of the voltage , as illustrated in ( b ) .
The current through a capacitor leads the voltage across a capacitor by or a quarter of a cycle .
The corresponding phasor diagram is shown in .
Therefore , we often use a second convention called the root mean square value , or rms value , in discussions of current and voltage .
The rms operates in reverse of the terminology .
First , you square the function , next , you take the mean , and then , you find the square root .
As a result , the rms values of current and voltage are not zero .
Appliances and devices are commonly quoted with rms values for their operations , rather than peak values .
We indicate rms values with a subscript attached to a capital letter ( such as ) .
Although a capacitor is basically an open circuit , an rms current , or the root mean square of the current , appears in a circuit with an ac voltage applied to a capacitor .
Consider that where is the peak current in an ac system .
The rms voltage , or the root mean square of the voltage , is where is the peak voltage in an ac system .
The rms current appears because the voltage is continually reversing , charging , and discharging the capacitor .
If the frequency goes to zero , which would be a dc voltage , tends to infinity , and the current is zero once the capacitor is charged .
At very high frequencies , the capacitor ’ s reactance tends to zero—it has a negligible reactance and does not impede the current ( it acts like a simple wire ) .
Lastly , let ’ s consider an inductor connected to an ac voltage source .
Therefore , connecting this with the ac voltage source , we have to The current is found by integrating this equation .
Since the circuit does not contain a source of constant emf , there is no steady current in the circuit .
Note that varies directly as the frequency of the ac source—high frequency causes high inductive reactance .
A phase difference of rad occurs between the current through and the voltage across the inductor .
From and , the current through an inductor lags the potential difference across an inductor by , or a quarter of a cycle .
The phasor diagram for this case is shown in .
An animation from the University of New South Wales illustrates some of the concepts we discuss in this chapter .
They also include wave and phasor diagrams that evolve over time so that you can get a better picture of how each changes over time .
The entire AC voltage across each device is the same as the source voltage .
We can find the currents by finding the reactance X of each device and solving for the peak current using The voltage across the terminals of the source is where is the angular frequency .
Since v ( t ) is also the voltage across each of the elements , we have a .
When the amplitude of the current through the resistor is so b .
The reactance for each device depends on the values of resistance , capacitance , or inductance .
Check Your Understanding Repeat for an ac source of amplitude 20 V and frequency 100 Hz .
The ac circuit shown in , called an RLC series circuit , is a series combination of a resistor , capacitor , and inductor connected across an ac source .
It produces an emf of Since the elements are in series , the same current flows through each element at all points in time .
The relative phase between the current and the emf is not obvious when all three elements are present .
Consequently , we represent the current by the general expression where is the current amplitude and is the phase angle between the current and the applied voltage .
The phase angle is thus the amount by which the voltage and current are out of phase with each other in a circuit .
Our task is to find A phasor diagram involving is helpful for analyzing the circuit .
Since a component of a sum of vectors is the sum of the components of the individual vectors—for example , —the projection of the vector sum of phasors onto the vertical axis is the sum of the vertical projections of the individual phasors .
Hence , if we add vectorially the phasors representing and then find the projection of the resultant onto the vertical axis , we obtain The vector sum of the phasors is shown in .
The resultant phasor has an amplitude and is directed at an angle with respect to the or i ( t ) , phasor .
The projection of this resultant phasor onto the vertical axis is We can easily determine the unknown quantities and from the geometry of the phasor diagram .
For the phase angle , and after cancellation of this becomes Furthermore , from the Pythagorean theorem , The current amplitude is therefore the ac version of Ohm ’ s law : where is known as the impedance of the circuit .
Its unit is the ohm , and it is the ac analog to resistance in a dc circuit , which measures the combined effect of resistance , capacitive reactance , and inductive reactance .
The RLC circuit is analogous to the wheel of a car driven over a corrugated road .
The regularly spaced bumps in the road drive the wheel up and down ; in the same way , a voltage source increases and decreases .
The shock absorber acts like the resistance of the RLC circuit , damping and limiting the amplitude of the oscillation .
The amplitude of the wheel ’ s motion is at a maximum if the bumps in the road are hit at the resonant frequency , which we describe in more detail in .
To analyze an ac circuit containing resistors , capacitors , and inductors , it is helpful to think of each device ’ s reactance and find the equivalent reactance using the rules we used for equivalent resistance in the past .
Phasors are a great method to determine whether the emf of the circuit has positive or negative phase ( namely , leads or lags other values ) .
Use the following steps to determine the emf of the circuit by phasors : Draw the phasors for voltage across each device : resistor , capacitor , and inductor , including the phase angle in the circuit .
If there is both a capacitor and an inductor , find the net voltage from these two phasors , since they are antiparallel .
Find the equivalent phasor from the phasor in step 2 and the resistor ’ s phasor using trigonometry or components of the phasors .
The equivalent phasor found is the emf of the circuit .
The reactances and impedance in ( a ) – ( c ) are found by substitutions into , , and , respectively .
The current amplitude is calculated from the peak voltage and the impedance .
The phase difference between the current and the emf is calculated by the inverse tangent of the difference between the reactances divided by the resistance .
Check Your Understanding Find the voltages across the resistor , the capacitor , and the inductor in the circuit of using as the output of the ac generator .
A circuit element dissipates or produces power according to where I is the current through the element and V is the voltage across it .
Since the current and the voltage both depend on time in an ac circuit , the instantaneous power is also time dependent .
A plot of p ( t ) for various circuit elements is shown in .
For a resistor , i ( t ) and v ( t ) are in phase and therefore always have the same sign ( see ) .
For a capacitor or inductor , the relative signs of i ( t ) and v ( t ) vary over a cycle due to their phase differences ( see and ) .
Consequently , p ( t ) is positive at some times and negative at others , indicating that capacitive and inductive elements produce power at some instants and absorb it at others .
Because instantaneous power varies in both magnitude and sign over a cycle , it seldom has any practical importance .
What we ’ re almost always concerned with is the power averaged over time , which we refer to as the average power .
It is defined by the time average of the instantaneous power over one cycle : where is the period of the oscillations .
For a resistor , so the average power dissipated is A comparison of p ( t ) and is shown in ( d ) .
To make look like its dc counterpart , we use the rms values of the current and the voltage .
By definition , these are where With we obtain We may then write for the average power dissipated by a resistor , This equation further emphasizes why the rms value is chosen in discussion rather than peak values .
Both equations for average power are correct for , but the rms values in the formula give a cleaner representation , so the extra factor of 1/2 is not necessary .
Alternating voltages and currents are usually described in terms of their rms values .
For example , the 110 V from a household outlet is an rms value .
The amplitude of this source is Because most ac meters are calibrated in terms of rms values , a typical ac voltmeter placed across a household outlet will read 110 V. For a capacitor and an inductor , respectively .
Since we find from that the average power dissipated by either of these elements is Capacitors and inductors absorb energy from the circuit during one half-cycle and then discharge it back to the circuit during the other half-cycle .
This behavior is illustrated in the plots of , ( b ) and ( c ) , which show p ( t ) oscillating sinusoidally about zero .
The phase angle for an ac generator may have any value .
If the generator produces power ; if absorbs power .
As we can see , Ohm ’ s law for the rms ac is found by dividing the rms voltage by the impedance .
An ac generator whose emf is given by is connected to an RLC circuit for which , , and .
( a ) What is the rms voltage across the generator ?
( b ) What is the impedance of the circuit ?
( c ) What is the average power output of the generator ?
The rms voltage is the amplitude of the voltage times .
The impedance of the circuit involves the resistance and the reactances of the capacitor and the inductor .
The average power is calculated by , or more specifically , the last part of the equation , because we have the impedance of the circuit Z , the rms voltage , and the resistance R .
Check Your Understanding An ac voltmeter attached across the terminals of a 45-Hz ac generator reads 7.07 V. Write an expression for the emf of the generator .
Check Your Understanding Show that the rms voltages across a resistor , a capacitor , and an inductor respectively .
in an ac circuit where the rms current is are given by Determine these values for the components of the RLC circuit of .
In the RLC series circuit of , the current amplitude is , from , If we can vary the frequency of the ac generator while keeping the amplitude of its output voltage constant , then the current changes accordingly .
A plot of versus is shown in .
In , we encountered a similar graph where the amplitude of a damped harmonic oscillator was plotted against the angular frequency of a sinusoidal driving force ( see ) .
This similarity is more than just a coincidence , as shown earlier by the application of Kirchhoff ’ s loop rule to the circuit of .
This yields or , where we substituted dq ( t ) / dt for i ( t ) .
A comparison of and , from for damped harmonic motion clearly demonstrates that the driven RLC series circuit is the electrical analog of the driven damped harmonic oscillator .
The resonant frequency of the RLC circuit is the frequency at which the amplitude of the current is a maximum and the circuit would oscillate if not driven by a voltage source .
By inspection , this corresponds to the angular frequency at which the impedance Z in is a minimum , or when and This is the resonant angular frequency of the circuit .
Substituting into , , and , we find that at resonance , Therefore , at resonance , an RLC circuit is purely resistive , with the applied emf and current in phase .
What happens to the power at resonance ?
tells us how the average power transferred from an ac generator to the RLC combination varies with frequency .
In addition , reaches a maximum when Z , which depends on the frequency , is a minimum , that is , when Thus , at resonance , the average power output of the source in an RLC series circuit is a maximum .
From , this maximum is is a typical plot of versus in the region of maximum power output .
The bandwidth of the resonance peak is defined as the range of angular frequencies over which the average power is greater than onehalf the maximum value of The sharpness of the peak is described by a dimensionless quantity known as the quality factor Q of the circuit .
By definition , where is the resonant angular frequency .
A high Q indicates a sharp resonance peak .
We can give Q in terms of the circuit parameters as Resonant circuits are commonly used to pass or reject selected frequency ranges .
This is done by adjusting the value of one of the elements and hence “ tuning ” the circuit to a particular resonant frequency .
For example , in radios , the receiver is tuned to the desired station by adjusting the resonant frequency of its circuitry to match the frequency of the station .
If the tuning circuit has a high Q , it will have a small bandwidth , so signals from other stations at frequencies even slightly different from the resonant frequency encounter a high impedance and are not passed by the circuit .
Cell phones work in a similar fashion , communicating with signals of around 1 GHz that are tuned by an inductor-capacitor circuit .
One of the most common applications of capacitors is their use in ac-timing circuits , based on attaining a resonant frequency .
A metal detector also uses a shift in resonance frequency in detecting metals .
( a ) What is the resonant frequency of the circuit of ?
( b ) If the ac generator is set to this frequency without changing the amplitude of the output voltage , what is the amplitude of the current ?
The resonant frequency for a RLC circuit is calculated from , which comes from a balance between the reactances of the capacitor and the inductor .
Since the circuit is at resonance , the impedance is equal to the resistor .
Then , the peak current is calculated by the voltage divided by the resistance .
The resonant frequency is found from : At resonance , the impedance of the circuit is purely resistive , and the current amplitude is If the circuit were not set to the resonant frequency , we would need the impedance of the entire circuit to calculate the current .
( a ) What is the resonant angular frequency of an RLC circuit with and ( b ) If an ac source of constant amplitude 4.00 V is set to this frequency , what is the average power transferred to the circuit ?
( c ) Determine Q and the bandwidth of this circuit .
The resonant angular frequency is calculated from .
The average power is calculated from the rms voltage and the resistance in the circuit .
The quality factor is calculated from and by knowing the resonant frequency .
The bandwidth is calculated from and by knowing the quality factor .
The resonant angular frequency is At this frequency , the average power transferred to the circuit is a maximum .
It is The quality factor of the circuit is We then find for the bandwidth If a narrower bandwidth is desired , a lower resistance or higher inductance would help .
However , a lower resistance increases the power transferred to the circuit , which may not be desirable , depending on the maximum power that could possibly be transferred .
Check Your Understanding In the circuit of , and ( a ) What is the resonant frequency ?
( b ) What is the impedance of the circuit at resonance ?
( c ) If the voltage amplitude is 10 V , what is i ( t ) at resonance ?
( d ) The frequency of the AC generator is now changed to 200 Hz .
Calculate the phase difference between the current and the emf of the generator .
Check Your Understanding What happens to the resonant frequency of an RLC series circuit when the following quantities are increased by a factor of 4 : ( a ) the capacitance , ( b ) the self-inductance , and ( c ) the resistance ?
Check Your Understanding The resonant angular is An ac source operating at this frequency transfers an average power of to the circuit .
The resistance of the circuit is Write an expression for the emf of the source .
frequency of an RLC series circuit Although ac electric power is produced at relatively low voltages , it is sent through transmission lines at very high voltages ( as high as 500 kV ) .
The same power can be transmitted at different voltages because power is the product ( For simplicity , we ignore the phase factor A particular power requirement can therefore be met with a low voltage and a high current or with a high voltage and a low current .
The advantage of the high-voltage/low-current choice is that it ohmic losses in the transmission lines , which can be significant in lines that are many kilometers results in lower long .
The device that transforms voltages from one value to another using induction is the transformer .
As illustrates , a transformer basically consists of two separated coils , or windings , wrapped around a soft iron core .
We also neglect energy losses to magnetic hysteresis , to ohmic heating in the windings , and to ohmic heating of the induced eddy currents in the core .
A good transformer can have losses as low as 1 % of the transmitted power , so this is not a bad assumption .
To analyze the transformer circuit , we first consider the primary winding .
The input voltage is equal to the potential difference induced across the primary winding .
From Faraday ’ s law , the induced potential difference is where is the flux through one turn of the primary winding .
Thus , Similarly , the output voltage delivered to the load resistor must equal the potential difference induced across the secondary winding .
Since the transformer is ideal , the flux through every turn of the secondary winding is also and Combining the last two equations , we have Hence , with appropriate values for down ” to the output voltage .
This is often abbreviated as the transformer equation , the input voltage may be “ stepped up ” or “ stepped which shows that the ratio of the secondary to primary voltages in a transformer equals the ratio of the number of turns in their windings .
For a step-up transformer , which increases voltage and decreases current , this ratio is greater than one ; for a step-down transformer , which decreases voltage and increases current , this ratio is less than one .
Finally , we can use , along with and , to obtain which tells us that the input voltage “ sees ” not a resistance but rather a resistance Our analysis has been based on instantaneous values of voltage and current .
However , the resulting equations are not limited to instantaneous values ; they hold also for maximum and rms values .
A transformer on a utility pole steps the rms voltage down from 12 kV to 240 V. ( a ) What is the ratio of the number of secondary turns to the number of primary turns ?
( b ) If the input current to the transformer is 2.0 A , what is the output current ?
( c ) Determine the power loss in the transmission line if the total resistance of the transmission line is .
( d ) What would the power loss have been if the transmission line was at 240 V the entire length of the line , rather than providing voltage at 12 kV ?
What does this say about transmission lines ?
The number of turns related to the voltages is found from .
The output current is calculated using .
Using with rms values and we have so the primary winding has 50 times the number of turns in the secondary winding .
Thus , lines are sent with high voltages and low currents and adjusted with a transformer before power is sent into homes .
This application of a step-down transformer allows a home that uses 240-V outlets to have 100 A available to draw upon .
This can power many devices in the home .
Check Your Understanding A transformer steps the line voltage down from 110 to 9.0 V so that a current of 0.50 A can be delivered to a doorbell .
( a ) What is the ratio of the number of turns in the primary and secondary windings ?
( b ) What is the current in the primary winding ?
( c ) What is the resistance seen by the 110-V source ?
Our view of objects in the sky at night , the warm radiance of sunshine , the sting of sunburn , our cell phone conversations , and the X-rays revealing a broken bone—all are brought to us by electromagnetic waves .
It would be hard to overstate the practical importance of electromagnetic waves , through their role in vision , through countless technological applications , and through their ability to transport the energy from the Sun through space to sustain life and almost all of its activities on Earth .
Theory predicted the general phenomenon of electromagnetic waves before anyone realized that light is a form of an electromagnetic wave .
In the mid-nineteenth century , James Clerk Maxwell formulated a single theory combining all the electric and magnetic effects known at that time .
Maxwell ’ s equations , summarizing this theory , predicted the existence of electromagnetic waves that travel at the speed of light .
His theory also predicted how these waves behave , and how they carry both energy and momentum .
The tails of comets , such as Comet McNaught in , provide a spectacular example .
Energy carried by light from the Sun warms the comet to release dust and gas .
The momentum carried by the light exerts a weak force that shapes the dust into a tail of the kind seen here .
The flux of particles emitted by the Sun , called the solar wind , typically produces an additional , second tail , as described in detail in this chapter .
In this chapter , we explain Maxwell ’ s theory and show how it leads to his prediction of electromagnetic waves .
We use his theory to examine what electromagnetic waves are , how they are produced , and how they transport energy and momentum .
We conclude by summarizing some of the many practical applications of electromagnetic waves .
James Clerk Maxwell ( 1831–1879 ) was one of the major contributors to physics in the nineteenth century .
Although he died young , he made major contributions to the development of the kinetic theory of gases , to the understanding of color vision , and to the nature of Saturn ’ s rings .
He is probably best known for having combined existing knowledge of the laws of electricity and of magnetism with insights of his own into a complete overarching electromagnetic theory , represented by Maxwell ’ s equations .
The four basic laws of electricity and magnetism had been discovered experimentally through the work of physicists such as Oersted , Coulomb , Gauss , and Faraday .
Maxwell discovered logical inconsistencies in these earlier results and identified the incompleteness of Ampère ’ s law as their cause .
Consider the set-up in .
A source of emf is abruptly connected across a parallel-plate capacitor so that a timedependent current I develops in the wire .
Suppose we apply Ampère ’ s law to loop C shown at a time before the capacitor is fully charged , so that .
Surface gives a nonzero value for the enclosed current I , whereas surface gives zero for the enclosed current because no current passes through it : Clearly , Ampère ’ s law in its usual form does not work here .
This may not be surprising , because Ampère ’ s law as applied in earlier chapters required a steady current , whereas the current in this experiment is changing with time and is not steady at all .
How can Ampère ’ s law be modified so that it works in all situations ?
It is produced , however , by a changing electric field .
It accounts for a changing electric field producing a magnetic field , just as a real current does , but the displacement current can produce a magnetic field even where no real current is present .
When this extra term is included , the modified Ampère ’ s law equation becomes and is independent of the surface S through which the current I is measured .
We can now examine this modified version of Ampère ’ s law to confirm that it holds independent of whether the surface or the surface in is chosen .
The electric field corresponding to the flux in is between the capacitor plates .
Therefore , the field and the displacement current through the surface are both zero , and takes the form We must now show that for surface value for the right side of the Ampère ’ s law equation .
For surface the equation becomes through which no actual current flows , the displacement current leads to the same Gauss ’ s law for electric charge requires a closed surface and can not ordinarily be applied to a surface like alone or alone .
But the two surfaces and form a closed surface in and can be used in Gauss ’ s law .
Because the electric field is zero on , the flux contribution through is zero .
A parallel-plate capacitor with capacitance C whose plates have area A and separation distance d is connected to a resistor R and a battery of voltage V .
The current starts to flow at .
( a ) Find the displacement current between the capacitor plates at time t .
( b ) From the properties of the capacitor , find the corresponding real current We can use the equations from the analysis of an RC circuit plus Maxwell ’ s version of Ampère ’ s law .
, and compare the answer to the expected current in the wires of the corresponding RC circuit .
The voltage between the plates at time t is given by Let the z -axis point from the positive plate to the negative plate .
Then the z -component of the electric field between the plates as a function of time t is Therefore , the z-component of the displacement current between the plates is where we have used From the expression for for the capacitance .
the charge on the capacitor is The current into the capacitor after the circuit is closed , is therefore This current is the same as found in ( a ) .
With the correction for the displacement current , Maxwell ’ s equations take the form Once the fields have been calculated using these four equations , the Lorentz force equation .
The Lorentz force equation gives the force that the fields exert on a particle with charge q moving with velocity combines the force of the electric field and of the magnetic field on the moving charge .
The magnetic and electric forces have been examined in earlier modules .
These four Maxwell ’ s equations are , respectively , 1 .
Gauss ’ s law The electric flux through any closed surface is equal to the electric charge enclosed by the surface .
Gauss ’ s law [ ] describes the relation between an electric charge and the electric field it produces .
This is often pictured in terms of electric field lines originating from positive charges and terminating on negative charges , and indicating the direction of the electric field at each point in space .
Gauss ’ s law for magnetism The magnetic field flux through any closed surface is zero [ ] .
This is equivalent to the statement that magnetic field lines are continuous , having no beginning or end .
Any magnetic field line entering the region enclosed by the surface must also leave it .
No magnetic monopoles , where magnetic field lines would terminate , are known to exist ( see ) .
Faraday ’ s law A changing magnetic field induces an electromotive force ( emf ) and , hence , an electric field .
The direction of the emf opposes the change .
This third of Maxwell ’ s equations , , is Faraday ’ s law of induction and includes Lenz ’ s law .
The electric field from a changing magnetic field has field lines that form closed loops , without any beginning or end .
Ampère-Maxwell law Magnetic fields are generated by moving charges or by changing electric fields .
This fourth of Maxwell ’ s equations , , encompasses Ampère ’ s law and adds another source of magnetic fields , namely changing electric fields .
Maxwell ’ s equations and the Lorentz force law together encompass all the laws of electricity and magnetism .
The symmetry that Maxwell introduced into his mathematical framework may not be immediately apparent .
Faraday ’ s law describes how changing magnetic fields produce electric fields .
The displacement current introduced by Maxwell results instead from a changing electric field and accounts for a changing electric field producing a magnetic field .
The equations for the effects of both changing electric fields and changing magnetic fields differ in form only where the absence of magnetic monopoles leads to missing terms .
This symmetry between the effects of changing magnetic and electric fields is essential in explaining the nature of electromagnetic waves .
Later application of Einstein ’ s theory of relativity to Maxwell ’ s complete and symmetric theory showed that electric and magnetic forces are not separate but are different manifestations of the same thing—the electromagnetic force .
The electromagnetic force and weak nuclear force are similarly unified as the electroweak force .
This unification of forces has been one motivation for attempts to unify all of the four basic forces in nature—the gravitational , electrical , strong , and weak nuclear forces ( see ) .
To see how the symmetry introduced by Maxwell accounts for the existence of combined electric and magnetic waves that propagate through space , imagine a time-varying magnetic field produced by the high-frequency alternating current seen in .
We represent in the diagram by one of its field lines .
From Faraday ’ s law , the changing magnetic field through a surface induces a time-varying electric field at the boundary of that surface .
The displacement current source for the electric field , like the Faraday ’ s law source for the magnetic field , produces only closed loops of field lines , because of the mathematical symmetry involved in the equations for the induced electric and induced magnetic fields .
A field line representation of creates a magnetic field which induces and so on .
We then have a self-continuing process that leads to the creation of time-varying electric and magnetic fields in regions farther and farther away from O .
This process may be visualized as the propagation of an electromagnetic wave through space .
according to the modified Ampère ’ s law .
This changing field induces is shown .
Prior to Maxwell ’ s work , experiments had already indicated that light was a wave phenomenon , although the nature of the waves was yet unknown .
In 1801 , Thomas Young ( 1773–1829 ) showed that when a light beam was separated by two narrow slits and then recombined , a pattern made up of bright and dark fringes was formed on a screen .
Young explained this behavior by assuming that light was composed of waves that added constructively at some points and destructively at others ( see ) .
Subsequently , Jean Foucault ( 1819–1868 ) , with measurements of the speed of light in various media , and Augustin Fresnel ( 1788–1827 ) , with detailed experiments involving interference and diffraction of light , provided further conclusive evidence that light was a wave .
So , light was known to be a wave , and Maxwell had predicted the existence of electromagnetic waves that traveled at the speed of light .
The conclusion seemed inescapable : Light must be a form of electromagnetic radiation .
But Maxwell ’ s theory showed that other wavelengths and frequencies than those of light were possible for electromagnetic waves .
He showed that electromagnetic radiation with the same fundamental properties as visible light should exist at any frequency .
It remained for others to test , and confirm , this prediction .
Check Your Understanding When the emf across a capacitor is turned on and the capacitor is allowed to charge , when does the magnetic field induced by the displacement current have the greatest magnitude ?
The German physicist Heinrich Hertz ( 1857–1894 ) was the first to generate and detect certain types of electromagnetic waves in the laboratory .
Starting in 1887 , he performed a series of experiments that not only confirmed the existence of electromagnetic waves but also verified that they travel at the speed of light .
Hertz used an alternating-current RLC ( resistor-inductor-capacitor ) circuit loop produced sparks that were visible evidence of the current in the circuit and helped generate electromagnetic waves .
Across the laboratory , Hertz placed another loop attached to another RLC circuit , which could be tuned ( as the dial on a radio ) to the same resonant frequency as the first and could thus be made to receive electromagnetic waves .
This loop also had a gap across which sparks were generated , giving solid evidence that electromagnetic waves had been received .
resonates at a known frequency and connected it to a loop of wire , as shown in .
High voltages induced across the gap in the that Hertz also studied the reflection , refraction , and interference patterns of the electromagnetic waves he generated , confirming their wave character .
He was able to determine the wavelengths from the interference patterns , and knowing their frequencies , he could calculate the propagation speed using the equation , where v is the speed of a wave , f is its frequency , and is its wavelength .
Hertz was thus able to prove that electromagnetic waves travel at the speed of light .
The SI unit for frequency , the hertz , is named in his honor .
Check Your Understanding Could a purely electric field propagate as a wave through a vacuum without a magnetic field ?
Justify your answer .
Mechanical waves travel through a medium such as a string , water , or air .
Perhaps the most significant prediction of Maxwell ’ s equations is the existence of combined electric and magnetic ( or electromagnetic ) fields that propagate through space as electromagnetic waves .
Because Maxwell ’ s equations hold in free space , the predicted electromagnetic waves , unlike mechanical waves , do not require a medium for their propagation .
A general treatment of the physics of electromagnetic waves is beyond the scope of this textbook .
We can , however , investigate the special case of an electromagnetic wave that propagates through free space along the x -axis of a given coordinate system .
An electromagnetic wave consists of an electric field , defined as usual in terms of the force per charge on a stationary charge , and a magnetic field , defined in terms of the force per charge on a moving charge .
The electromagnetic field is assumed to be a function of only the x -coordinate and time .
The y -component of the electric field is then written as the z -component of the magnetic field as , etc .
Because we are assuming free space , there are no free charges or currents , so we can set and in Maxwell ’ s equations .
We examine first what Gauss ’ s law for electric fields implies about the relative directions of the electric field and the propagation direction in an electromagnetic wave .
Assume the Gaussian surface to be the surface of a rectangular box whose cross-section is a square of side l and whose third side has length , as shown in .
The corresponding argument also holds for the net flux from the z -component of the electric field through Sides 3 and 4 .
Any net flux through the surface therefore comes entirely from the x -component of the electric field .
Because the electric field has no y or z -dependence , is constant over the face of the box with area A and has a possibly different value that is constant over the opposite face of the box .
Applying Gauss ’ s law gives where is the area of the front and back faces of the rectangular surface .
But the charge enclosed is , so this component ’ s net flux is also zero , and implies for any .
Therefore , if there is an x -component of the electric field , it can not vary with x .
A uniform field of that kind would merely be superposed artificially on the traveling wave , for example , by having a pair of parallel-charged plates .
Such a component would not be part of an electromagnetic wave propagating along the x -axis ; so for this wave .
Therefore , the only nonzero components of the electric field are and perpendicular to the direction of propagation of the wave .
A similar argument holds by substituting E for B and using Gauss ’ s law for magnetism instead of Gauss ’ s law for electric fields .
This shows that the B field is also perpendicular to the direction of propagation of the wave .
The electromagnetic wave is therefore a transverse wave , with its oscillating electric and magnetic fields perpendicular to its direction of propagation .
We can next apply Maxwell ’ s equations to the description given in connection with in the previous section to obtain an equation for the E field from the changing B field , and for the B field from a changing E field .
We then combine the two equations to show how the changing E and B fields propagate through space at a speed precisely equal to the speed of light .
First , we apply Faraday ’ s law over Side 3 of the Gaussian surface , using the path shown in .
Because we have Assuming is small and approximating by we obtain Because is small , the magnetic flux through the face can be approximated by its value in the center of the area traversed , namely .
Next we apply the Ampère-Maxwell law ( with ) over the same two faces ( Surface 3 and then Surface 2 ) of the rectangular box of .
Applying , to Surface 3 , and then to Surface 2 , yields the two equations These equations describe the spatially dependent B field produced by the time-dependent E field .
We next combine the equations showing the changing B field producing an E field with the equation showing the changing E field producing a B field .
Taking the derivative of with respect to x and using gives This is the form taken by the general wave equation for our plane wave .
The same type of analysis with and would also show that the speed of an electromagnetic wave is .
The physics of traveling electromagnetic fields was worked out by Maxwell in 1873 .
He showed in a more general way than our derivation that electromagnetic waves always travel in free space with a speed given by .
If we evaluate the speed we find that which is the speed of light .
Imagine the excitement that Maxwell must have felt when he discovered this equation !
He had found a fundamental connection between two seemingly unrelated phenomena : electromagnetic fields and light .
Check Your Understanding The wave equation was obtained by ( 1 ) finding the E field produced by the changing B field , ( 2 ) finding the B field produced by the changing E field , and combining the two results .
Which of Maxwell ’ s equations was the basis of step ( 1 ) and which of step ( 2 ) ?
So far , we have seen that the rates of change of different components of the E and B fields are related , that the electromagnetic wave is transverse , and that the wave propagates at speed c .
We next show what Maxwell ’ s equations imply about the ratio of the E and B field magnitudes and the relative directions of the E and B fields .
We now consider solutions to in the form of plane waves for the electric field : We have arbitrarily taken the wave to be traveling in the +x -direction and chosen its phase so that the maximum field strength occurs at the origin at time .
We are justified in considering only sines and cosines in this way , and generalizing the results , because Fourier ’ s theorem implies we can express any wave , including even square step functions , as a superposition of sines and cosines .
The frequency f is the number of complete oscillations per unit of time , and is related to the angular frequency by .
The wavelength is the distance covered by one complete cycle of the wave , and the wavenumber k is the number of wavelengths that fit into a distance of in the units being used .
These quantities are related in the same way as for a mechanical wave : Given that the solution of has the form shown in , we need to determine the B field that accompanies it .
From , the magnetic field component must obey Because the solution for the B -field pattern of the wave propagates in the + x -direction at the same speed c as the Efield pattern , it must be a function of .
The plane wave has the form shown in .
What is the maximum strength of the B field in an electromagnetic wave that has a maximum E -field strength of 1000 V/m ?
To find the B -field strength , we rearrange to solve for B , yielding We are given E , and c is the speed of light .
Entering these into the expression for B yields The B -field strength is less than a tenth of Earth ’ s admittedly weak magnetic field .
This means that a relatively strong electric field of 1000 V/m is accompanied by a relatively weak magnetic field .
Changing electric fields create relatively weak magnetic fields .
The combined electric and magnetic fields can be detected in electromagnetic waves , however , by taking advantage of the phenomenon of resonance , as Hertz did .
A system with the same natural frequency as the electromagnetic wave can be made to oscillate .
All radio and TV receivers use this principle to pick up and then amplify weak electromagnetic waves , while rejecting all others not at their resonant frequency .
A steady electric current produces a magnetic field that is constant in time and which does not propagate as a wave .
Accelerating charges , however , produce electromagnetic waves .
An electric charge oscillating up and down , or an alternating current or flow of charge in a conductor , emit radiation at the frequencies of their oscillations .
The electromagnetic field of a dipole antenna is shown in .
The positive and negative charges on the two conductors are made to reverse at the desired frequency by the output of a transmitter as the power source .
The continually changing current accelerates charge in the antenna , and this results in an oscillating electric field a distance away from the antenna .
The changing electric fields produce changing magnetic fields that in turn produce changing electric fields , which thereby propagate as electromagnetic waves .
The frequency of this radiation is the same as the frequency of the ac source that is accelerating the electrons in the antenna .
The two conducting elements of the dipole antenna are commonly straight wires .
The total length of the two wires is typically about one-half of the desired wavelength ( hence , the alternative name halfwave antenna ) , because this allows standing waves to be set up and enhances the effectiveness of the radiation .
The electric field lines in one plane are shown .
The magnetic field is perpendicular to this plane .
This radiation field has cylindrical symmetry around the axis of the dipole .
Field lines near the dipole are not shown .
The pattern is not at all uniform in all directions .
The strongest signal is in directions perpendicular to the axis of the antenna , which would be horizontal if the antenna is mounted vertically .
There is zero intensity along the axis of the antenna .
The fields detected far from the antenna are from the changing electric and magnetic fields inducing each other and traveling as electromagnetic waves .
Far from the antenna , the wave fronts , or surfaces of equal phase for the electromagnetic wave , are almost spherical .
Even farther from the antenna , the radiation propagates like electromagnetic plane waves .
The electromagnetic waves carry energy away from their source , similar to a sound wave carrying energy away from a standing wave on a guitar string .
An antenna for receiving electromagnetic signals works in reverse .
Incoming electromagnetic waves induce oscillating currents in the antenna , each at its own frequency .
The radio receiver includes a tuner circuit , whose resonant frequency can be adjusted .
The tuner responds strongly to the desired frequency but not others , allowing the user to tune to the desired broadcast .
Electrical components amplify the signal formed by the moving electrons .
The signal is then converted into an audio and/or video format .
Use this to broadcast radio waves .
Wiggle the transmitter electron manually or have it oscillate automatically .
Display the field as a curve or vectors .
The strip chart shows the electron positions at the transmitter and at the receiver .
Anyone who has used a microwave oven knows there is energy in electromagnetic waves .
Sometimes this energy is obvious , such as in the warmth of the summer Sun .
Other times , it is subtle , such as the unfelt energy of gamma rays , which can destroy living cells .
Electromagnetic waves bring energy into a system by virtue of their electric and magnetic fields .
These fields can exert forces and move charges in the system and , thus , do work on them .
However , there is energy in an electromagnetic wave itself , whether it is absorbed or not .
Once created , the fields carry energy away from a source .
If some energy is later absorbed , the field strengths are diminished and anything left travels on .
Clearly , the larger the strength of the electric and magnetic fields , the more work they can do and the greater the energy the electromagnetic wave carries .
In electromagnetic waves , the amplitude is the maximum field strength of the electric and magnetic fields .
The wave energy is determined by the wave amplitude .
This energy per unit volume , or energy density u , is the sum of the energy density from the electric field and the energy density from the magnetic field .
Expressions for both field energy densities were discussed earlier ( in and in ) .
Combining these the contributions , we obtain then shows that the magnetic energy density and electric energy density are The expression equal , despite the fact that changing electric fields generally produce only small magnetic fields .
The equality of the electric and magnetic energy densities leads to The energy density moves with the electric and magnetic fields in a similar manner to the waves themselves .
We can find the rate of transport of energy by considering a small time interval .
More generally , the flux of energy through any surface also depends on the orientation of the surface .
To take the direction into account , we introduce a vector , called the Poynting vector , with the following definition : The cross-product of and points in the direction perpendicular to both vectors .
To confirm that the direction of is that of wave propagation , and not its negative , return to .
Note that Lenz ’ s and Faraday ’ s laws imply that when the magnetic field shown is increasing in time , the electric field is greater at x than at .
The electric field is decreasing with increasing x at the given time and location .
The proportionality between electric and magnetic fields requires the electric field to increase in time along with the magnetic field .
This is possible only if the wave is propagating to the right in the diagram , in which case , the relative orientations show that is specifically in the direction of propagation of the electromagnetic wave .
The energy flux at any place also varies in time , as can be seen by substituting u from into .
Because the frequency of visible light is very high , of the order of the energy flux for visible light through any area is an extremely rapidly varying quantity .
Most measuring devices , including our eyes , detect only an average over many cycles .
The time average of the energy flux is the intensity I of the electromagnetic wave and is the power per unit area .
The intensity of light moving at speed c in vacuum is then found to be in terms of the maximum electric field strength which is also the electric field amplitude .
Algebraic manipulation produces the relationship is the magnetic field amplitude , which is the same as the maximum magnetic field strength .
One more expression the previous where for in terms of both electric and magnetic field strengths is useful .
Substituting the fact that expression becomes We can use whichever of the three preceding equations is most convenient , because the three equations are really just different versions of the same result : The energy in a wave is related to amplitude squared .
Furthermore , because these equations are based on the assumption that the electromagnetic waves are sinusoidal , the peak intensity is twice the average intensity ; that is , The beam from a small laboratory laser typically has an intensity of about .
Assuming that the beam is composed of plane waves , calculate the amplitudes of the electric and magnetic fields in the beam .
Use the equation expressing intensity in terms of electric field to calculate the electric field from the intensity .
From , the intensity of the laser beam is The amplitude of the electric field is therefore The amplitude of the magnetic field can be obtained from : A light bulb emits 5.00 W of power as visible light .
What are the average electric and magnetic fields from the light at a distance of 3.0 m ?
Assume the bulb ’ s power output P is distributed uniformly over a sphere of radius 3.0 m to calculate the intensity , and from it , the electric field .
The power radiated as visible light is then The intensity I falls off as the distance squared if the radiation is dispersed uniformly in all directions .
A 60-kW radio transmitter on Earth sends its signal to a satellite 100 km away .
At what distance in the same direction would the signal have the same maximum field strength if the transmitter ’ s output power were increased to 90 kW ?
The area over which the power in a particular direction is dispersed increases as distance squared , as illustrated in the figure .
Change the power output P by a factor of ( 90 kW/60 kW ) and change the area by the same factor to keep distance that produces the calculated change in area .
Using the proportionality of the areas to the squares of the distances , and solving , we obtain from the diagram the same .
Then use the proportion of area A in the diagram to distance squared to find the The range of a radio signal is the maximum distance between the transmitter and receiver that allows for normal operation .
In the absence of complications such as reflections from obstacles , the intensity follows an inverse square law , and doubling the range would require multiplying the power by four .
Material objects consist of charged particles .
An electromagnetic wave incident on the object exerts forces on the charged particles , in accordance with the Lorentz force , .
These forces do work on the particles of the object , increasing its energy , as discussed in the previous section .
The energy that sunlight carries is a familiar part of every warm sunny day .
A much less familiar feature of electromagnetic radiation is the extremely weak pressure that electromagnetic radiation produces by exerting a force in the direction of the wave .
This force occurs because electromagnetic waves contain and transport momentum .
This is comparable to an object moving against friction and stopping as soon as the force pushing it stops .
When the electric field is in the direction of the positive y -axis , electrons move in the negative y -direction , with the magnetic field in the direction of the positive z -axis .
By applying the right-hand rule , and accounting for the negative charge of the electron , we can see that the force on the electron from the magnetic field is in the direction of the positive x -axis , which is the direction of wave propagation .
When the E field reverses , the B field does too , and the force is again in the same direction .
Maxwell ’ s equations together with the Lorentz force equation imply the existence of radiation pressure much more generally than this specific example , however .
Maxwell predicted that an electromagnetic wave carries momentum .
An object absorbing an electromagnetic wave would experience a force in the direction of propagation of the wave .
The force corresponds to radiation pressure exerted on the object by the wave .
The force would be twice as great if the radiation were reflected rather than absorbed .
Maxwell ’ s prediction was confirmed in 1903 by Nichols and Hull by precisely measuring radiation pressures with a torsion balance .
The schematic arrangement is shown in .
The mirrors suspended from a fiber were housed inside a glass container .
Nichols and Hull were able to obtain a small measurable deflection of the mirrors from shining light on one of them .
From the measured deflection , they could calculate the unbalanced force on the mirror , and obtained agreement with the predicted value of the force .
Comets are basically chunks of icy material in which frozen gases and particles of rock and dust are embedded .
When a comet approaches the Sun , it warms up and its surface begins to evaporate .
The coma of the comet is the hazy area around it from the gases and dust .
Some of the gases and dust form tails when they leave the comet .
Notice in that a comet has two tails .
The ion tail ( or gas tail in ) is composed mainly of ionized gases .
These ions interact electromagnetically with the solar wind , which is a continuous stream of charged particles emitted by the Sun .
The force of the solar wind on the ionized gases is strong enough that the ion tail almost always points directly away from the Sun .
The second tail is composed of dust particles .
Because the dust tail is electrically neutral , it does not interact with the solar wind .
However , this tail is affected by the radiation pressure produced by the light from the Sun .
Although quite small , this pressure is strong enough to cause the dust tail to be displaced from the path of the comet .
On February 9 , 1986 , Comet Halley was at its closest point to the Sun , about from the center of the Sun .
The average power output of the Sun is ( a ) Calculate the radiation pressure on the comet at this point in its orbit .
Assume that the comet reflects all the incident light .
( b ) Suppose that a 10-kg chunk of material of cross-sectional area breaks loose from the comet .
Calculate the force on this chunk due to the solar radiation .
Compare this force with the gravitational force of the Sun .
Calculate the intensity of solar radiation at the given distance from the Sun and use that to calculate the radiation pressure .
From the pressure and area , calculate the force .
The intensity of the solar radiation is the average solar power per unit area .
After Maxwell showed that light carried momentum as well as energy , a novel idea eventually emerged , initially only as science fiction .
Perhaps a spacecraft with a large reflecting light sail could use radiation pressure for propulsion .
Such a vehicle would not have to carry fuel .
It would experience a constant but small force from solar radiation , instead of the short bursts from rocket propulsion .
It would accelerate slowly , but by being accelerated continuously , it would eventually reach great speeds .
A spacecraft with small total mass and a sail with a large area would be necessary to obtain a usable acceleration .
When the space program began in the 1960s , the idea started to receive serious attention from NASA .
The most recent development in light propelled spacecraft has come from a citizen-funded group , the Planetary Society .
It is currently testing the use of light sails to propel a small vehicle built from CubeSats , tiny satellites that NASA places in orbit for various research projects during space launches intended mainly for other purposes .
The LightSail spacecraft shown below consists of three CubeSats bundled together .
It has a total mass of only about 5 kg and is about the size as a loaf of bread .
Its sails are made of very thin Mylar and open after launch to have a surface area of The first LightSail spacecraft was launched in 2015 to test the sail deployment system .
It was placed in low-earth orbit in 2015 by hitching a ride on an Atlas 5 rocket launched for an unrelated mission .
The test was successful , but the low-earth orbit allowed too much drag on the spacecraft to accelerate it by sunlight .
Eventually , it burned in the atmosphere , as expected .
The next Planetary Society ’ s LightSail solar sailing spacecraft is scheduled for 2016 .
An of the spacecraft , as it is expected to appear in flight , can be seen on the Planetary Society ’ s website .
The intensity of energy from sunlight at a distance of 1 AU from the Sun is .
The LightSail spacecraft has sails with total area of and a total mass of 5.0 kg .
Calculate the maximum acceleration LightSail spacecraft could achieve from radiation pressure when it is about 1 AU from the Sun .
The maximum acceleration can be expected when the sail is opened directly facing the Sun .
Use the light intensity to calculate the radiation pressure and from it , the force on the sails .
Then use Newton ’ s second law to calculate the acceleration .
The radiation pressure is The resulting acceleration is If this small acceleration continued for a year , the craft would attain a speed of 1829 m/s , or 6600 km/h .
Check Your Understanding How would the speed and acceleration of a radiation-propelled spacecraft be affected as it moved farther from the Sun on an interplanetary space flight ?
Electromagnetic waves have a vast range of practical everyday applications that includes such diverse uses as communication by cell phone and radio broadcasting , WiFi , cooking , vision , medical imaging , and treating cancer .
In this module , we discuss how electromagnetic waves are classified into categories such as radio , infrared , ultraviolet , and so on .
We also summarize some of the main applications for each range .
The different categories of electromagnetic waves differ in their wavelength range , or equivalently , in their corresponding frequency ranges .
Their properties change smoothly from one frequency range to the next , with different applications in each range .
A brief overview of the production and utilization of electromagnetic waves is found in .
The relationship between frequency f and wavelength applies to all waves and ensures that greater frequency means smaller wavelength .
shows how the various types of electromagnetic waves are categorized according to their wavelengths and frequencies—that is , it shows the electromagnetic spectrum .
The term radio waves refers to electromagnetic radiation with wavelengths greater than about 0.1 m. Radio waves are commonly used for audio communications ( i.e. , for radios ) , but the term is used for electromagnetic waves in this range regardless of their application .
Radio waves typically result from an alternating current in the wires of a broadcast antenna .
They cover a very broad wavelength range and are divided into many subranges , including microwaves , electromagnetic waves used for AM and FM radio , cellular telephones , and TV signals .
There is no lowest frequency of radio waves , but ELF waves , or “ extremely low frequency ” are among the lowest frequencies commonly encountered , from 3 Hz to 3 kHz .
The accelerating charge in the ac currents of electrical power lines produce electromagnetic waves in this range .
ELF waves are able to penetrate sea water , which strongly absorbs electromagnetic waves of higher frequency , and therefore are useful for submarine communications .
In order to use an electromagnetic wave to transmit information , the amplitude , frequency , or phase of the wave is modulated , or varied in a controlled way that encodes the intended information into the wave .
In AM radio transmission , the amplitude of the wave is modulated to mimic the vibrations of the sound being conveyed .
Fourier ’ s theorem implies that the modulated AM wave amounts to a superposition of waves covering some narrow frequency range .
Each AM station is assigned a specific carrier frequency that , by international agreement , is allowed to vary by .
In FM radio transmission , the frequency of the wave is modulated to carry this information , as illustrated in , and the frequency of each station is allowed to use 100 kHz on each side of its carrier frequency .
The electromagnetic wave produces a current in a receiving antenna , and the radio or television processes the signal to produce the sound and any image .
The higher the frequency of the radio wave used to carry the data , the greater the detailed variation of the wave that can be carried by modulating it over each time unit , and the more data that can be transmitted per unit of time .
The assigned frequencies for AM broadcasting are 540 to 1600 kHz , and for FM are 88 MHz to108 MHz .
Cell phone conversations , and television voice and video images are commonly transmitted as digital data , by converting the signal into a sequence of binary ones and zeros .
This allows clearer data transmission when the signal is weak , and allows using computer algorithms to compress the digital data to transmit more data in each frequency range .
Computer data as well is transmitted as a sequence of binary ones and zeros , each one or zero constituting one bit of data .
Microwaves are the highest-frequency electromagnetic waves that can be produced by currents in macroscopic circuits and devices .
Microwave frequencies range from about to nearly .
Their high frequencies correspond to short wavelengths compared with other radio waves—hence the name “ microwave. ” Microwaves also occur naturally as the cosmic background radiation left over from the origin of the universe .
Along with other ranges of electromagnetic waves , they are part of the radiation that any object above absolute zero emits and absorbs because of thermal agitation , that is , from the thermal motion of its atoms and molecules .
Most satellite-transmitted information is carried on microwaves .
Radar is a common application of microwaves .
By detecting and timing microwave echoes , radar systems can determine the distance to objects as diverse as clouds , aircraft , or even the surface of Venus .
Microwaves of 2.45 GHz are commonly used in microwave ovens .
The electrons in a water molecule tend to remain closer to the oxygen nucleus than the hydrogen nuclei .
This creates two separated centers of equal and opposite charges , giving the molecule a dipole moment ( see ) .
The oscillating electric field of the microwaves inside the oven exerts a torque that tends to align each molecule first in one direction and then in the other , with the motion of each molecule coupled to others around it .
This pumps energy into the continual thermal motion of the water to heat the food .
The plate under the food contains no water , and remains relatively unheated .
The microwaves in a microwave oven reflect off the walls of the oven , so that the superposition of waves produces standing waves , similar to the standing waves of a vibrating guitar or violin string ( see ) .
A rotating fan acts as a stirrer by reflecting the microwaves in different directions , and food turntables , help spread out the hot spots .
How far apart are the hotspots in a 2.45-GHz microwave oven ?
Consider the waves along one direction in the oven , being reflected at the opposite wall from where they are generated .
The antinodes , where maximum intensity occurs , are half the wavelength apart , with separation The distance between the hot spots in a microwave oven are determined by the wavelength of the microwaves .
A cell phone has a radio receiver and a weak radio transmitter , both of which can quickly tune to hundreds of specifically assigned microwave frequencies .
The low intensity of the transmitted signal gives it an intentionally limited range .
A ground-based system links the phone to only to the broadcast tower assigned to the specific small area , or cell , and smoothly transitions its connection to the next cell when the signal reception there is the stronger one .
This enables a cell phone to be used while changing location .
Microwaves also provide the WiFi that enables owners of cell phones , laptop computers , and similar devices to connect wirelessly to the Internet at home and at coffee shops and airports .
A wireless WiFi router is a device that exchanges data over the Internet through the cable or another connection , and uses microwaves to exchange the data wirelessly with devices such as cell phones and computers .
The term WiFi itself refers to the standards followed in modulating and analyzing the microwaves so that wireless routers and devices from different manufacturers work compatibly with one another .
The computer data in each direction consist of sequences of binary zeros and ones , each corresponding to a binary bit .
The microwaves are in the range of 2.4 GHz to 5.0 GHz range .
Other wireless technologies also use microwaves to provide everyday communications between devices .
Microwaves find use also in radio tagging , using RFID ( radio frequency identification ) technology .
Examples are RFID tags attached to store merchandize , transponder for toll booths use attached to the windshield of a car , or even a chip embedded into a pet ’ s skin .
NFC ( near field communication ) works similarly , except it is much shorter range .
Its mechanism of interaction is the induced magnetic field at microwave frequencies between two coils .
Cell phones that have NFC capability and the right software can supply information for purchases using the cell phone instead of a physical credit card .
The very short range of the data transfer is a desired security feature in this case .
The boundary between the microwave and infrared regions of the electromagnetic spectrum is not well defined ( see ) .
Infrared radiation is generally produced by thermal motion , and the vibration and rotation of atoms and molecules .
Electronic transitions in atoms and molecules can also produce infrared radiation .
About half of the solar energy arriving at Earth is in the infrared region , with most of the rest in the visible part of the spectrum .
About 23 % of the solar energy is absorbed in the atmosphere , about 48 % is absorbed at Earth ’ s surface , and about 29 % is reflected back into space .
The range of infrared frequencies extends up to the lower limit of visible light , just below red .
In fact , infrared means “ below red. ” Water molecules rotate and vibrate particularly well at infrared frequencies .
Reconnaissance satellites can detect buildings , vehicles , and even individual humans by their infrared emissions , whose power radiation is proportional to the fourth power of the absolute temperature .
More mundanely , we use infrared lamps , including those called quartz heaters , to preferentially warm us because we absorb infrared better than our surroundings .
The familiar handheld “ remotes ” for changing channels and settings on television sets often transmit their signal by modulating an infrared beam .
If you try to use a TV remote without the infrared emitter being in direct line of sight with the infrared detector , you may find the television not responding .
Some remotes use Bluetooth instead and reduce this annoyance .
Visible light is the narrow segment of the electromagnetic spectrum between about 400 nm and about 750 nm to which the normal human eye responds .
Visible light is produced by vibrations and rotations of atoms and molecules , as well as by electronic transitions within atoms and molecules .
The receivers or detectors of light largely utilize electronic transitions .
Red light has the lowest frequencies and longest wavelengths , whereas violet has the highest frequencies and shortest wavelengths .
Blackbody radiation from the Sun peaks in the visible part of the spectrum but is more intense in the red than in the violet , making the sun yellowish in appearance .
Living things—plants and animals—have evolved to utilize and respond to parts of the electromagnetic spectrum in which they are embedded .
We enjoy the beauty of nature through visible light .
Plants are more selective .
Photosynthesis uses parts of the visible spectrum to make sugars .
Ultraviolet means “ above violet. ” The electromagnetic frequencies of ultraviolet radiation ( UV ) extend upward from 1. http : //earthobservatory.nasa.gov/Features/EnergyBalance/page4.php violet , the highest-frequency visible light .
The highest-frequency ultraviolet overlaps with the lowest-frequency X-rays .
The wavelengths of ultraviolet extend from 400 nm down to about 10 nm at its highest frequencies .
Ultraviolet is produced by atomic and molecular motions and electronic transitions .
UV radiation from the Sun is broadly subdivided into three wavelength ranges : UV-A ( 320–400 nm ) is the lowest frequency , then UV-B ( 290–320 nm ) and UV-C ( 220–290 nm ) .
Most UV-B and all UV-C are absorbed by ozone molecules in the upper atmosphere .
Consequently , 99 % of the solar UV radiation reaching Earth ’ s surface is UV-A .
Sunburn is caused by large exposures to UV-B and UV-C , and repeated exposure can increase the likelihood of skin cancer .
The tanning response is a defense mechanism in which the body produces pigments in inert skin layers to reduce exposure of the living cells below .
As examined in a later chapter , the shorter the wavelength of light , the greater the energy change of an atom or molecule that absorbs the light in an electronic transition .
This makes short-wavelength ultraviolet light damaging to living cells .
It also explains why ultraviolet radiation is better able than visible light to cause some materials to glow , or fluoresce .
Besides the adverse effects of ultraviolet radiation , there are also benefits of exposure in nature and uses in technology .
Vitamin D production in the skin results from exposure to UV-B radiation , generally from sunlight .
Several studies suggest vitamin D deficiency is associated with the development of a range of cancers ( prostate , breast , colon ) , as well as osteoporosis .
Low-intensity ultraviolet has applications such as providing the energy to cause certain dyes to fluoresce and emit visible light , for example , in printed money to display hidden watermarks as counterfeit protection .
X-rays have wavelengths from about .
They have shorter wavelengths , and higher frequencies , than ultraviolet , so that the energy they transfer at an atomic level is greater .
As a result , X-rays have adverse effects on living cells similar to those of ultraviolet radiation , but they are more penetrating .
Cancer and genetic defects can be induced by X-rays .
Because of their effect on rapidly dividing cells , X-rays can also be used to treat and even cure cancer .
The widest use of X-rays is for imaging objects that are opaque to visible light , such as the human body or aircraft parts .
In humans , the risk of cell damage is weighed carefully against the benefit of the diagnostic information obtained .
Soon after nuclear radioactivity was first detected in 1896 , it was found that at least three distinct types of radiation were being emitted , and these were designated as alpha , beta , and gamma rays .
The most penetrating nuclear radiation , the gamma ray ( ray ) , was later found to be an extremely high-frequency electromagnetic wave .
The lower end of the ray frequency range overlaps the upper end of the X-ray range .
Gamma rays have characteristics identical to X-rays of the same frequency—they differ only in source .
The name “ gamma rays ” is generally used for electromagnetic radiation emitted by a nucleus , while X-rays are generally produced by bombarding a target with energetic electrons in an X-ray tube .
At higher frequencies , rays are more penetrating and more damaging to living tissue .
They have many of the same uses as X-rays , including cancer therapy .
Gamma radiation from radioactive materials is used in nuclear medicine .
Use this to explore how light interacts with molecules in our atmosphere .
Explore how light interacts with molecules in our atmosphere .
Identify that absorption of light depends on the molecule and the type of light .
Relate the energy of the light to the resulting motion .
Identify that energy increases from microwave to ultraviolet .
Predict the motion of a molecule based on the type of light it absorbs .
Check Your Understanding How do the electromagnetic waves for electromagnetic radiation differ ?
the different kinds of
