Our investigation of light revolves around two questions of fundamental importance : ( 1 ) What is the nature of light , and ( 2 ) how does light behave under various circumstances ?
Answers to these questions can be found in Maxwell ’ s equations ( in ) , which predict the existence of electromagnetic waves and their behavior .
Examples of light include radio and infrared waves , visible light , ultraviolet radiation , and X-rays .
Interestingly , not all light phenomena can be explained by Maxwell ’ s theory .
Experiments performed early in the twentieth century showed that light has corpuscular , or particle-like , properties .
The idea that light can display both wave and particle characteristics is called wave-particle duality , which is examined in .
In this chapter , we study the basic properties of light .
In the next few chapters , we investigate the behavior of light when it interacts with optical devices such as mirrors , lenses , and apertures .
The speed of light in a vacuum c is one of the fundamental constants of physics .
As you will see when you reach , it is a central concept in Einstein ’ s theory of relativity .
As the accuracy of the measurements of the speed of light improved , it was found that different observers , even those moving at large velocities with respect to each other , measure the same value for the speed of light .
However , the speed of light does vary in a precise manner with the material it traverses .
These facts have far-reaching implications , as we will see in later chapters .
The first measurement of the speed of light was made by the Danish astronomer Ole Roemer ( 1644–1710 ) in 1675 .
He studied the orbit of Io , one of the four large moons of Jupiter , and found that it had a period of revolution of 42.5 h around Jupiter .
He also discovered that this value fluctuated by a few seconds , depending on the position of Earth in its orbit around the Sun .
Roemer realized that this fluctuation was due to the finite speed of light and could be used to determine c .
Roemer found the period of revolution of Io by measuring the time interval between successive eclipses by Jupiter .
( a ) shows the planetary configurations when such a measurement is made from Earth in the part of its orbit where it is receding from Jupiter .
When Earth is at point A , Earth , Jupiter , and Io are aligned .
The next time this alignment occurs , Earth is at point B , and the light carrying that information to Earth must travel to that point .
Since B is farther from Jupiter than A , light takes more time to reach Earth when Earth is at B .
Now imagine it is about 6 months later , and the planets are arranged as in part ( b ) of the figure .
The measurement of Io ’ s period begins with Earth at point and Io eclipsed by Jupiter .
The next eclipse then occurs when Earth is at point , to which the light carrying the information of this eclipse must travel .
Since is closer to Jupiter than , light takes less time to reach Earth when it is at .
This time interval between the successive eclipses of Io seen at and is therefore less than the time interval between the eclipses seen at A and B .
By measuring the difference in these time intervals and with appropriate knowledge of the distance between Jupiter and Earth , Roemer calculated that the speed of light was which is 33 % below the value accepted today .
The first successful terrestrial measurement of the speed of light was made by Armand Fizeau ( 1819–1896 ) in 1849 .
He placed a toothed wheel that could be rotated very rapidly on one hilltop and a mirror on a second hilltop 8 km away .
An intense light source was placed behind the wheel , so that when the wheel rotated , it chopped the light beam into a succession of pulses .
The speed of the wheel was then adjusted until no light returned to the observer located behind the wheel .
This could only happen if the wheel rotated through an angle corresponding to a displacement of teeth , while the pulses traveled down to the mirror and back .
Knowing the rotational speed of the wheel , the number of teeth on the wheel , and the distance to the mirror , Fizeau determined the speed of light to be which is only 5 % too high .
The French physicist Jean Bernard Léon Foucault ( 1819–1868 ) modified Fizeau ’ s apparatus by replacing the toothed wheel with a rotating mirror .
In 1862 , he measured the speed of light to be which is within 0.6 % of the presently accepted value .
Albert Michelson ( 1852–1931 ) also used Foucault ’ s method on several occasions to measure the speed of light .
His first experiments were performed in 1878 ; by 1926 , he had refined the technique so well that he found c to be Today , the speed of light is known to great precision .
In fact , the speed of light in a vacuum c is so important that it is accepted as one of the basic physical quantities and has the value where the approximate value of is used whenever three-digit accuracy is sufficient .
The speed of light through matter is less than it is in a vacuum , because light interacts with atoms in a material .
The speed of light depends strongly on the type of material , since its interaction varies with different atoms , crystal lattices , and other substructures .
We can define a constant of a material that describes the speed of light in it , called the index of refraction n : where v is the observed speed of light in the material .
Since the speed of light is always less than c in matter and equals c only in a vacuum , the index of refraction is always greater than or equal to one ; that is , .
gives the indices of refraction for some representative substances .
The values are listed for a particular wavelength of light , because they vary slightly with wavelength .
( This can have important effects , such as colors separated by a prism , as we will see in . )
Note that for gases , n is close to 1.0 .
This seems reasonable , since atoms in gases are widely separated , and light travels at c in the vacuum between atoms .
It is common to take for gases unless great precision is needed .
Although the speed of light v in a medium varies considerably from its value c in a vacuum , it is still a large speed .
Calculate the speed of light in zircon , a material used in jewelry to imitate diamond .
We can calculate the speed of light in a material v from the index of refraction n of the material , using the equation Rearranging the equation for v gives us The index of refraction for zircon is given as 1.923 in , and c is given in .
Entering these values in the equation gives This speed is slightly larger than half the speed of light in a vacuum and is still high compared with speeds we normally experience .
The only substance listed in that has a greater index of refraction than zircon is diamond .
We shall see later that the large index of refraction for zircon makes it sparkle more than glass , but less than diamond .
Check Your Understanding shows that ethanol and fresh water have very similar indices of refraction .
By what percentage do the speeds of light in these liquids differ ?
You have already studied some of the wave characteristics of light in the previous chapter on .
In this chapter , we start mainly with the ray characteristics .
There are three ways in which light can travel from a source to another location .
It can come directly from the source through empty space , such as from the Sun to Earth .
Or light can travel through various media , such as air and glass , to the observer .
Light can also arrive after being reflected , such as by a mirror .
In all of these cases , we can model the path of light as a straight line called a ray .
Experiments show that when light interacts with an object several times larger than its wavelength , it travels in straight lines and acts like a ray .
Its wave characteristics are not pronounced in such situations .
Since the wavelength of visible light is less than a micron ( a thousandth of a millimeter ) , it acts like a ray in the many common situations in which it encounters objects larger than a micron .
For example , when visible light encounters anything large enough that we can observe it with unaided eyes , such as a coin , it acts like a ray , with generally negligible wave characteristics .
In all of these cases , we can model the path of light as straight lines .
Light may change direction when it encounters objects ( such as a mirror ) or in passing from one material to another ( such as in passing from air to glass ) , but it then continues in a straight line or as a ray .
The word “ ray ” comes from mathematics and here means a straight line that originates at some point .
It is acceptable to visualize light rays as laser rays .
The ray model of light describes the path of light as straight lines .
Since light moves in straight lines , changing directions when it interacts with materials , its path is described by geometry and simple trigonometry .
This part of optics , where the ray aspect of light dominates , is therefore called geometric optics .
Two laws govern how light changes direction when it interacts with matter .
These are the law of reflection , for situations in which light bounces off matter , and the law of refraction , for situations in which light passes through matter .
We will examine more about each of these laws in upcoming sections of this chapter .
Whenever we look into a mirror , or squint at sunlight glinting from a lake , we are seeing a reflection .
When you look at a piece of white paper , you are seeing light scattered from it .
Large telescopes use reflection to form an image of stars and other astronomical objects .
We expect to see reflections from smooth surfaces , but illustrates how a rough surface reflects light .
Since the light strikes different parts of the surface at different angles , it is reflected in many different directions , or diffused .
Diffused light is what allows us to see a sheet of paper from any angle , as shown in ( a ) .
People , clothing , leaves , and walls all have rough surfaces and can be seen from all sides .
A mirror , on the other hand , has a smooth surface ( compared with the wavelength of light ) and reflects light at specific angles , as illustrated in ( b ) .
When the Moon reflects from a lake , as shown in ( c ) , a combination of these effects takes place .
When you see yourself in a mirror , it appears that the image is actually behind the mirror .
We see the light coming from a direction determined by the law of reflection .
The angles are such that the image is exactly the same distance behind the mirror as you stand in front of the mirror .
If the mirror is on the wall of a room , the images in it are all behind the mirror , which can make the room seem bigger .
Although these mirror images make objects appear to be where they can not be ( like behind a solid wall ) , the images are not figments of your imagination .
Mirror images can be photographed and videotaped by instruments and look just as they do with our eyes ( which are optical instruments themselves ) .
The precise manner in which images are formed by mirrors and lenses is discussed in an upcoming chapter on .
A light ray that strikes an object consisting of two mutually perpendicular reflecting surfaces is reflected back exactly parallel to the direction from which it came .
This is true whenever the reflecting surfaces are perpendicular , and it is independent of the angle of incidence .
( For proof , see at the end of this section . )
Such an object is called a corner reflector , since the light bounces from its inside corner .
Corner reflectors are a subclass of retroreflectors , which all reflect rays back in the directions from which they came .
Although the geometry of the proof is much more complex , corner reflectors can also be built with three mutually perpendicular reflecting surfaces and are useful in three-dimensional applications .
Many inexpensive reflector buttons on bicycles , cars , and warning signs have corner reflectors designed to return light in the direction from which it originated .
Rather than simply reflecting light over a wide angle , retroreflection ensures high visibility if the observer and the light source are located together , such as a car ’ s driver and headlights .
The Apollo astronauts placed a true corner reflector on the Moon .
Laser signals from Earth can be bounced from that corner reflector to measure the gradually increasing distance to the Moon of a few centimeters per year .
Working on the same principle as these optical reflectors , corner reflectors are routinely used as radar reflectors for radio-frequency applications .
Under most circumstances , small boats made of fiberglass or wood do not strongly reflect radio waves emitted by radar systems .
To make these boats visible to radar ( to avoid collisions , for example ) , radar reflectors are attached to boats , usually in high places .
As a counterexample , if you are interested in building a stealth airplane , radar reflections should be minimized to evade detection .
One of the design considerations would then be to avoid building corners into the airframe .
You may often notice some odd things when looking into a fish tank .
For example , you may see the same fish appearing to be in two different places .
This happens because light coming from the fish to you changes direction when it leaves the tank , and in this case , it can travel two different paths to get to your eyes .
The changing of a light ray ’ s direction ( loosely called bending ) when it passes through substances of different refractive indices is called refraction and is related to changes in the speed of light , .
Refraction is responsible for a tremendous range of optical phenomena , from the action of lenses to data transmission through optical fibers .
shows how a ray of light changes direction when it passes from one medium to another .
As before , the angles are measured relative to a perpendicular to the surface at the point where the light ray crosses it .
( Some of the incident light is reflected from the surface , but for now we concentrate on the light that is transmitted . )
The change in direction of the light ray depends on the relative values of the indices of refraction of the two media involved .
In the situations shown , medium 2 has a greater index of refraction than medium 1 .
Note that as shown in ( a ) , the direction of the ray moves closer to the perpendicular when it progresses from a medium with a lower index of refraction to one with a higher index of refraction .
Conversely , as shown in ( b ) , the direction of the ray moves away from the perpendicular when it progresses from a medium with a higher index of refraction to one with a lower index of refraction .
The path is exactly reversible .
The amount that a light ray changes its direction depends both on the incident angle and the amount that the speed changes .
For a ray at a given incident angle , a large change in speed causes a large change in direction and thus a large change in angle .
The exact mathematical relationship is the law of refraction , or Snell ’ s law , after the Dutch mathematician Willebrord Snell ( 1591–1626 ) , who discovered it in 1621 .
The law of refraction is stated in equation form as Here and are the indices of refraction for media 1 and 2 , and and are the angles between the rays and the perpendicular in media 1 and 2 .
The incoming ray is called the incident ray , the outgoing ray is called the refracted ray , and the associated angles are the incident angle and the refracted angle , respectively .
Snell ’ s experiments showed that the law of refraction is obeyed and that a characteristic index of refraction n could be assigned to a given medium and its value measured .
Snell was not aware that the speed of light varied in different media , a key fact used when we derive the law of refraction theoretically using Huygens ’ s principle in .
Find the index of refraction for medium 2 in ( a ) , assuming medium 1 is air and given that the incident angle is and the angle of refraction is .
The index of refraction for air is taken to be 1 in most cases ( and up to four significant figures , it is 1.000 ) .
Thus , here .
From the given information , and With this information , the only unknown in Snell ’ s law is From Snell ’ s law we have so we can use Snell ’ s law to find it .
Entering known values , This is the index of refraction for water , and Snell could have determined it by measuring the angles and performing this calculation .
He would then have found 1.33 to be the appropriate index of refraction for water in all other situations , such as when a ray passes from water to glass .
Today , we can verify that the index of refraction is related to the speed of light in a medium by measuring that speed directly .
Explore between two media with different indices of refraction .
Use the “ Intro ” simulation and see how changing from air to water to glass changes the bending angle .
Use the protractor tool to measure the angles and see if you can recreate the configuration in .
Also by measurement , confirm that the angle of reflection equals the angle of incidence .
Suppose that in a situation like that in , light goes from air to diamond and that the incident angle is .
Calculate the angle of refraction in the diamond .
Again , the index of refraction for air is taken to be , and we are given .
We can look up the index of refraction for diamond in , finding .
The only unknown in Snell ’ s law is , which we wish to determine .
Solving Snell ’ s law for yields Entering known values , The angle is thus For the same angle of incidence , the angle of refraction in diamond is significantly smaller than in water rather than —see ) .
This means there is a larger change in direction in diamond .
The cause of a large change in direction is a large change in the index of refraction ( or speed ) .
In general , the larger the change in speed , the greater the effect on the direction of the ray .
Check Your Understanding In , the solid with the next highest index of refraction after diamond is zircon .
If the diamond in were replaced with a piece of zircon , what would be the new angle of refraction ?
A good-quality mirror may reflect more than of the light that falls on it , absorbing the rest .
But it would be useful to have a mirror that reflects all of the light that falls on it .
Interestingly , we can produce total reflection using an aspect of refraction .
Consider what happens when a ray of light strikes the surface between two materials , as shown in ( a ) .
Part of the light crosses the boundary and is refracted ; the rest is reflected .
If , as shown in the figure , the index of refraction for the second medium is less than for the first , the ray bends away from the perpendicular .
( Since the angle of refraction is greater than the angle of incidence—that is , Now imagine what happens as the incident angle increases .
This causes to increase also .
The largest the angle of refraction can be is , as shown in part ( b ) .
The critical angle for a combination of materials is defined to be the incident angle that produces an angle of refraction of .
That is , is the incident angle for which .
If the incident angle is greater than the critical angle , as shown in ( c ) , then all of the light is reflected back into medium 1 , a condition called total internal reflection .
( As the figure shows , the reflected rays obey the law of reflection so that the angle of reflection is equal to the angle of incidence in all three cases . )
Snell ’ s law states the relationship between angles and indices of refraction .
It is given by When the incident angle equals the critical angle Snell ’ s law in this case becomes , the angle of refraction is .
Noting that The critical angle for a given combination of materials is thus Total internal reflection occurs for any incident angle greater than the critical angle , and it can only occur when the second medium has an index of refraction less than the first .
Note that this equation is written for a light ray that travels in medium 1 and reflects from medium 2 , as shown in .
What is the critical angle for light traveling in a polystyrene ( a type of plastic ) pipe surrounded by air ?
The index of refraction for polystyrene is 1.49 .
The index of refraction of air can be taken to be 1.00 , as before .
This makes the inside surface of the clear plastic a perfect mirror for such rays , without any need for the silvering used on common mirrors .
Different combinations of materials have different critical angles , but any combination with can produce total internal reflection .
The same calculation as made here shows that the critical angle for a ray going from water to air is , whereas that from diamond to air is , and that from flint glass to crown glass is .
Check Your Understanding At the surface between air and water , light rays can go from air to water and from water to air .
For which ray is there no possibility of total internal reflection ?
In the photo that opens this chapter , the image of a swimmer underwater is captured by a camera that is also underwater .
The swimmer in the upper half of the photograph , apparently facing upward , is , in fact , a reflected image of the swimmer below .
The circular ripple near the photograph ’ s center is actually on the water surface .
The undisturbed water surrounding it makes a good reflecting surface when viewed from below , thanks to total internal reflection .
However , at the very top edge of this photograph , rays from below strike the surface with incident angles less than the critical angle , allowing the camera to capture a view of activities on the pool deck above water .
Fiber optics is one application of total internal reflection that is in wide use .
In communications , it is used to transmit telephone , internet , and cable TV signals .
Fiber optics employs the transmission of light down fibers of plastic or glass .
Because the fibers are thin , light entering one is likely to strike the inside surface at an angle greater than the critical angle and , thus , be totally reflected .
The index of refraction outside the fiber must be smaller than inside .
In fact , most fibers have a varying refractive index to allow more light to be guided along the fiber through total internal refraction .
Rays are reflected around corners as shown , making the fibers into tiny light pipes .
Bundles of fibers can be used to transmit an image without a lens , as illustrated in .
The output of a device called an endoscope is shown in ( b ) .
Endoscopes are used to explore the interior of the body through its natural orifices or minor incisions .
Light is transmitted down one fiber bundle to illuminate internal parts , and the reflected light is transmitted back out through another bundle to be observed .
Fiber optics has revolutionized surgical techniques and observations within the body , with a host of medical diagnostic and therapeutic uses .
Surgery can be performed , such as arthroscopic surgery on a knee or shoulder joint , employing cutting tools attached to and observed with the endoscope .
Samples can also be obtained , such as by lassoing an intestinal polyp for external examination .
The flexibility of the fiber optic bundle allows doctors to navigate it around small and difficult-toreach regions in the body , such as the intestines , the heart , blood vessels , and joints .
Transmission of an intense laser beam to burn away obstructing plaques in major arteries , as well as delivering light to activate chemotherapy drugs , are becoming commonplace .
Optical fibers have in fact enabled microsurgery and remote surgery where the incisions are small and the surgeon ’ s fingers do not need to touch the diseased tissue .
Optical fibers in bundles are surrounded by a cladding material that has a lower index of refraction than the core .
The cladding prevents light from being transmitted between fibers in a bundle .
Without cladding , light could pass between fibers in contact , since their indices of refraction are identical .
Since no light gets into the cladding ( there is total internal reflection back into the core ) , none can be transmitted between clad fibers that are in contact with one another .
Instead , the light is propagated along the length of the fiber , minimizing the loss of signal and ensuring that a quality image is formed at the other end .
The cladding and an additional protective layer make optical fibers durable as well as flexible .
Special tiny lenses that can be attached to the ends of bundles of fibers have been designed and fabricated .
Light emerging from a fiber bundle can be focused through such a lens , imaging a tiny spot .
In some cases , the spot can be scanned , allowing quality imaging of a region inside the body .
Special minute optical filters inserted at the end of the fiber bundle have the capacity to image the interior of organs located tens of microns below the surface without cutting the surface—an area known as nonintrusive diagnostics .
This is particularly useful for determining the extent of cancers in the stomach and bowel .
In another type of application , optical fibers are commonly used to carry signals for telephone conversations and internet communications .
Extensive optical fiber cables have been placed on the ocean floor and underground to enable optical communications .
Optical fiber communication systems offer several advantages over electrical ( copper ) -based systems , particularly for long distances .
The fibers can be made so transparent that light can travel many kilometers before it becomes dim enough to require amplification—much superior to copper conductors .
This property of optical fibers is called low loss .
Lasers emit light with characteristics that allow far more conversations in one fiber than are possible with electric signals on a single conductor .
This property of optical fibers is called high bandwidth .
Optical signals in one fiber do not produce undesirable effects in other adjacent fibers .
This property of optical fibers is called reduced crosstalk .
We shall explore the unique characteristics of laser radiation in a later chapter .
Corner reflectors are perfectly efficient when the conditions for total internal reflection are satisfied .
With common materials , it is easy to obtain a critical angle that is less than One use of these perfect mirrors is in binoculars , as shown in .
Another use is in periscopes found in submarines .
Total internal reflection , coupled with a large index of refraction , explains why diamonds sparkle more than other materials .
The critical angle for a diamond-to-air surface is only , so when light enters a diamond , it has trouble getting back out .
Although light freely enters the diamond , it can exit only if it makes an angle less than .
Facets on diamonds are specifically intended to make this unlikely .
Good diamonds are very clear , so that the light makes many internal reflections and is concentrated before exiting—hence the bright sparkle .
( Zircon is a natural gemstone that has an exceptionally large index of refraction , but it is not as large as diamond , so it is not as highly prized .
Cubic zirconia is manufactured and has an even higher index of refraction , but it is still less than that of diamond . )
The colors you see emerging from a clear diamond are not due to the diamond ’ s color , which is usually nearly colorless .
The colors result from dispersion , which we discuss in .
Colored diamonds get their color from structural defects of the crystal lattice and the inclusion of minute quantities of graphite and other materials .
The Argyle Mine in Western Australia produces around 90 % of the world ’ s pink , red , champagne , and cognac diamonds , whereas around 50 % of the world ’ s clear diamonds come from central and southern Africa .
Explore between two media with different indices of refraction .
Try to make the refracted ray disappear with total internal reflection .
Use the protractor tool to measure the critical angle and compare with the prediction from .
Everyone enjoys the spectacle of a rainbow glimmering against a dark stormy sky .
How does sunlight falling on clear drops of rain get broken into the rainbow of colors we see ?
The same process causes white light to be broken into colors by a clear glass prism or a diamond .
We see about six colors in a rainbow—red , orange , yellow , green , blue , and violet ; sometimes indigo is listed , too .
These colors are associated with different wavelengths of light , as shown in .
When our eye receives pure-wavelength light , we tend to see only one of the six colors , depending on wavelength .
The thousands of other hues we can sense in other situations are our eye ’ s response to various mixtures of wavelengths .
White light , in particular , is a fairly uniform mixture of all visible wavelengths .
Sunlight , considered to be white , actually appears to be a bit yellow , because of its mixture of wavelengths , but it does contain all visible wavelengths .
The sequence of colors in rainbows is the same sequence as the colors shown in the figure .
This implies that white light is spread out in a rainbow according to wavelength .
Dispersion is defined as the spreading of white light into its full spectrum of wavelengths .
More technically , dispersion occurs whenever the propagation of light depends on wavelength .
Any type of wave can exhibit dispersion .
For example , sound waves , all types of electromagnetic waves , and water waves can be dispersed according to wavelength .
Dispersion may require special circumstances and can result in spectacular displays such as in the production of a rainbow .
This is also true for sound , since all frequencies ordinarily travel at the same speed .
If you listen to sound through a long tube , such as a vacuum cleaner hose , you can easily hear it dispersed by interaction with the tube .
Dispersion , in fact , can reveal a great deal about what the wave has encountered that disperses its wavelengths .
The dispersion of electromagnetic radiation from outer space , for example , has revealed much about what exists between the stars—the so-called interstellar medium .
Nick Moore ’ s discusses dispersion of a pulse as he taps a long spring .
Follow his explanation as Moore replays the high-speed footage showing high frequency waves outrunning the lower frequency waves .
Refraction is responsible for dispersion in rainbows and many other situations .
The angle of refraction depends on the index of refraction , as we know from Snell ’ s law .
We know that the index of refraction n depends on the medium .
But for a given medium , n also depends on wavelength .
Note that for a given medium , n increases as wavelength decreases and is greatest for violet light .
Thus , violet light is bent more than red light , as shown for a prism in ( b ) .
White light is dispersed into the same sequence of wavelengths as seen in and .
A beam of white light goes from air into flint glass at an incidence angle of .
What is the angle between the red ( 660 nm ) and violet ( 410 nm ) parts of the refracted light ?
Values for the indices of refraction for flint glass at various wavelengths are listed in .
Use these values for calculate the angle of refraction for each color and then take the difference to find the dispersion angle .
Check Your Understanding In the preceding example , how much distance inside the block of flint glass would the red and the violet rays have to progress before they are separated by 1.0 mm ?
Rainbows are produced by a combination of refraction and reflection .
You may have noticed that you see a rainbow only when you look away from the Sun .
Light enters a drop of water and is reflected from the back of the drop .
The light is refracted both as it enters and as it leaves the drop .
Since the index of refraction of water varies with wavelength , the light is dispersed , and a rainbow is observed ( ( a ) ) .
( No dispersion occurs at the back surface , because the law of reflection does not depend on wavelength . )
The actual rainbow of colors seen by an observer depends on the myriad rays being refracted and reflected toward the observer ’ s eyes from numerous drops of water .
The effect is most spectacular when the background is dark , as in stormy weather , but can also be observed in waterfalls and lawn sprinklers .
The arc of a rainbow comes from the need to be looking at a specific angle relative to the direction of the Sun , as illustrated in part ( b ) .
If two reflections of light occur within the water drop , another “ secondary ” rainbow is produced .
This rare event produces an arc that lies above the primary rainbow arc , as in part ( c ) , and produces colors in the reverse order of the primary rainbow , with red at the lowest angle and violet at the largest angle .
Dispersion may produce beautiful rainbows , but it can cause problems in optical systems .
White light used to transmit messages in a fiber is dispersed , spreading out in time and eventually overlapping with other messages .
Since a laser produces a nearly pure wavelength , its light experiences little dispersion , an advantage over white light for transmission of information .
In contrast , dispersion of electromagnetic waves coming to us from outer space can be used to determine the amount of matter they pass through .
So far in this chapter , we have been discussing optical phenomena using the ray model of light .
However , some phenomena require analysis and explanations based on the wave characteristics of light .
This is particularly true when the wavelength is not negligible compared to the dimensions of an optical device , such as a slit in the case of diffraction .
Huygens ’ s principle is an indispensable tool for this analysis .
shows how a transverse wave looks as viewed from above and from the side .
A light wave can be imagined to propagate like this , although we do not actually see it wiggling through space .
From above , we view the wave fronts ( or wave crests ) as if we were looking down on ocean waves .
The side view would be a graph of the electric or magnetic field .
The view from above is perhaps more useful in developing concepts about wave optics .
The Dutch scientist Christiaan Huygens ( 1629–1695 ) developed a useful technique for determining in detail how and where waves propagate .
Starting from some known position , Huygens ’ s principle states that every point on a wave front is a source of wavelets that spread out in the forward direction at the same speed as the wave itself .
The new wave front is tangent to all of the wavelets .
shows how Huygens ’ s principle is applied .
A wave front is the long edge that moves , for example , with the crest or the trough .
Each point on the wave front emits a semicircular wave that moves at the propagation speed v .
We can draw these wavelets at a time t later , so that they have moved a distance The new wave front is a plane tangent to the wavelets and is where we would expect the wave to be a time t later .
Huygens ’ s principle works for all types of waves , including water waves , sound waves , and light waves .
It is useful not only in describing how light waves propagate but also in explaining the laws of reflection and refraction .
In addition , we will see that Huygens ’ s principle tells us how and where light rays interfere .
shows how a mirror reflects an incoming wave at an angle equal to the incident angle , verifying the law of reflection .
As the wave front strikes the mirror , wavelets are first emitted from the left part of the mirror and then from the right .
The wavelets closer to the left have had time to travel farther , producing a wave front traveling in the direction shown .
The law of refraction can be explained by applying Huygens ’ s principle to a wave front passing from one medium to another .
Each wavelet in the figure was emitted when the wave front crossed the interface between the media .
Since the speed of light is smaller in the second medium , the waves do not travel as far in a given time , and the new wave front changes direction as shown .
This explains why a ray changes direction to become closer to the perpendicular when light slows down .
Snell ’ s law can be derived from the geometry in .
By examining the geometry of the wave fronts , derive the law of refraction .
Consider , which expands upon .
It shows the incident wave front just reaching the surface at point A , while point B is still well within medium 1 .
Note that from the geometry , the angle is equal to the angle of incidence , .
Similarly , is .
Check Your Understanding In , we had .
If were decreased such that and the speed of light in medium 2 is faster than in medium 1 , what would happen to the length of ?
What would happen to the wave front and the direction of the refracted ray ?
This by Walter Fendt shows an animation of reflection and refraction using Huygens ’ s wavelets while you control the parameters .
Be sure to click on “ Next step ” to display the wavelets .
You can see the reflected and refracted wave fronts forming .
What happens when a wave passes through an opening , such as light shining through an open door into a dark room ?
For light , we observe a sharp shadow of the doorway on the floor of the room , and no visible light bends around corners into other parts of the room .
When sound passes through a door , we hear it everywhere in the room and thus observe that sound spreads out when passing through such an opening .
What is the difference between the behavior of sound waves and light waves in this case ?
The answer is that light has very short wavelengths and acts like a ray .
Sound has wavelengths on the order of the size of the door and bends around corners ( for frequency of 1000 Hz , about three times smaller than the width of the doorway ) .
If we pass light through smaller openings such as slits , we can use Huygens ’ s principle to see that light bends as sound does .
The bending of a wave around the edges of an opening or an obstacle is called diffraction .
Diffraction is a wave characteristic and occurs for all types of waves .
If diffraction is observed for some phenomenon , it is evidence that the phenomenon is a wave .
Thus , the horizontal diffraction of the laser beam after it passes through the slits in is evidence that light is a wave .
You will learn about diffraction in much more detail in the chapter on .
Polarizing sunglasses are familiar to most of us .
They have a special ability to cut the glare of light reflected from water or glass .
They have this ability because of a wave characteristic of light called polarization .
What is polarization ?
How is it produced ?
What are some of its uses ?
The answers to these questions are related to the wave character of light .
Light is one type of electromagnetic ( EM ) wave .
As noted in the previous chapter on , EM waves are transverse waves consisting of varying electric and magnetic fields that oscillate perpendicular to the direction of propagation .
However , in general , there are no specific directions for the oscillations of the electric and magnetic fields ; they vibrate in any randomly oriented plane perpendicular to the direction of propagation .
Polarization is the attribute that a wave ’ s oscillations do have a definite direction relative to the direction of propagation of the wave .
( This is not the same type of polarization as that discussed for the separation of charges . )
Waves having such a direction are said to be polarized .
For an EM wave , we define the direction of polarization to be the direction parallel to the electric field .
Thus , we can think of the electric field arrows as showing the direction of polarization , as in .
To examine this further , consider the transverse waves in the ropes shown in .
The oscillations in one rope are in a vertical plane and are said to be vertically polarized .
Those in the other rope are in a horizontal plane and are horizontally polarized .
If a vertical slit is placed on the first rope , the waves pass through .
However , a vertical slit blocks the horizontally polarized waves .
For EM waves , the direction of the electric field is analogous to the disturbances on the ropes .
The Sun and many other light sources produce waves that have the electric fields in random directions ( ( a ) ) .
Such light is said to be unpolarized , because it is composed of many waves with all possible directions of polarization .
Polaroid materials—which were invented by the founder of the Polaroid Corporation , Edwin Land—act as a polarizing slit for light , allowing only polarization in one direction to pass through .
Polarizing filters are composed of long molecules aligned in one direction .
If we think of the molecules as many slits , analogous to those for the oscillating ropes , we can understand why only light with a specific polarization can get through .
The axis of a polarizing filter is the direction along which the filter passes the electric field of an EM wave .
shows the effect of two polarizing filters on originally unpolarized light .
The first filter polarizes the light along its axis .
When the axes of the first and second filters are aligned ( parallel ) , then all of the polarized light passed by the first filter is also passed by the second filter .
If the second polarizing filter is rotated , only the component of the light parallel to the second filter ’ s axis is passed .
When the axes are perpendicular , no light is passed by the second filter .
Only the component of the EM wave parallel to the axis of a filter is passed .
Let us call the angle between the direction of polarization and the axis of a filter .
If the electric field has an amplitude E , then the transmitted part of the wave has an amplitude .
Since the intensity of a wave is proportional to its amplitude squared , the intensity I of the transmitted wave is related to the incident wave by where is the intensity of the polarized wave before passing through the filter .
This equation is known as Malus ’ s law .
This helps you visualize the electric field vectors as light encounters a polarizing filter .
You can rotate the filter—note that the angle displayed is in radians .
You can also rotate the animation for 3D visualization .
What angle is needed between the direction of polarized light and the axis of a polarizing filter to reduce its intensity by ?
When the intensity is reduced by , it is or 0.100 times its original value .
That is , Using this information , the equation can be used to solve for the needed angle .
Solving the equation for and substituting with the relationship between I and gives Solving for yields A fairly large angle between the direction of polarization and the filter axis is needed to reduce the intensity to of its original value .
This seems reasonable based on experimenting with polarizing films .
It is interesting that at an angle of , the intensity is reduced to of its original value .
Note that is from reducing the intensity to zero , and that at an angle of , the intensity is reduced to of its original value , giving evidence of symmetry .
Check Your Understanding Although we did not specify the direction in , let ’ s say the polarizing filter was rotated clockwise by to reduce the light intensity by .
What would be the intensity reduction if the polarizing filter were rotated counterclockwise by ?
By now , you can probably guess that polarizing sunglasses cut the glare in reflected light , because that light is polarized .
You can check this for yourself by holding polarizing sunglasses in front of you and rotating them while looking at light reflected from water or glass .
As you rotate the sunglasses , you will notice the light gets bright and dim , but not completely black .
This implies the reflected light is partially polarized and can not be completely blocked by a polarizing filter .
illustrates what happens when unpolarized light is reflected from a surface .
Vertically polarized light is preferentially refracted at the surface , so the reflected light is left more horizontally polarized .
The reasons for this phenomenon are beyond the scope of this text , but a convenient mnemonic for remembering this is to imagine the polarization direction to be like an arrow .
Vertical polarization is like an arrow perpendicular to the surface and is more likely to stick and not be reflected .
Horizontal polarization is like an arrow bouncing on its side and is more likely to be reflected .
Sunglasses with vertical axes thus block more reflected light than unpolarized light from other sources .
Since the part of the light that is not reflected is refracted , the amount of polarization depends on the indices of refraction of the media involved .
It can be shown that reflected light is completely polarized at an angle of reflection given by where is the medium in which the incident and reflected light travel and is the index of refraction of the medium that forms the interface that reflects the light .
This equation is known as Brewster ’ s law and is known as Brewster ’ s angle , named after the nineteenth-century Scottish physicist who discovered them .
This shows incident , reflected , and refracted light as rays and EM waves .
Try rotating the animation for 3D visualization and also change the angle of incidence .
Near Brewster ’ s angle , the reflected light becomes highly polarized .
( a ) At what angle will light traveling in air be completely polarized horizontally when reflected from water ?
( b ) From glass ?
All we need to solve these problems are the indices of refraction .
Air has water has and crown glass has can be directly applied to find in each case .
The equation Putting the known quantities into the equation gives Solving for the angle yields Similarly , for crown glass and air , Thus , Light reflected at these angles could be completely blocked by a good polarizing filter held with its axis vertical .
Brewster ’ s angle for water and air are similar to those for glass and air , so that sunglasses are equally effective for light reflected from either water or glass under similar circumstances .
Light that is not reflected is refracted into these media .
Therefore , at an incident angle equal to Brewster ’ s angle , the refracted light is slightly polarized vertically .
It is not completely polarized vertically , because only a small fraction of the incident light is reflected , so a significant amount of horizontally polarized light is refracted .
Check Your Understanding What happens at Brewster ’ s angle if the original incident light is already vertically polarized ?
Polarizing filters have a polarization axis that acts as a slit .
This slit passes EM waves ( often visible light ) that have an electric field parallel to the axis .
This is accomplished with long molecules aligned perpendicular to the axis , as shown in .
illustrates how the component of the electric field parallel to the long molecules is absorbed .
An EM wave is composed of oscillating electric and magnetic fields .
The electric field is strong compared with the magnetic field and is more effective in exerting force on charges in the molecules .
The most affected charged particles are the electrons , since electron masses are small .
If an electron is forced to oscillate , it can absorb energy from the EM wave .
This reduces the field in the wave and , hence , reduces its intensity .
In long molecules , electrons can more easily oscillate parallel to the molecule than in the perpendicular direction .
The electrons are bound to the molecule and are more restricted in their movement perpendicular to the molecule .
Thus , the electrons can absorb EM waves that have a component of their electric field parallel to the molecule .
The electrons are much less responsive to electric fields perpendicular to the molecule and allow these fields to pass .
Thus , the axis of the polarizing filter is perpendicular to the length of the molecule .
If you hold your polarizing sunglasses in front of you and rotate them while looking at blue sky , you will see the sky get bright and dim .
This is a clear indication that light scattered by air is partially polarized .
helps illustrate how this happens .
Since light is a transverse EM wave , it vibrates the electrons of air molecules perpendicular to the direction that it is traveling .
The electrons then radiate like small antennae .
Since they are oscillating perpendicular to the direction of the light ray , they produce EM radiation that is polarized perpendicular to the direction of the ray .
When viewing the light along a line perpendicular to the original ray , as in the figure , there can be no polarization in the scattered light parallel to the original ray , because that would require the original ray to be a longitudinal wave .
Along other directions , a component of the other polarization can be projected along the line of sight , and the scattered light is only partially polarized .
Furthermore , multiple scattering can bring light to your eyes from other directions and can contain different polarizations .
Photographs of the sky can be darkened by polarizing filters , a trick used by many photographers to make clouds brighter by contrast .
Scattering from other particles , such as smoke or dust , can also polarize light .
Detecting polarization in scattered EM waves can be a useful analytical tool in determining the scattering source .
A range of optical effects are used in sunglasses .
Besides being polarizing , sunglasses may have colored pigments embedded in them , whereas others use either a nonreflective or reflective coating .
A recent development is photochromic lenses , which darken in the sunlight and become clear indoors .
Photochromic lenses are embedded with organic microcrystalline molecules that change their properties when exposed to UV in sunlight , but become clear in artificial lighting with no UV .
Although you are undoubtedly aware of liquid crystal displays ( LCDs ) found in watches , calculators , computer screens , cellphones , flat screen televisions , and many other places , you may not be aware that they are based on polarization .
Liquid crystals are so named because their molecules can be aligned even though they are in a liquid .
Liquid crystals have the property that they can rotate the polarization of light passing through them by .
Furthermore , this property can be turned off by the application of a voltage , as illustrated in .
It is possible to manipulate this characteristic quickly and in small , well-defined regions to create the contrast patterns we see in so many LCD devices .
In flat screen LCD televisions , a large light is generated at the back of the TV .
The light travels to the front screen through millions of tiny units called pixels ( picture elements ) .
One of these is shown in ( a ) and ( b ) .
Each unit has three cells , with red , blue , or green filters , each controlled independently .
When the voltage across a liquid crystal is switched off , the liquid crystal passes the light through the particular filter .
We can vary the picture contrast by varying the strength of the voltage applied to the liquid crystal .
Many crystals and solutions rotate the plane of polarization of light passing through them .
Such substances are said to be optically active .
Examples include sugar water , insulin , and collagen .
In addition to depending on the type of substance , the amount and direction of rotation depend on several other factors .
Among these is the concentration of the substance , the distance the light travels through it , and the wavelength of light .
Optical activity is due to the asymmetrical shape of molecules in the substance , such as being helical .
Measurements of the rotation of polarized light passing through substances can thus be used to measure concentrations , a standard technique for sugars .
It can also give information on the shapes of molecules , such as proteins , and factors that affect their shapes , such as temperature and pH .
Glass and plastic become optically active when stressed : the greater the stress , the greater the effect .
Optical stress analysis on complicated shapes can be performed by making plastic models of them and observing them through crossed filters , as seen in .
It is apparent that the effect depends on wavelength as well as stress .
The wavelength dependence is sometimes also used for artistic purposes .
Another interesting phenomenon associated with polarized light is the ability of some crystals to split an unpolarized beam of light into two polarized beams .
This occurs because the crystal has one value for the index of refraction of polarized light but a different value for the index of refraction of light polarized in the perpendicular direction , so that each component has its own angle of refraction .
Such crystals are said to be birefringent , and , when aligned properly , two perpendicularly polarized beams will emerge from the crystal .
Birefringent crystals can be used to produce polarized beams from unpolarized light .
Some birefringent materials preferentially absorb one of the polarizations .
These materials are called dichroic and can produce polarization by this preferential absorption .
This is fundamentally how polarizing filters and other polarizers work .
This chapter introduces the major ideas of geometric optics , which describe the formation of images due to reflection and refraction .
It is called “ geometric ” optics because the images can be characterized using geometric constructions , such as ray diagrams .
We have seen that visible light is an electromagnetic wave ; however , its wave nature becomes evident only when light interacts with objects with dimensions comparable to the wavelength ( about 500 nm for visible light ) .
Therefore , the laws of geometric optics only apply to light interacting with objects much larger than the wavelength of the light .
You only have to look as far as the nearest bathroom to find an example of an image formed by a mirror .
Images in a plane mirror are the same size as the object , are located behind the mirror , and are oriented in the same direction as the object ( i.e. , “ upright ” ) .
To understand how this happens , consider .
Two rays emerge from point P , strike the mirror , and reflect into the observer ’ s eye .
Note that we use the law of reflection to construct the reflected rays .
If the reflected rays are extended backward behind the mirror ( see dashed lines in ) , they seem to originate from point Q .
This is where the image of point P is located .
If we repeat this process for point , we obtain its image at point .
You should convince yourself by using basic geometry that the image height ( the distance from Q to ) is the same as the object height ( the distance from P to ) .
By forming images of all points of the object , we obtain an upright image of the object behind the mirror .
Notice that the reflected rays appear to the observer to come directly from the image behind the mirror .
In reality , these rays come from the points on the mirror where they are reflected .
The image behind the mirror is called a virtual image because it can not be projected onto a screen—the rays only appear to originate from a common point behind the mirror .
If you walk behind the mirror , you can not see the image , because the rays do not go there .
However , in front of the mirror , the rays behave exactly as if they come from behind the mirror , so that is where the virtual image is located .
Later in this chapter , we discuss real images ; a real image can be projected onto a screen because the rays physically go through the image .
You can certainly see both real and virtual images .
The difference is that a virtual image can not be projected onto a screen , whereas a real image can .
The law of reflection tells us that the angle of incidence is the same as the angle of reflection .
Applying this to triangles PAB and QAB in and using basic geometry shows that they are congruent triangles .
This means that the distance PB from the object to the mirror is the same as the distance BQ from the mirror to the image .
The object distance ( denoted ) is the distance from the mirror to the object ( or , more generally , from the center of the optical element that creates its image ) .
Similarly , the image distance ( denoted ) is the distance from the mirror to the image ( or , more generally , from the center of the optical element that creates it ) .
If an object is situated in front of two mirrors , you may see images in both mirrors .
In addition , the image in the first mirror may act as an object for the second mirror , so the second mirror may form an image of the image .
If the mirrors are placed parallel to each other and the object is placed at a point other than the midpoint between them , then this process of imageof-an-image continues without end , as you may have noticed when standing in a hallway with mirrors on each side .
This is shown in , which shows three images produced by the blue object .
Notice that each reflection reverses front and back , just like pulling a right-hand glove inside out produces a left-hand glove ( this is why a reflection of your right hand is a left hand ) .
Thus , the fronts and backs of images 1 and 2 are both inverted with respect to the object , and the front and back of image 3 is inverted with respect to image 2 , which is the object for image 3 .
You may have noticed that image 3 is smaller than the object , whereas images 1 and 2 are the same size as the object .
The ratio of the image height with respect to the object height is called magnification .
More will be said about magnification in the next section .
Infinite reflections may terminate .
For instance , two mirrors at right angles form three images , as shown in part ( a ) of .
Images 1 and 2 result from rays that reflect from only a single mirror , but image 1,2 is formed by rays that reflect from both mirrors .
This is shown in the ray-tracing diagram in part ( b ) of .
To find image 1,2 , you have to look behind the corner of the two mirrors .
The image in a plane mirror has the same size as the object , is upright , and is the same distance behind the mirror as the object is in front of the mirror .
A curved mirror , on the other hand , can form images that may be larger or smaller than the object and may form either in front of the mirror or behind it .
In general , any curved surface will form an image , although some images make be so distorted as to be unrecognizable ( think of fun house mirrors ) .
Because curved mirrors can create such a rich variety of images , they are used in many optical devices that find many uses .
We will concentrate on spherical mirrors for the most part , because they are easier to manufacture than mirrors such as parabolic mirrors and so are more common .
We can define two general types of spherical mirrors .
If the reflecting surface is the outer side of the sphere , the mirror is called a convex mirror .
If the inside surface is the reflecting surface , it is called a concave mirror .
Symmetry is one of the major hallmarks of many optical devices , including mirrors and lenses .
The symmetry axis of such optical elements is often called the principal axis or optical axis .
For a spherical mirror , the optical axis passes through the mirror ’ s center of curvature and the mirror ’ s vertex , as shown in .
Consider rays that are parallel to the optical axis of a parabolic mirror , as shown in part ( a ) of .
Following the law of reflection , these rays are reflected so that they converge at a point , called the focal point .
Part ( b ) of this figure shows a spherical mirror that is large compared with its radius of curvature .
For this mirror , the reflected rays do not cross at the same point , so the mirror does not have a well-defined focal point .
This is called spherical aberration and results in a blurred image of an extended object .
Part ( c ) shows a spherical mirror that is small compared to its radius of curvature .
This mirror is a good approximation of a parabolic mirror , so rays that arrive parallel to the optical axis are reflected to a well-defined focal point .
The distance along the optical axis from the mirror to the focal point is called the focal length of the mirror .
A convex spherical mirror also has a focal point , as shown in .
Incident rays parallel to the optical axis are reflected from the mirror and seem to originate from point F at focal length f behind the mirror .
Thus , the focal point is virtual because no real rays actually pass through it ; they only appear to originate from it .
How does the focal length of a mirror relate to the mirror ’ s radius of curvature ?
shows a single ray that is reflected by a spherical concave mirror .
The incident ray is parallel to the optical axis .
The point at which the reflected ray crosses the optical axis is the focal point .
Note that all incident rays that are parallel to the optical axis are reflected through the focal point—we only show one ray for simplicity .
We want to find how the focal length FP ( denoted by f ) relates to the radius of curvature of the mirror , R , whose length is .
The law of reflection tells us that angles OXC and CXF are the same , and because the incident ray is parallel to the optical axis , angles OXC and XCP are also the same .
Thus , triangle CXF is an isosceles triangle with .
If the angle is small ( so that ; this is called the “ small-angle approximation ” ) , then or .
In this approximation , all rays are paraxial rays , which means that they make a small angle with the optical axis and are at a distance much less than the radius of curvature from the optical axis .
In this case , their angles of reflection are small angles , so .
Combined with some basic geometry , we can use ray tracing to find the focal point , the image location , and other information about how a mirror manipulates light .
In fact , we already used ray tracing above to locate the focal point of spherical mirrors , or the image distance of flat mirrors .
To locate the image of an object , you must locate at least two points of the image .
Locating each point requires drawing at least two rays from a point on the object and constructing their reflected rays .
The point at which the reflected rays intersect , either in real space or in virtual space , is where the corresponding point of the image is located .
To make ray tracing easier , we concentrate on four “ principal ” rays whose reflections are easy to construct .
shows a concave mirror and a convex mirror , each with an arrow-shaped object in front of it .
These are the objects whose images we want to locate by ray tracing .
To do so , we draw rays from point Q that is on the object but not on the optical axis .
We choose to draw our ray from the tip of the object .
Principal ray 1 goes from point Q and travels parallel to the optical axis .
The reflection of this ray must pass through the focal point , as discussed above .
Thus , for the concave mirror , the reflection of principal ray 1 goes through focal point F , as shown in part ( b ) of the figure .
For the convex mirror , the backward extension of the reflection of principal ray 1 goes through the focal point ( i.e. , a virtual focus ) .
Principal ray 2 travels first on the line going through the focal point and then is reflected back along a line parallel to the optical axis .
Principal ray 3 travels toward the center of curvature of the mirror , so it strikes the mirror at normal incidence and is reflected back along the line from which it came .
Finally , principal ray 4 strikes the vertex of the mirror and is reflected symmetrically about the optical axis .
The four principal rays intersect at point , which is where the image of point Q is located .
To locate point , drawing any two of these principle rays would suffice .
We are thus free to choose whichever of the principal rays we desire to locate the image .
Drawing more than two principal rays is sometimes useful to verify that the ray tracing is correct .
To completely locate the extended image , we need to locate a second point in the image , so that we know how the image is oriented .
To do this , we trace the principal rays from the base of the object .
In this case , all four principal rays run along the optical axis , reflect from the mirror , and then run back along the optical axis .
The difficulty is that , because these rays are collinear , we can not determine a unique point where they intersect .
All we know is that the base of the image is on the optical axis .
However , because the mirror is symmetrical from top to bottom , it does not change the vertical orientation of the object .
Thus , because the object is vertical , the image must be vertical .
Therefore , the image of the base of the object is on the optical axis directly above the image of the tip , as drawn in the figure .
For the concave mirror , the extended image in this case forms between the focal point and the center of curvature of the mirror .
It is inverted with respect to the object , is a real image , and is smaller than the object .
Were we to move the object closer to or farther from the mirror , the characteristics of the image would change .
For example , we show , as a later exercise , that an object placed between a concave mirror and its focal point leads to a virtual image that is upright and larger than the object .
For the convex mirror , the extended image forms between the focal point and the mirror .
It is upright with respect to the object , is a virtual image , and is smaller than the object .
Ray tracing is very useful for mirrors .
The rules for ray tracing are summarized here for reference : A ray travelling parallel to the optical axis of a spherical mirror is reflected along a line that goes through the focal point of the mirror ( ray 1 in ) .
A ray travelling along a line that goes through the focal point of a spherical mirror is reflected along a line parallel to the optical axis of the mirror ( ray 2 in ) .
A ray travelling along a line that goes through the center of curvature of a spherical mirror is reflected back along the same line ( ray 3 in ) .
A ray that strikes the vertex of a spherical mirror is reflected symmetrically about the optical axis of the mirror ( ray 4 in ) .
We use ray tracing to illustrate how images are formed by mirrors and to obtain numerical information about optical properties of the mirror .
If we assume that a mirror is small compared with its radius of curvature , we can also use algebra and geometry to derive a mirror equation , which we do in the next section .
Combining ray tracing with the mirror equation is a good way to analyze mirror systems .
For a plane mirror , we showed that the image formed has the same height and orientation as the object , and it is located at the same distance behind the mirror as the object is in front of the mirror .
Although the situation is a bit more complicated for curved mirrors , using geometry leads to simple formulas relating the object and image distances to the focal lengths of concave and convex mirrors .
Consider the object OP shown in .
The center of curvature of the mirror is labeled C and is a distance R from the vertex of the mirror , as marked in the figure .
The object and image distances are labeled and , and the object and image heights are labeled and , respectively .
Because the angles and are alternate interior angles , we know that they have the same magnitude .
However , they must differ in sign if we measure angles from the optical axis , so .
An analogous scenario holds for the angles and .
The law of reflection tells us that they have the same magnitude , but their signs must differ if we measure angles from the optical axis .
Taking the tangent of the angles and , and using the property that , gives us Similarly , taking the tangent of and gives Combining these two results gives After a little algebra , this becomes No approximation is required for this result , so it is exact .
However , as discussed above , in the small-angle approximation , .
Inserting this into the focal length of a spherical mirror is one-half the radius of curvature of the mirror , or gives the mirror equation : The mirror equation relates the image and object distances to the focal distance and is valid only in the small-angle approximation .
Although it was derived for a concave mirror , it also holds for convex mirrors ( proving this is left as an exercise ) .
We can extend the mirror equation to the case of a plane mirror by noting that a plane mirror has an infinite radius of curvature .
This means the focal point is at infinity , so the mirror equation simplifies to which is the same as obtained earlier .
Notice that we have been very careful with the signs in deriving the mirror equation .
For a plane mirror , the image distance has the opposite sign of the object distance .
Also , the real image formed by the concave mirror in is on the opposite side of the optical axis with respect to the object .
In this case , the image height should have the opposite sign of the object height .
To keep track of the signs of the various quantities in the mirror equation , we now introduce a sign convention .
Using a consistent sign convention is very important in geometric optics .
It assigns positive or negative values for the quantities that characterize an optical system .
Understanding the sign convention allows you to describe an image without constructing a ray diagram .
This text uses the following sign convention : The focal length f is positive for concave mirrors and negative for convex mirrors .
The image distance is positive for real images and negative for virtual images .
Notice that rule 1 means that the radius of curvature of a spherical mirror can be positive or negative .
What does it mean to have a negative radius of curvature ?
This means simply that the radius of curvature for a convex mirror is defined to be negative .
Let ’ s use the sign convention to further interpret the derivation of the mirror equation .
In deriving this equation , we found that the object and image heights are related by See .
Both the object and the image formed by the mirror in are real , so the object and image distances are both positive .
The highest point of the object is above the optical axis , so the object height is positive .
The image , however , is below the optical axis , so the image height is negative .
Thus , this sign convention is consistent with our derivation of the mirror equation .
in fact describes the linear magnification ( often simply called “ magnification ” ) of the image in terms of the object and image distances .
We thus define the dimensionless magnification m as follows : If m is positive , the image is upright , and if m is negative , the image is inverted .
If , the image is larger than the object , and if , the image is smaller than the object .
One of the solar technologies used today for generating electricity involves a device ( called a parabolic trough or concentrating collector ) that concentrates sunlight onto a blackened pipe that contains a fluid .
This heated fluid is pumped to a heat exchanger , where the thermal energy is transferred to another system that is used to generate steam and eventually generates electricity through a conventional steam cycle .
shows such a working system in southern California .
The real mirror is a parabolic cylinder with its focus located at the pipe ; however , we can approximate the mirror as exactly one-quarter of a circular cylinder .
If we want the rays from the sun to focus at 40.0 cm from the mirror , what is the radius of the mirror ?
What is the amount of sunlight concentrated onto the pipe , per meter of pipe length , assuming the insolation ( incident solar radiation ) is 900 ?
If the fluid-carrying pipe has a 2.00-cm diameter , what is the temperature increase of the fluid per meter of pipe over a period of 1 minute ?
Assume that all solar radiation incident on the reflector is absorbed by the pipe , and that the fluid is mineral oil .
First identify the physical principles involved .
Part ( a ) is related to the optics of spherical mirrors .
Part ( b ) involves a little math , primarily geometry .
Part ( c ) requires an understanding of heat and density .
The sun is the object , so the object distance is essentially infinity : .
The desired image distance is .
We use the mirror equation to find the focal length of the mirror : Thus , the radius of the mirror is .
The insolation is 900 .
You must find the cross-sectional area A of the concave mirror , since the power delivered is 900 .
The mirror in this case is a quarter-section of a cylinder , so the area for a length L of the mirror is .
The area for a length of 1.00 m is then The insolation on the 1.00-m length of pipe is then The increase in temperature is given by .
We are considering only one meter of pipe here and ignoring heat losses along the pipe .
A keratometer is a device used to measure the curvature of the cornea of the eye , particularly for fitting contact lenses .
Light is reflected from the cornea , which acts like a convex mirror , and the keratometer measures the magnification of the image .
The smaller the magnification , the smaller the radius of curvature of the cornea .
If the light source is 12 cm from the cornea and the image magnification is 0.032 , what is the radius of curvature of the cornea ?
If you find the focal length of the convex mirror formed by the cornea , then you know its radius of curvature ( it ’ s twice the focal length ) .
The object distance is and the magnification is .
First find the image distance and then solve for the focal length f .
Start with the equation for magnification , .
Solving for and inserting the given values yields where we retained an extra significant figure because this is an intermediate step in the calculation .
Solve the mirror equation for the focal length f and insert the known values for the object and image distances .
The result is The radius of curvature is twice the focal length , so The focal length is negative , so the focus is virtual , as expected for a concave mirror and a real object .
The radius of curvature found here is reasonable for a cornea .
The distance from cornea to retina in an adult eye is about 2.0 cm .
In practice , corneas may not be spherical , which complicates the job of fitting contact lenses .
Note that the image distance here is negative , consistent with the fact that the image is behind the mirror .
Thus , the image is virtual because no rays actually pass through it .
In the problems and exercises , you will show that , for a fixed object distance , a smaller radius of curvature corresponds to a smaller the magnification .
First make sure that image formation by a spherical mirror is involved .
Determine whether ray tracing , the mirror equation , or both are required .
A sketch is very useful even if ray tracing is not specifically required by the problem .
Write symbols and known values on the sketch .
Identify exactly what needs to be determined in the problem ( identify the unknowns ) .
Make a list of what is given or can be inferred from the problem as stated ( identify the knowns ) .
If ray tracing is required , use the ray-tracing rules listed near the beginning of this section .
Most quantitative problems require using the mirror equation .
Use the examples as guides for using the mirror equation .
Check to see whether the answer makes sense .
Do the signs of object distance , image distance , and focal length correspond with what is expected from ray tracing ?
Is the sign of the magnification correct ?
Are the object and image distances reasonable ?
The small-angle approximation is a cornerstone of the above discussion of image formation by a spherical mirror .
When this approximation is violated , then the image created by a spherical mirror becomes distorted .
Such distortion is called aberration .
Here we briefly discuss two specific types of aberrations : spherical aberration and coma .
Consider a broad beam of parallel rays impinging on a spherical mirror , as shown in .
The farther from the optical axis the rays strike , the worse the spherical mirror approximates a parabolic mirror .
Thus , these rays are not focused at the same point as rays that are near the optical axis , as shown in the figure .
Because of spherical aberration , the image of an extended object in a spherical mirror will be blurred .
Spherical aberrations are characteristic of the mirrors and lenses that we consider in the following section of this chapter ( more sophisticated mirrors and lenses are needed to eliminate spherical aberrations ) .
Coma is similar to spherical aberration , but arises when the incoming rays are not parallel to the optical axis , as shown in part ( b ) of .
Recall that the small-angle approximation holds for spherical mirrors that are small compared to their radius .
In this case , spherical mirrors are good approximations of parabolic mirrors .
Parabolic mirrors focus all rays that are parallel to the optical axis at the focal point .
However , parallel rays that are not parallel to the optical axis are focused at different heights and at different focal lengths , as show in part ( b ) of .
Because a spherical mirror is symmetric about the optical axis , the various colored rays in this figure create circles of the corresponding color on the focal plane .
Although a spherical mirror is shown in part ( b ) of , comatic aberration occurs also for parabolic mirrors—it does not result from a breakdown in the small-angle approximation .
Spherical aberration , however , occurs only for spherical mirrors and is a result of a breakdown in the small-angle approximation .
We will discuss both coma and spherical aberration later in this chapter , in connection with telescopes .
When rays of light propagate from one medium to another , these rays undergo refraction , which is when light waves are bent at the interface between two media .
The refracting surface can form an image in a similar fashion to a reflecting surface , except that the law of refraction ( Snell ’ s law ) is at the heart of the process instead of the law of reflection .
If you look at a straight rod partially submerged in water , it appears to bend at the surface .
The reason behind this curious effect is that the image of the rod inside the water forms a little closer to the surface than the actual position of the rod , so it does not line up with the part of the rod that is above the water .
The same phenomenon explains why a fish in water appears to be closer to the surface than it actually is .
To study image formation as a result of refraction , consider the following questions : What happens to the rays of light when they enter or pass through a different medium ?
Do the refracted rays originating from a single point meet at some point or diverge away from each other ?
To be concrete , we consider a simple system consisting of two media separated by a plane interface .
The object is in one medium and the observer is in the other .
The depth that you “ see ” is the image height and is called the apparent depth .
The actual depth of the fish is the object height .
The apparent depth depends on the angle at which you view the image .
For a view from above ( the so-called “ normal ” view ) , we can approximate the refraction angle to be small , and replace sin in Snell ’ s law by tan .
With this approximation , you can use the triangles and to show that the apparent depth is given by The derivation of this result is left as an exercise .
Thus , a fish appears at 3/4 of the real depth when viewed from above .
Spherical shapes play an important role in optics primarily because high-quality spherical shapes are far easier to manufacture than other curved surfaces .
To study refraction at a single spherical surface , we assume that the medium with the spherical surface at one end continues indefinitely ( a “ semi-infinite ” medium ) .
Consider a point source of light at point P in front of a convex surface made of glass ( see ) .
Let R be the radius of curvature , be the refractive index of the medium in which object point P is located , and be the refractive index of the medium with the spherical surface .
We want to know what happens as a result of refraction at this interface .
Because of the symmetry involved , it is sufficient to examine rays in only one plane .
The figure shows a ray of light that starts at the object point P , refracts at the interface , and goes through the image point .
We derive a formula relating the object distance , the image distance , and the radius of curvature R .
Applying Snell ’ s law to the ray emanating from point P gives .
We can find the location of the first focus by setting in the preceding equation .
Similarly , we can define a second focus or image focus where the image is formed for an object that is far away [ part ( b ) ] .
The location of the second focus is obtained from by setting : Note that the object focus is at a different distance from the vertex than the image focus because .
In this section , we use the Snell ’ s law to explore the properties of lenses and how they form images .
The word “ lens ” derives from the Latin word for a lentil bean , the shape of which is similar to a convex lens .
However , not all lenses have the same shape .
shows a variety of different lens shapes .
The vocabulary used to describe lenses is the same as that used for spherical mirrors : The axis of symmetry of a lens is called the optical axis , where this axis intersects the lens surface is called the vertex of the lens , and so forth .
Likewise , a concave or diverging lens is shaped so that all rays that enter it parallel to its optical axis diverge , as shown in part ( b ) .
To understand more precisely how a lens manipulates light , look closely at the top ray that goes through the converging lens in part ( a ) .
Because the index of refraction of the lens is greater than that of air , Snell ’ s law tells us that the ray is bent toward the perpendicular to the interface as it enters the lens .
Likewise , when the ray exits the lens , it is bent away from the perpendicular .
The same reasoning applies to the diverging lenses , as shown in part ( b ) .
The overall effect is that light rays are bent toward the optical axis for a converging lens and away from the optical axis for diverging lenses .
For a converging lens , the point at which the rays cross is the focal point F of the lens .
For a diverging lens , the point from which the rays appear to originate is the ( virtual ) focal point .
The distance from the center of the lens to its focal point is the focal length f of the lens .
A lens is considered to be thin if its thickness t is much less than the radii of curvature of both surfaces , as shown in .
In this case , the rays may be considered to bend once at the center of the lens .
For the case drawn in the figure , light ray 1 is parallel to the optical axis , so the outgoing ray is bent once at the center of the lens and goes through the focal point .
Another important characteristic of thin lenses is that light rays that pass through the center of the lens are undeviated , as shown by light ray 2 .
As noted in the initial discussion of Snell ’ s law , the paths of light rays are exactly reversible .
This means that the direction of the arrows could be reversed for all of the rays in .
For example , if a point-light source is placed at the focal point of a convex lens , as shown in , parallel light rays emerge from the other side .
Ray tracing is the technique of determining or following ( tracing ) the paths taken by light rays .
Ray tracing for thin lenses is very similar to the technique we used with spherical mirrors .
As for mirrors , ray tracing can accurately describe the operation of a lens .
A ray entering a diverging lens parallel to the optical axis exits along the line that passes through the focal point on the same side of the lens ( ray 1 in part ( b ) of the figure ) .
A ray passing through the center of either a converging or a diverging lens is not deviated ( ray 2 in parts ( a ) and ( b ) ) .
For a converging lens , a ray that passes through the focal point exits the lens parallel to the optical axis ( ray 3 in part ( a ) ) .
For a diverging lens , a ray that approaches along the line that passes through the focal point on the opposite side exits the lens parallel to the axis ( ray 3 in part ( b ) ) .
Thin lenses work quite well for monochromatic light ( i.e. , light of a single wavelength ) .
However , for light that contains several wavelengths ( e.g. , white light ) , the lenses work less well .
The problem is that , as we learned in the previous chapter , the index of refraction of a material depends on the wavelength of light .
This phenomenon is responsible for many colorful effects , such as rainbows .
Unfortunately , this phenomenon also leads to aberrations in images formed by lenses .
In particular , because the focal distance of the lens depends on the index of refraction , it also depends on the wavelength of the incident light .
This means that light of different wavelengths will focus at different points , resulting is so-called “ chromatic aberrations. ” In particular , the edges of an image of a white object will become colored and blurred .
Special lenses called doublets are capable of correcting chromatic aberrations .
A doublet is formed by gluing together a converging lens and a diverging lens .
The combined doublet lens produces significantly reduced chromatic aberrations .
We use ray tracing to investigate different types of images that can be created by a lens .
In some circumstances , a lens forms a real image , such as when a movie projector casts an image onto a screen .
In other cases , the image is a virtual image , which can not be projected onto a screen .
Where , for example , is the image formed by eyeglasses ?
We use ray tracing for thin lenses to illustrate how they form images , and then we develop equations to analyze quantitatively the properties of thin lenses .
Consider an object some distance away from a converging lens , as shown in .
To find the location and size of the image , we trace the paths of selected light rays originating from one point on the object , in this case , the tip of the arrow .
The figure shows three rays from many rays that emanate from the tip of the arrow .
These three rays can be traced by using the ray-tracing rules given above .
Ray 1 enters the lens parallel to the optical axis and passes through the focal point on the opposite side ( rule 1 ) .
Ray 2 passes through the center of the lens and is not deviated ( rule 2 ) .
Ray 3 passes through the focal point on its way to the lens and exits the lens parallel to the optical axis ( rule 3 ) .
The three rays cross at a single point on the opposite side of the lens .
Thus , the image of the tip of the arrow is located at this point .
All rays that come from the tip of the arrow and enter the lens are refracted and cross at the point shown .
After locating the image of the tip of the arrow , we need another point of the image to orient the entire image of the arrow .
We chose to locate the image base of the arrow , which is on the optical axis .
As explained in the section on spherical mirrors , the base will be on the optical axis just above the image of the tip of the arrow ( due to the top-bottom symmetry of the lens ) .
Thus , the image spans the optical axis to the ( negative ) height shown .
Rays from another point on the arrow , such as the middle of the arrow , cross at another common point , thus filling in the rest of the image .
Although three rays are traced in this figure , only two are necessary to locate a point of the image .
It is best to trace rays for which there are simple ray-tracing rules .
Several important distances appear in the figure .
As for a mirror , we define to be the object distance , or the distance of an object from the center of a lens .
The image distance is defined to be the distance of the image from the center of a lens .
The height of the object and the height of the image are indicated by and , respectively .
Images that appear upright relative to the object have positive heights , and those that are inverted have negative heights .
By using the rules of ray tracing and making a scale drawing with paper and pencil , like that in , we can accurately describe the location and size of an image .
But the real benefit of ray tracing is in visualizing how images are formed in a variety of situations .
We have seen that rays parallel to the optical axis are directed to the focal point of a converging lens .
In the case of a diverging lens , they come out in a direction such that they appear to be coming from the focal point on the opposite side of the lens ( i.e. , the side from which parallel rays enter the lens ) .
What happens to parallel rays that are not parallel to the optical axis ?
In the case of a converging lens , these rays do not converge at the focal point .
Instead , they come together on another point in the plane called the focal plane .
The focal plane contains the focal point and is perpendicular to the optical axis .
As shown in the figure , parallel rays focus where the ray through the center of the lens crosses the focal plane .
Ray tracing allows us to get a qualitative picture of image formation .
To obtain numeric information , we derive a pair of equations from a geometric analysis of ray tracing for thin lenses .
These equations , called the thin-lens equation and the lens maker ’ s equation , allow us to quantitatively analyze thin lenses .
Consider the thick bi-convex lens shown in .
The index of refraction of the surrounding medium is ( if the lens is in air , then ) and that of the lens is .
The radii of curvatures of the two sides are .
We wish to find a relation between the object distance , the image distance , and the parameters of the lens .
To derive the thin-lens equation , we consider the image formed by the first refracting surface ( i.e. , left surface ) and then use this image as the object for the second refracting surface .
In the figure , the image from the first refracting surface is , which is formed by extending backwards the rays from inside the lens ( these rays result from refraction at the first surface ) .
This is shown by the dashed lines in the figure .
Notice that this image is virtual because no rays actually pass through the point .
To find the image distance corresponding to the image , we use .
In this case , the object distance is , the image distance is , and the radius of curvature is .
Inserting these into gives The image is virtual and on the same side as the object , so and .
The first surface is convex toward the object , so .
To find the object distance for the object Q formed by refraction from the second interface , note that the role of the indices of refraction and are interchanged in .
In , the rays originate in the medium with index , whereas in , the rays originate in the medium with index .
Thus , we must interchange and in .
In addition , by consulting again , we see that the object distance is and the image distance is .
The radius of curvature is Inserting these quantities into gives The image is real and on the opposite side from the object , so and .
The second surface is convex away from the object , so .
can be simplified by noting that , where we have taken the absolute value because is a negative number , whereas both and t are positive .
We can dispense with the absolute value if we negate , which gives .
Inserting this into gives Summing and gives In the thin-lens approximation , we assume that the lens is very thin compared to the first image distance , or ( or , equivalently , ) .
In this case , the third and fourth terms on the left-hand side of cancel , leaving us with Dividing by gives us finally The left-hand side looks suspiciously like the mirror equation that we derived above for spherical mirrors .
As done for spherical mirrors , we can use ray tracing and geometry to show that , for a thin lens , where f is the focal length of the thin lens ( this derivation is left as an exercise ) .
This is the thin-lens equation .
The focal length of a thin lens is the same to the left and to the right of the lens .
Combining and gives which is called the lens maker ’ s equation .
It shows that the focal length of a thin lens depends only of the radii of curvature and the index of refraction of the lens and that of the surrounding medium .
f is positive for a converging lens and negative for a diverging lens .
R is positive for a surface convex toward the object , and negative for a surface concave toward object .
By using a finite-size object on the optical axis and ray tracing , you can show that the magnification m of an image is ( where the three lines mean “ is defined as ” ) .
This is exactly the same equation as we obtained for mirrors ( see ) .
If , then the image has the same vertical orientation as the object ( called an “ upright ” image ) .
If , then the image has the opposite vertical orientation as the object ( called an “ inverted ” image ) .
The thin-lens equation and the lens maker ’ s equation are broadly applicable to situations involving thin lenses .
We explore many features of image formation in the following examples .
Consider a thin converging lens .
Where does the image form and what type of image is formed as the object approaches the lens from infinity ?
This may be seen by using the thin-lens equation for a given focal length to plot the image distance as a function of object distance .
In other words , we plot for a given value of f .
For , the result is shown in part ( a ) of .
As the object approaches the focal plane , the image distance diverges to positive infinity .
This is expected because an object at the focal plane produces parallel rays that form an image at infinity ( i.e. , very far from the lens ) .
When the object is farther than the focal length from the lens , the image distance is positive , so the image is real , on the opposite side of the lens from the object , and inverted ( because ) .
When the object is closer than the focal length from the lens , the image distance becomes negative , which means that the image is virtual , on the same side of the lens as the object , and upright .
For a thin diverging lens of focal length , a similar plot of image distance vs. object distance is shown in part ( b ) .
In this case , the image distance is negative for all positive object distances , which means that the image is virtual , on the same side of the lens as the object , and upright .
These characteristics may also be seen by ray-tracing diagrams ( see ) .
To see a concrete example of upright and inverted images , look at , which shows images formed by converging lenses when the object ( the person ’ s face in this case ) is place at different distances from the lens .
In part ( a ) of the figure , the person ’ s face is farther than one focal length from the lens , so the image is inverted .
In part ( b ) , the person ’ s face is closer than one focal length from the lens , so the image is upright .
Work through the following examples to better understand how thin lenses work .
Determine whether ray tracing , the thin-lens equation , or both would be useful .
Even if ray tracing is not used , a careful sketch is always very useful .
Write symbols and values on the sketch .
Identify what needs to be determined in the problem ( identify the unknowns ) .
Make a list of what is given or can be inferred from the problem ( identify the knowns ) .
If ray tracing is required , use the ray-tracing rules listed near the beginning of this section .
Most quantitative problems require the use of the thin-lens equation and/or the lens maker ’ s equation .
Solve these for the unknowns and insert the given quantities or use both together to find two unknowns .
Check to see if the answer is reasonable .
Are the signs correct ?
Is the sketch or ray tracing consistent with the calculation ?
Find the radius of curvature of a biconcave lens symmetrically ground from a glass with index of refractive 1.55 so that its focal length in air is 20 cm ( for a biconcave lens , both surfaces have the same radius of curvature ) .
Use the thin-lens form of the lens maker ’ s equation : where and .
Since we are making a symmetric biconcave lens , we have .
We start with the thin-lens equation .
Solve this for the image distance and insert the given , object distance and focal length .
For , this gives The image is positive , so the image , is real , is on the opposite side of the lens from the object , and is 12.6 cm from the lens .
To find the magnification and orientation of the image , use The negative magnification means that the image is inverted .
Since , the image is smaller than the object .
The size of the image is given by For The image distance is negative , so the image is virtual , is on the same side of the lens as the object , and is 10 cm from the lens .
The magnification and orientation of the image are found from The positive magnification means that the image is upright ( i.e. , it has the same orientation as the object ) .
Since , the image is larger than the object .
The size of the image is For The image distance is positive , so the image is real , is on the opposite side of the lens from the object , and is 20.0 cm from the lens .
The magnification is The negative magnification means that the image is inverted .
Since , the image is the same size as the object .
When solving problems in geometric optics , we often need to combine ray tracing and the lens equations .
The following example demonstrates this approach .
To project an image of a light bulb on a screen 1.50 m away , you need to choose what type of lens to use ( converging or diverging ) and its focal length .
The distance between the lens and the lightbulb is fixed at 0.75 m. Also , what is the magnification and orientation of the image ?
The image must be real , so you choose to use a converging lens .
The focal length can be found by using the thin-lens equation and solving for the focal length .
The object distance is and the image distance is .
Solve the thin lens for the focal length and insert the desired object and image distances : The magnification is The minus sign for the magnification means that the image is inverted .
The focal length is positive , as expected for a converging lens .
Ray tracing can be used to check the calculation ( see ) .
As expected , the image is inverted , is real , and is larger than the object .
The human eye is perhaps the most interesting and important of all optical instruments .
Our eyes perform a vast number of functions : They allow us to sense direction , movement , colors , and distance .
In this section , we explore the geometric optics of the eye .
The eye is remarkable in how it forms images and in the richness of detail and color it can detect .
However , our eyes often need some correction to reach what is called “ normal ” vision .
shows the basic anatomy of the eye .
The cornea and lens form a system that , to a good approximation , acts as a single thin lens .
For clear vision , a real image must be projected onto the light-sensitive retina , which lies a fixed distance from the lens .
The flexible lens of the eye allows it to adjust the radius of curvature of the lens to produce an image on the retina for objects at different distances .
The center of the image falls on the fovea , which has the greatest density of light receptors and the greatest acuity ( sharpness ) in the visual field .
The variable opening ( i.e. , the pupil ) of the eye , along with chemical adaptation , allows the eye to detect light intensities from the lowest observable to times greater ( without damage ) .
This is an incredible range of detection .
Processing of visual nerve impulses begins with interconnections in the retina and continues in the brain .
The optic nerve conveys the signals received by the eye to the brain .
The indices of refraction in the eye are crucial to its ability to form images .
lists the indices of refraction relevant to the eye .
The biggest change in the index of refraction , which is where the light rays are most bent , occurs at the aircornea interface rather than at the aqueous humor-lens interface .
The ray diagram in shows image formation by the cornea and lens of the eye .
The cornea , which is itself a converging lens with a focal length of approximately 2.3 cm , provides most of the focusing power of the eye .
The lens , which is a converging lens with a focal length of about 6.4 cm , provides the finer focus needed to produce a clear image on the retina .
The cornea and lens can be treated as a single thin lens , even though the light rays pass through several layers of material ( such as cornea , aqueous humor , several layers in the lens , and vitreous humor ) , changing direction at each interface .
The image formed is much like the one produced by a single convex lens ( i.e. , a real , inverted image ) .
Although images formed in the eye are inverted , the brain inverts them once more to make them seem upright .
As noted , the image must fall precisely on the retina to produce clear vision—that is , the image distance must equal the lens-to-retina distance .
Because the lens-to-retina distance does not change , the image distance must be the same for objects at all distances .
The ciliary muscles adjust the shape of the eye lens for focusing on nearby or far objects .
By changing the shape of the eye lens , the eye changes the focal length of the lens .
This mechanism of the eye is called accommodation .
The nearest point an object can be placed so that the eye can form a clear image on the retina is called the near point of the eye .
Similarly , the far point is the farthest distance at which an object is clearly visible .
A person with normal vision can see objects clearly at distances ranging from 25 cm to essentially infinity .
The near point increases with age , becoming several meters for some older people .
In this text , we consider the near point to be 25 cm .
We can use the thin-lens equations to quantitatively examine image formation by the eye .
First , we define the optical power of a lens as with the focal length f given in meters .
The units of optical power are called “ diopters ” ( D ) .
That is , .
Optometrists prescribe common eyeglasses and contact lenses in units of diopters .
Find the net focal length and optical power of the eye .
The optical powers of the closely spaced lenses add , so .
Writing the equation for power in terms of the focal lengths gives Hence , the focal length of the eye ( cornea and lens together ) is The optical power of the eye is For clear vision , the image distance must equal the lens-to-retina distance .
Normal vision is possible for objects at distances to infinity .
The following example shows how to calculate the image distance for an object placed at the near point of the eye .
The net focal length of a particular human eye is 1.7 cm .
An object is placed at the near point of the eye .
How far behind the lens is a focused image formed ?
The near point is 25 cm from the eye , so the object distance is .
We determine the image distance from the lens equation : Therefore , the image is formed 1.8 cm behind the lens .
From the magnification formula , we find .
Since , the image is inverted in orientation with respect to the object .
From the absolute value of m we see that the image is much smaller than the object ; in fact , it is only 7 % of the size of the object .
The need for some type of vision correction is very common .
Typical vision defects are easy to understand with geometric optics , and some are simple to correct .
illustrates two common vision defects .
Nearsightedness , or myopia , is the ability to see near objects , whereas distant objects are blurry .
The eye overconverges the nearly parallel rays from a distant object , and the rays cross in front of the retina .
More divergent rays from a close object are converged on the retina for a clear image .
The distance to the farthest object that can be seen clearly is called the far point of the eye ( normally the far point is at infinity ) .
Farsightedness , or hyperopia , is the ability to see far objects clearly , whereas near objects are blurry .
A farsighted eye does not sufficiently converge the rays from a near object to make the rays meet on the retina .
Since the nearsighted eye overconverges light rays , the correction for nearsightedness consists of placing a diverging eyeglass lens in front of the eye , as shown in .
This reduces the optical power of an eye that is too powerful ( recall that the focal length of a diverging lens is negative , so its optical power is negative ) .
Another way to understand this correction is that a diverging lens will cause the incoming rays to diverge more to compensate for the excessive convergence caused by the lens system of the eye .
What optical power of eyeglass lens is needed to correct the vision of a nearsighted person whose far point is 30.0 cm ?
Assume the corrective lens is fixed 1.50 cm away from the eye .
You want this nearsighted person to be able to see distant objects clearly , which means that the eyeglass lens must produce an image 30.0 cm from the eye for an object at infinity .
An image 30.0 cm from the eye will be from the eyeglass lens .
Therefore , we must have when .
The image distance is negative because it is on the same side of the eyeglass lens as the object .
Since and are known , we can find the optical power of the eyeglass lens by using : The negative optical power indicates a diverging ( or concave ) lens , as expected .
If you examine eyeglasses for nearsighted people , you will find the lenses are thinnest in the center .
Additionally , if you examine a prescription for eyeglasses for nearsighted people , you will find that the prescribed optical power is negative and given in units of diopters .
Correcting farsightedness consists simply of using the opposite type of lens as for nearsightedness ( i.e. , a converging lens ) , as shown in .
Such a lens will produce an image of physical objects that are closer than the near point at a distance that is between the near point and the far point , so that the person can see the image clearly .
To determine the optical power needed for correction , you must therefore know the person ’ s near point , as explained in .
What optical power of eyeglass lens is needed to allow a farsighted person , whose near point is 1.00 m , to see an object clearly that is 25.0 cm from the eye ?
Assume the corrective lens is fixed 1.5 cm from the eye .
When an object is 25.0 cm from the person ’ s eyes , the eyeglass lens must produce an image 1.00 m away ( the near point ) , so that the person can see it clearly .
An image 1.00 m from the eye will be from the eyeglass lens because the eyeglass lens is 1.5 cm from the eye .
Therefore , , where the minus sign indicates that is from the eyeglass lens , so .
Since and are known , we can find the optical power of the eyeglass lens by using : the image is on the same side of the lens as the object .
The object The positive optical power indicates a converging ( convex ) lens , as expected .
If you examine eyeglasses of farsighted people , you will find the lenses to be thickest in the center .
In addition , prescription eyeglasses for farsighted people have a prescribed optical power that is positive .
Cameras are very common in our everyday life .
Between 1825 and 1827 , French inventor Nicéphore Niépce successfully photographed an image created by a primitive camera .
Since then , enormous progress has been achieved in the design of cameras and camera-based detectors .
Initially , photographs were recorded by using the light-sensitive reaction of silver-based compounds such as silver chloride or silver bromide .
Silver-based photographic paper was in common use until the advent of digital photography in the 1980s , which is intimately connected to charge-coupled device ( CCD ) detectors .
In a nutshell , a CCD is a semiconductor chip that records images as a matrix of tiny pixels , each pixel located in a “ bin ” in the surface .
Each pixel is capable of detecting the intensity of light impinging on it .
Color is brought into play by putting red- , blue- , and green-colored filters over the pixels , resulting in colored digital images .
At its best resolution , one CCD pixel corresponds to one pixel of the image .
To reduce the resolution and decrease the size of the file , we can “ bin ” several CCD pixels into one , resulting in a smaller but “ pixelated ” image .
Clearly , electronics is a big part of a digital camera ; however , the underlying physics is basic optics .
As a matter of fact , the optics of a camera are pretty much the same as those of a single lens with an object distance that is significantly larger than the lens ’ s focal distance .
For instance , let us consider the camera in a smartphone .
An average smartphone camera is equipped with a stationary wideangle lens with a focal length of about 4–5 mm .
( This focal length is about equal to the thickness of the phone . )
The image created by the lens is focused on the CCD detector mounted at the opposite side of the phone .
In a cell phone , the lens and the CCD can not move relative to each other .
So how do we make sure that both the images of a distant and a close object are in focus ?
Recall that a human eye can accommodate for distant and close images by changing its focal distance .
A cell phone camera can not do that because the distance from the lens to the detector is fixed .
Here is where the small focal distance becomes important .
Let us assume we have a camera with a 5-mm focal distance .
What is the image distance for a selfie ?
The object distance for a selfie ( the length of the hand holding the phone ) is about 50 cm .
Using the thin-lens equation , we can write We then obtain the image distance : Note that the object distance is 100 times larger than the focal distance .
We can clearly see that the 1/ ( 500 mm ) term is significantly smaller than 1/ ( 5 mm ) , which means that the image distance is pretty much equal to the lens ’ s focal length .
An actual calculation gives us the image distance .
This value is extremely close to the lens ’ s focal distance .
Now let us consider the case of a distant object .
Let us say that we would like to take a picture of a person standing about 5 m from us .
Using the thin-lens equation again , we obtain the image distance of 5.005 mm .
The farther the object is from the lens , the closer the image distance is to the focal distance .
At the limiting case of an infinitely distant object , we obtain the image distance exactly equal to the focal distance of the lens .
As you can see , the difference between the image distance for a selfie and the image distance for a distant object is just about 0.05 mm or 50 microns .
Even a short object distance such as the length of your hand is two orders of magnitude larger than the lens ’ s focal length , resulting in minute variations of the image distance .
( The 50-micron difference is smaller than the thickness of an average sheet of paper . )
Such a small difference can be easily accommodated by the same detector , positioned at the focal distance of the lens .
Image analysis software can help improve image quality .
Conventional point-and-shoot cameras often use a movable lens to change the lens-to-image distance .
Complex lenses of the more expensive mirror reflex cameras allow for superb quality photographic images .
The optics of these camera lenses is beyond the scope of this textbook .
The apparent size of an object perceived by the eye depends on the angle the object subtends from the eye .
As shown in , the object at A subtends a larger angle from the eye than when it is position at point B .
Thus , the object at A forms a larger image on the retina ( see ) than when it is positioned at B ( see ) .
Thus , objects that subtend large angles from the eye appear larger because they form larger images on the retina .
We have seen that , when an object is placed within a focal length of a convex lens , its image is virtual , upright , and larger than the object ( see part ( b ) of ) .
A convex lens used for this purpose is called a magnifying glass or a simple magnifier .
To account for the magnification of a magnifying lens , we compare the angle subtended by the image ( created by the lens ) with the angle subtended by the object ( viewed with no lens ) , as shown in .
We assume that the object is situated at the near point of the eye , because this is the object distance at which the unaided eye can form the largest image on the retina .
We will compare the magnified images created by a lens with this maximum image size for the unaided eye .
The magnification of an image when observed by the eye is the angular magnification M , which is defined by the ratio of the angle subtended by the image to the angle subtended by the object : Consider the situation shown in .
The magnifying lens is held a distance from the eye , and the image produced by the magnifier forms a distance L from the eye .
We want to calculate the angular magnification for any arbitrary L and .
In the small-angle approximation , the angular size of the image is .
The angular size of the object at the near point is .
Note that because the image is virtual , so we can dispense with the absolute value by explicitly inserting the minus sign : .
Inserting this into gives us the final equation for the angular magnification of a magnifying lens : Note that all the quantities in this equation have to be expressed in centimeters .
Often , we want the image to be at the nearpoint distance to get maximum magnification , and we hold the magnifying lens close to the eye .
In this case , gives which shows that the greatest magnification occurs for the lens with the shortest focal length .
In addition , when the image is at the near-point distance and the lens is held close to the eye , then and becomes where m is the linear magnification derived for spherical mirrors and thin lenses .
Another useful situation is when the image is at infinity .
then takes the form The resulting magnification is simply the ratio of the near-point distance to the focal length of the magnifying lens , so a lens with a shorter focal length gives a stronger magnification .
Although this magnification is smaller by 1 than the magnification obtained with the image at the near point , it provides for the most comfortable viewing conditions , because the eye is relaxed when viewing a distant object .
By comparing with , we see that the range of angular magnification of a given converging lens is A jeweler wishes to inspect a 3.0-mm-diameter diamond with a magnifier .
The diamond is held at the jeweler ’ s near point ( 25 cm ) , and the jeweler holds the magnifying lens close to his eye .
( a ) What should the focal length of the magnifying lens be to see a 15-mm-diameter image of the diamond ?
( b ) What should the focal length of the magnifying lens be to obtain magnification ?
We need to determine the requisite magnification of the magnifier .
Because the jeweler holds the magnifying lens close to his eye , we can use to find the focal length of the magnifying lens .
The required linear magnification is the ratio of the desired image diameter to the diamond ’ s actual diameter .
The result is Note that a greater magnification is achieved by using a lens with a smaller focal length .
We thus need to use a lens with radii of curvature that are less than a few centimeters and hold it very close to our eye .
This is not very convenient .
A compound microscope , explored in the following section , can overcome this drawback .
Microscopes and telescopes are major instruments that have contributed hugely to our current understanding of the microand macroscopic worlds .
The invention of these devices led to numerous discoveries in disciplines such as physics , astronomy , and biology , to name a few .
In this section , we explain the basic physics that make these instruments work .
Although the eye is marvelous in its ability to see objects large and small , it obviously is limited in the smallest details it can detect .
The desire to see beyond what is possible with the naked eye led to the use of optical instruments .
We have seen that a simple convex lens can create a magnified image , but it is hard to get large magnification with such a lens .
A magnification greater than is difficult without distorting the image .
To get higher magnification , we can combine the simple magnifying glass with one or more additional lenses .
In this section , we examine microscopes that enlarge the details that we can not see with the naked eye .
Microscopes were first developed in the early 1600s by eyeglass makers in The Netherlands and Denmark .
The simplest compound microscope is constructed from two convex lenses .
The objective lens is a convex lens of short focal length ( i.e. , high power ) with typical magnification from to .
The eyepiece , also referred to as the ocular , is a convex lens of longer focal length .
The purpose of a microscope is to create magnified images of small objects , and both lenses contribute to the final magnification .
Also , the final enlarged image is produced sufficiently far from the observer to be easily viewed , since the eye can not focus on objects or images that are too close ( i.e. , closer than the near point of the eye ) .
To see how the microscope in forms an image , consider its two lenses in succession .
The object is just beyond the focal length of the objective lens , producing a real , inverted image that is larger than the object .
This first image serves as the object for the second lens , or eyepiece .
The eyepiece is positioned so that the first image is within its focal length , so that it can further magnify the image .
In a sense , it acts as a magnifying glass that magnifies the intermediate image produced by the objective .
The image produced by the eyepiece is a magnified virtual image .
The final image remains inverted but is farther from the observer than the object , making it easy to view .
The eye views the virtual image created by the eyepiece , which serves as the object for the lens in the eye .
The virtual image formed by the eyepiece is well outside the focal length of the eye , so the eye forms a real image on the retina .
The magnification of the microscope is the product of the linear magnification by the objective and the angular magnification by the eyepiece .
These are given by and are the focal lengths of the objective and the eyepiece , respectively .
We assume that the final image Here , is formed at the near point of the eye , providing the largest magnification .
Note that the angular magnification of the eyepiece is the same as obtained earlier for the simple magnifying glass .
This should not be surprising , because the eyepiece is essentially a magnifying glass , and the same physics applies here .
The objective and eyepiece are separated by 23.0 cm .
This situation is similar to that shown in .
To find the overall magnification , we must know the linear magnification of the objective and the angular magnification of the eyepiece .
We can use , but we need to use the thin-lens equation to find the image distance gives Solving the thin-lens equation for of the objective .
Inserting this result into along with the known values gives and Both the objective and the eyepiece contribute to the overall magnification , which is large and negative , consistent with , where the image is seen to be large and inverted .
In this case , the image is virtual and inverted , which can not happen for a single element ( see ) .
We now calculate the magnifying power of a microscope when the image is at infinity , as shown in , because this makes for the most relaxed viewing .
The magnifying power of the microscope is the product of linear magnification and from of the objective and the angular magnification of the eyepiece .
We know that the thin-lens equation we obtain If the final image is at infinity , then the image created by the objective must be located at the focal point of the eyepiece .
This may be seen by considering the thin-lens equation with or by recalling that rays that pass through the focal point exit the lens parallel to each other , which is equivalent to focusing at infinity .
For many microscopes , the distance between the image-side focal point of the objective and the object-side focal point of the eyepiece is standardized at .
This distance is called the tube length of the microscope .
From , we see that .
Inserting this into gives We now need to calculate the angular magnification of the eyepiece with the image at infinity .
Using and working in the small-angle approximation , we have is the height of the image formed by the objective , which is the object of the eyepiece .
Thus , the angular magnification of the eyepiece is and , where The net magnifying power of the compound microscope with the image at infinity is therefore The focal distances must be in centimeters .
The minus sign indicates that the final image is inverted .
Note that the only variables in the equation are the focal distances of the eyepiece and the objective , which makes this equation particularly useful .
Telescopes are meant for viewing distant objects and produce an image that is larger than the image produced in the unaided eye .
Telescopes gather far more light than the eye , allowing dim objects to be observed with greater magnification and better resolution .
Telescopes were invented around 1600 , and Galileo was the first to use them to study the heavens , with monumental consequences .
He observed the moons of Jupiter , the craters and mountains on the moon , the details of sunspots , and the fact that the Milky Way is composed of a vast number of individual stars .
Part ( a ) of shows a refracting telescope made of two lenses .
The first lens , called the objective , forms a real image within the focal length of the second lens , which is called the eyepiece .
The image of the objective lens serves as the object for the eyepiece , which forms a magnified virtual image that is observed by the eye .
This design is what Galileo used to observe the heavens .
Although the arrangement of the lenses in a refracting telescope looks similar to that in a microscope , there are important differences .
In a telescope , the real object is far away and the intermediate image is smaller than the object .
In a microscope , the real object is very close and the intermediate image is larger than the object .
In both the telescope and the microscope , the eyepiece magnifies the intermediate image ; in the telescope , however , this is the only magnification .
The most common two-lens telescope is shown in part ( b ) of the figure .
The object is so far from the telescope that it , so the incoming rays are essentially is essentially at infinity compared with the focal lengths of the lenses , as shown in the figure , and is not parallel and focus on the focal plane .
Thus , the first image is produced at large compared with what you might see by looking directly at the object .
If we assume that these planes are superposed , we have the situation shown in .
We further assume that the angles and are small , so that the small-angle approximation holds .
If the image formed at the focal plane has height h , then where the minus sign is introduced because the height is negative if we measure both angles in the counterclockwise direction .
Inserting these expressions into gives Thus , to obtain the greatest angular magnification , it is best to have an objective with a long focal length and an eyepiece with a short focal length .
The greater the angular magnification M , the larger an object will appear when viewed through a telescope , making more details visible .
Limits to observable details are imposed by many factors , including lens quality and atmospheric disturbance .
Typical eyepieces have focal lengths of 2.5 cm or 1.25 cm .
If the objective of the telescope has a focal length of 1 meter , then these eyepieces result in magnifications of and , respectively .
Thus , the angular magnifications make the image appear 40 times or 80 times closer than the real object .
The minus sign in the magnification indicates the image is inverted , which is unimportant for observing the stars but is a real problem for other applications , such as telescopes on ships or telescopic gun sights .
If an upright image is needed , Galileo ’ s arrangement in part ( a ) of can be used .
But a more common arrangement is to use a third convex lens as an eyepiece , increasing the distance between the first two and inverting the image once again , as seen in .
The largest refracting telescope in the world is the 40-inch diameter Yerkes telescope located at Lake Geneva , Wisconsin , and operated by the University of Chicago .
It is very difficult and expensive to build large refracting telescopes .
You need large defect-free lenses , which in itself is a technically demanding task .
A refracting telescope basically looks like a tube with a support structure to rotate it in different directions .
A refracting telescope suffers from several problems .
The aberration of lenses causes the image to be blurred .
Also , as the lenses become thicker for larger lenses , more light is absorbed , making faint stars more difficult to observe .
Large lenses are also very heavy and deform under their own weight .
Some of these problems with refracting telescopes are addressed by avoiding refraction for collecting light and instead using a curved mirror in its place , as devised by Isaac Newton .
These telescopes are called reflecting telescopes .
Isaac Newton designed the first reflecting telescope around 1670 to solve the problem of chromatic aberration that happens in all refracting telescopes .
In chromatic aberration , light of different colors refracts by slightly different amounts in the lens .
As a result , a rainbow appears around the image and the image appears blurred .
In the reflecting telescope , light rays from a distant source fall upon the surface of a concave mirror fixed at the bottom end of the tube .
The use of a mirror instead of a lens eliminates chromatic aberration .
The concave mirror focuses the rays on its focal plane .
The design problem is how to observe the focused image .
Newton used a design in which the focused light from the concave mirror was reflected to one side of the tube into an eyepiece [ part ( a ) of ] .
This arrangement is common in many amateur telescopes and is called the Newtonian design .
Some telescopes reflect the light back toward the middle of the concave mirror using a convex mirror .
In this arrangement , the light-gathering concave mirror has a hole in the middle [ part ( b ) of the figure ] .
The light then is incident on an eyepiece lens .
This arrangement of the objective and eyepiece is called the Cassegrain design .
Most big telescopes , including the Hubble space telescope , are of this design .
Other arrangements are also possible .
In some telescopes , a light detector is placed right at the spot where light is focused by the curved mirror .
Most astronomical research telescopes are now of the reflecting type .
One of the earliest large telescopes of this kind is the Hale 200-inch ( or 5-meter ) telescope built on Mount Palomar in southern California , which has a 200 inch-diameter mirror .
One of the largest telescopes in the world is the 10-meter Keck telescope at the Keck Observatory on the summit of the dormant Mauna Kea volcano in Hawaii .
The Keck Observatory operates two 10-meter telescopes .
Each is not a single mirror , but is instead made up of 36 hexagonal mirrors .
Furthermore , the two telescopes on the Keck can work together , which increases their power to an effective 85-meter mirror .
The Hubble telescope is another large reflecting telescope with a 2.4 meter-diameter primary mirror .
The Hubble was put into orbit around Earth in 1990 .
The angular magnification M of a reflecting telescope is also given by .
For a spherical mirror , the focal length is half the radius of curvature , so making a large objective mirror not only helps the telescope collect more light but also increases the magnification of the image .
The most certain indication of a wave is interference .
This wave characteristic is most prominent when the wave interacts with an object that is not large compared with the wavelength .
Interference is observed for water waves , sound waves , light waves , and , in fact , all types of waves .
The same is true for the colors seen in an oil slick or in the light reflected from a DVD disc .
These and other interesting phenomena can not be explained fully by geometric optics .
In these cases , light interacts with objects and exhibits wave characteristics .
The branch of optics that considers the behavior of light when it exhibits wave characteristics is called wave optics ( sometimes called physical optics ) .
It is the topic of this chapter .
The Dutch physicist Christiaan Huygens ( 1629–1695 ) thought that light was a wave , but Isaac Newton did not .
Newton thought that there were other explanations for color , and for the interference and diffraction effects that were observable at the time .
Owing to Newton ’ s tremendous reputation , his view generally prevailed ; the fact that Huygens ’ s principle worked was not considered direct evidence proving that light is a wave .
The acceptance of the wave character of light came many years later in 1801 , when the English physicist and physician Thomas Young ( 1773–1829 ) demonstrated optical interference with his now-classic double-slit experiment .
If there were not one but two sources of waves , the waves could be made to interfere , as in the case of waves on water .
If light is an electromagnetic wave , it must therefore exhibit interference effects under appropriate circumstances .
In Young ’ s experiment , sunlight was passed through a pinhole on a board .
The emerging beam fell on two pinholes on a second board .
The light emanating from the two pinholes then fell on a screen where a pattern of bright and dark spots was observed .
This pattern , called fringes , can only be explained through interference , a wave phenomenon .
We can analyze double-slit interference with the help of , which depicts an apparatus analogous to Young ’ s .
Light from a monochromatic source falls on a slit .
The light emanating from is incident on two other slits and that are equidistant from .
A pattern of interference fringes on the screen is then produced by the light emanating from and .
All slits are assumed to be so narrow that they can be considered secondary point sources for Huygens ’ wavelets .
The sources and are then said to be coherent .
By coherent waves , we mean the waves are in phase or have a definite phase relationship .
The term incoherent means the waves have random phase relationships , which would be the case if and were illuminated by two independent light sources , rather than a single source .
Two independent light sources ( which may be two separate areas within the same lamp or the Sun ) would generally not emit their light in unison , that is , not coherently .
Also , because and are the same distance from , the amplitudes of the two Huygens wavelets are equal .
Young used sunlight , where each wavelength forms its own pattern , making the effect more difficult to see .
In the following discussion , we illustrate the double-slit experiment with monochromatic light ( single ) to clarify the effect .
shows the pure constructive and destructive interference of two waves having the same wavelength and amplitude .
When light passes through narrow slits , the slits act as sources of coherent waves and light spreads out as semicircular waves , as shown in ( a ) .
Pure constructive interference occurs where the waves are crest to crest or trough to trough .
Pure destructive interference occurs where they are crest to trough .
The light must fall on a screen and be scattered into our eyes for us to see the pattern .
An analogous pattern for water waves is shown in .
Note that regions of constructive and destructive interference move out from the slits at well-defined angles to the original beam .
These angles depend on wavelength and the distance between the slits , as we shall see below .
To understand the double-slit interference pattern , consider how two waves travel from the slits to the screen .
Each slit is a different distance from a given point on the screen .
Thus , different numbers of wavelengths fit into each path .
Waves start out from the slits in phase ( crest to crest ) , but they may end up out of phase ( crest to trough ) at the screen if the paths differ in length by half a wavelength , interfering destructively .
If the paths differ by a whole wavelength , then the waves arrive in phase ( crest to crest ) at the screen , interfering constructively .
More generally , if the path length difference between the two waves is any half-integral number of wavelengths [ ( 1 / 2 ) , ( 3 / 2 ) , ( 5 / 2 ) , etc .
] , then destructive interference occurs .
Similarly , if the path length difference is any integral number of wavelengths ( , 2 , 3 , etc .
) , then constructive interference occurs .
These conditions can be expressed as equations : ( a ) shows how to determine the path length difference for waves traveling from two slits to a common point on a screen .
If the screen is a large distance away compared with the distance between the slits , then the angle between the path and a line from the slits to the screen [ part ( b ) ] is nearly the same for each path .
In other words , and are essentially parallel .
The lengths of and differ by , as indicated by the two dashed lines in the figure .
Simple trigonometry shows where d is the distance between the slits .
We call m the order of the interference .
For example , is fourth-order interference .
The equations for double-slit interference imply that a series of bright and dark lines are formed .
For vertical slits , the light spreads out horizontally on either side of the incident beam into a pattern called interference fringes .
The closer the slits are , the more the bright fringes spread apart .
We can see this by examining the equation .
For fixed and m , the smaller d is , the larger must be , since .
This is consistent with our contention that wave effects are most noticeable when the object the wave encounters ( here , slits a distance d apart ) is small .
Small d gives large , hence , a large effect .
Referring back to part ( a ) of the figure , is typically small enough that , where is the distance from the central maximum to the m th bright fringe and D is the distance between the slit and the screen .
may then be written as or Suppose you pass light from a He-Ne laser through two slits separated by 0.0100 mm and find that the third bright line on a screen is formed at an angle of relative to the incident beam .
What is the wavelength of the light ?
The phenomenon is two-slit interference as illustrated in and the third bright line is due to thirdorder constructive interference , which means that .
We are given and .
The wavelength can thus be found using the equation for constructive interference .
Solving for the wavelength gives Substituting known values yields To three digits , this is the wavelength of light emitted by the common He-Ne laser .
Not by coincidence , this red color is similar to that emitted by neon lights .
More important , however , is the fact that interference patterns can be used to measure wavelength .
Young did this for visible wavelengths .
This analytical techinque is still widely used to measure electromagnetic spectra .
For a given order , the angle for constructive interference increases with , so that spectra ( measurements of intensity versus wavelength ) can be obtained .
Interference patterns do not have an infinite number of lines , since there is a limit to how big m can be .
What is the highest-order constructive interference possible with the system described in the preceding example ?
The equation ( for ) describes constructive interference from two slits .
For fixed values of , the larger m is , the larger is .
However , the maximum value that can have is 1 , for an angle of .
( Larger angles imply that light goes backward and does not reach the screen at all . )
Let us find what value of m corresponds to this maximum diffraction angle .
Solving the equation for m gives Taking and substituting the values of from the preceding example gives Therefore , the largest integer m can be is 15 , or .
The number of fringes depends on the wavelength and slit separation .
The number of fringes is very large for large slit separations .
However , recall ( see and the introduction for this chapter ) that wave interference is only prominent when the wave interacts with objects that are not large compared to the wavelength .
We also note that the fringes get fainter farther away from the center .
Consequently , not all 15 fringes may be observable .
Check Your Understanding In the system used in the preceding examples , at what angles are the first and the second bright fringes formed ?
Analyzing the interference of light passing through two slits lays out the theoretical framework of interference and gives us a historical insight into Thomas Young ’ s experiments .
However , much of the modern-day application of slit interference uses not just two slits but many , approaching infinity for practical purposes .
The key optical element is called a diffraction grating , an important tool in optical analysis , which we discuss in detail in .
Here , we start the analysis of multiple-slit interference by taking the results from our analysis of the double slit and extending it to configurations with three , four , and much larger numbers of slits .
shows the simplest case of multiple-slit interference , with three slits , or .
The spacing between slits is d , and the path length difference between adjacent slits is , same as the case for the double slit .
What is new is that the path length difference for the first and the third slits is .
The condition for constructive interference is the same as for the double slit , that is When this condition is met , is automatically a multiple of , so all three rays combine constructively , and the bright fringes that occur here are called principal maxima .
But what happens when the path length difference between adjacent slits is only ?
We can think of the first and second rays as interfering destructively , but the third ray remains unaltered .
Instead of obtaining a dark fringe , or a minimum , as we did for the double slit , we see a secondary maximum with intensity lower than the principal maxima .
In general , for N slits , these secondary maxima occur whenever an unpaired ray is present that does not go away due to destructive interference .
This occurs at evenly spaced positions between the principal maxima .
The amplitude of the electromagnetic wave is correspondingly diminished to of the wave at the principal maxima , and the light intensity , being proportional to the square of the wave amplitude , is diminished to of the intensity compared to the principal maxima .
As shows , a dark fringe is located between every maximum ( principal or secondary ) .
As N grows larger and the number of bright and dark fringes increase , the widths of the maxima become narrower due to the closely located neighboring dark fringes .
Because the total amount of light energy remains unaltered , narrower maxima require that each maximum reaches a correspondingly higher intensity .
The bright colors seen in an oil slick floating on water or in a sunlit soap bubble are caused by interference .
The brightest colors are those that interfere constructively .
This interference is between light reflected from different surfaces of a thin film ; thus , the effect is known as thin-film interference .
As we noted before , interference effects are most prominent when light interacts with something having a size similar to its wavelength .
A thin film is one having a thickness t smaller than a few times the wavelength of light , .
Since color is associated indirectly with and because all interference depends in some way on the ratio of to the size of the object involved , we should expect to see different colors for different thicknesses of a film , as in .
What causes thin-film interference ?
shows how light reflected from the top and bottom surfaces of a film can interfere .
Incident light is only partially reflected from the top surface of the film ( ray 1 ) .
The remainder enters the film and is itself partially reflected from the bottom surface .
Part of the light reflected from the bottom surface can emerge from the top of the film ( ray 2 ) and interfere with light reflected from the top ( ray 1 ) .
The ray that enters the film travels a greater distance , so it may be in or out of phase with the ray reflected from the top .
However , consider for a moment , again , the bubbles in .
The bubbles are darkest where they are thinnest .
Furthermore , if you observe a soap bubble carefully , you will note it gets dark at the point where it breaks .
For very thin films , the difference in path lengths of rays 1 and 2 in is negligible , so why should they interfere destructively and not constructively ?
The answer is that a phase change can occur upon reflection , as discussed next .
We saw earlier that reflection of mechanical waves can involve a phase change .
For example , a traveling wave on a string is inverted ( i.e. , a phase change ) upon reflection at a boundary to which a heavier string is tied .
However , if the second string is lighter ( or more precisely , of a lower linear density ) , no inversion occurs .
Light waves produce the same effect , but the deciding parameter for light is the index of refraction .
Light waves undergo a or radians phase change upon reflection at an interface beyond which is a medium of higher index of refraction .
No phase change takes place when reflecting from a medium of lower refractive index .
Because of the periodic nature of waves , this phase change or inversion is equivalent to in distance travelled , or path length .
Both the path length and refractive indices are important factors in thin-film interference .
If the film in is a soap bubble ( essentially water with air on both sides ) , then a phase shift of occurs for ray 1 but not for ray 2 .
Thus , when the film is very thin and the path length difference between the two rays is negligible , they are exactly out of phase , and destructive interference occurs at all wavelengths .
Thus , the soap bubble is dark here .
The thickness of the film relative to the wavelength of light is the other crucial factor in thin-film interference .
Ray 2 in travels a greater distance than ray 1 .
For light incident perpendicular to the surface , ray 2 travels a distance approximately 2 t farther than ray 1 .
Sophisticated cameras use a series of several lenses .
Light can reflect from the surfaces of these various lenses and degrade image clarity .
To limit these reflections , lenses are coated with a thin layer of magnesium fluoride , which causes destructive thin-film interference .
What is the thinnest this film can be , if its index of refraction is 1.38 and it is designed to limit the reflection of 550-nm light , normally the most intense visible wavelength ?
Assume the index of refraction of the glass is 1.52 .
Refer to and use for air , , and .
Both ray 1 and ray 2 have a shift upon reflection .
Thus , to obtain destructive interference , ray 2 needs to travel a half wavelength farther than ray 1 .
For rays incident perpendicularly , the path length difference is 2 t .
To obtain destructive interference here , where is the wavelength in the film and is given by .
Thus , Solving for t and entering known values yields Films such as the one in this example are most effective in producing destructive interference when the thinnest layer is used , since light over a broader range of incident angles is reduced in intensity .
These films are called nonreflective coatings ; this is only an approximately correct description , though , since other wavelengths are only partially cancelled .
Nonreflective coatings are also used in car windows and sunglasses .
Thin-film interference is most constructive or most destructive when the path length difference for the two rays is an integral or half-integral wavelength .
That is , for rays incident perpendicularly , To know whether interference is constructive or destructive , you must also determine if there is a phase change upon reflection .
Thin-film interference thus depends on film thickness , the wavelength of light , and the refractive indices .
For white light incident on a film that varies in thickness , you can observe rainbow colors of constructive interference for various wavelengths as the thickness varies .
( a ) What are the three smallest thicknesses of a soap bubble that produce constructive interference for red light with a wavelength of 650 nm ?
The index of refraction of soap is taken to be the same as that of water .
( b ) What three smallest thicknesses give destructive interference ?
Use to visualize the bubble , which acts as a thin film between two layers of air .
Thus for air , and for soap ( equivalent to water ) .
There is a shift for ray 1 reflected from the top surface of the bubble and no shift for ray 2 reflected from the bottom surface .
To get constructive interference , then , the path length difference ( 2 t ) must be a half-integral multiple of the wavelength—the first three being , and .
To get destructive interference , the path length difference must be an integral multiple of the wavelength—the first three being 0 , , and .
Constructive interference occurs here when Thus , the smallest constructive thickness is The next thickness that gives constructive interference is , so that Finally , the third thickness producing constructive interference is , so that b .
For destructive interference , the path length difference here is an integral multiple of the wavelength .
The first occurs for zero thickness , since there is a phase change at the top surface , that is , the very thin ( or negligibly thin ) case discussed above .
The first non-zero thickness producing destructive interference is Substituting known values gives Finally , the third destructive thickness is , so that If the bubble were illuminated with pure red light , we would see bright and dark bands at very uniform increases in thickness .
First would be a dark band at 0 thickness , then bright at 122 nm thickness , then dark at 244 nm , bright at 366 nm , dark at 488 nm , and bright at 610 nm .
If the bubble varied smoothly in thickness , like a smooth wedge , then the bands would be evenly spaced .
Check Your Understanding Going further with , what are the next two thicknesses of soap bubble that would lead to ( a ) constructive interference , and ( b ) destructive interference ?
Another example of thin-film interference can be seen when microscope slides are separated ( see ) .
The slides are very flat , so that the wedge of air between them increases in thickness very uniformly .
A phase change occurs at the second surface but not the first , so a dark band forms where the slides touch .
The rainbow colors of constructive interference repeat , going from violet to red again and again as the distance between the slides increases .
As the layer of air increases , the bands become more difficult to see , because slight changes in incident angle have greater effects on path length differences .
If monochromatic light instead of white light is used , then bright and dark bands are obtained rather than repeating rainbow colors .
An important application of thin-film interference is found in the manufacturing of optical instruments .
A lens or mirror can be compared with a master as it is being ground , allowing it to be shaped to an accuracy of less than a wavelength over its entire surface .
illustrates the phenomenon called Newton ’ s rings , which occurs when the plane surfaces of two lenses are placed together .
( The circular bands are called Newton ’ s rings because Isaac Newton described them and their use in detail .
Newton did not discover them ; Robert Hooke did , and Newton did not believe they were due to the wave character of light . )
Each successive ring of a given color indicates an increase of only half a wavelength in the distance between the lens and the blank , so that great precision can be obtained .
Once the lens is perfect , no rings appear .
Thin-film interference has many other applications , both in nature and in manufacturing .
The wings of certain moths and butterflies have nearly iridescent colors due to thin-film interference .
In addition to pigmentation , the wing ’ s color is affected greatly by constructive interference of certain wavelengths reflected from its film-coated surface .
Some car manufacturers offer special paint jobs that use thin-film interference to produce colors that change with angle .
This expensive option is based on variation of thin-film path length differences with angle .
Security features on credit cards , banknotes , driving licenses , and similar items prone to forgery use thin-film interference , diffraction gratings , or holograms .
As early as 1998 , Australia led the way with dollar bills printed on polymer with a diffraction grating security feature , making the currency difficult to forge .
Other countries , such as Canada , New Zealand , and Taiwan , are using similar technologies , while US currency includes a thin-film interference effect .
The Michelson interferometer ( invented by the American physicist Albert A. Michelson , 1852–1931 ) is a precision instrument that produces interference fringes by splitting a light beam into two parts and then recombining them after they have traveled different optical paths .
depicts the interferometer and the path of a light beam from a single point on the extended source S , which is a ground-glass plate that diffuses the light from a monochromatic lamp of wavelength .
The beam strikes the half-silvered mirror M , where half of it is reflected to the side and half passes through the mirror .
The reflected light travels to the movable plane mirror , where it is reflected back through M to the observer .
The transmitted half of the original beam is reflected back by the stationary mirror and then toward the observer by M. Because both beams originate from the same point on the source , they are coherent and therefore interfere .
Notice from the figure that one beam passes through M three times and the other only once .
To ensure that both beams traverse the same thickness of glass , a compensator plate C of transparent glass is placed in the arm containing .
The path difference of the two beams when they recombine is , where is the distance between M and , and is the distance between M and .
Suppose this path difference is an integer number of wavelengths .
Then , constructive interference occurs and a bright image of the point on the source is seen at the observer .
Now the light from any other point on the source whose two beams have this same path difference also undergoes constructive interference and produces a bright image .
The collection of these point images is a bright fringe corresponding to a path difference of .
When is moved a distance , this path difference changes by , and each fringe moves to the position previously occupied by an adjacent fringe .
While keeping the mirror fixed , mirror is moved .
The fringes are found to move past a fixed cross-hair in the viewer .
Find the distance the mirror is moved for a single fringe to move past the reference line .
Refer to for the geometry .
We use the result of the Michelson interferometer interference condition to find the distance moved , .
For a 630-nm red laser light , and for each fringe crossing , the distance traveled by if you keep fixed is An important application of this measurement is the definition of the standard meter .
As mentioned in , the length of the standard meter was once defined as the mirror displacement in a Michelson interferometer corresponding to 1,650,763.73 wavelengths of the particular fringe of krypton-86 in a gas discharge tube .
In one arm of a Michelson interferometer , a glass chamber is placed with attachments for evacuating the inside and putting gases in it .
The space inside the container is 2 cm wide .
Initially , the container is empty .
As gas is slowly let into the chamber , you observe that dark fringes move past a reference line in the field of observation .
By the time the chamber is filled to the desired pressure , you have counted 122 fringes move past the reference line .
The wavelength of the light used is 632.8 nm .
What is the refractive index of this gas ?
The fringes observed compose the difference between the number of wavelengths that fit within the empty chamber ( vacuum ) and the number of wavelengths that fit within the same chamber when it is gas-filled .
The wavelength in the filled chamber is shorter by a factor of n , the index of refraction .
The ray travels a distance to the right through the glass chamber and another distance t to the left upon reflection .
The total travel is .
When empty , the number of wavelengths that fit in this chamber is where is the wavelength in vacuum of the light used .
In any other medium , the wavelength is and the number of wavelengths that fit in the gas-filled chamber is The number of fringes observed in the transition is Solving for gives and .
The indices of refraction for gases are so close to that of vacuum , that we normally consider them equal to 1 .
The difference between 1 and 1.0019 is so small that measuring it requires a correspondingly sensitive technique such as interferometry .
We can not , for example , hope to measure this value using techniques based simply on Snell ’ s law .
Check Your Understanding Although m , the number of fringes observed , is an integer , which is often regarded as having zero uncertainty , in practical terms , it is all too easy to lose track when counting fringes .
In , if you estimate that you might have missed as many as five fringes when you reported fringes , ( a ) is the value for the index of refraction worked out in too large or too small ?
( b ) By how much ?
Examine the situation to determine that interference is involved .
Identify whether slits , thin films , or interferometers are considered in the problem .
If slits are involved , note that diffraction gratings and double slits produce very similar interference patterns , but that gratings have narrower ( sharper ) maxima .
Single-slit patterns are characterized by a large central maximum and smaller maxima to the sides .
If thin-film interference or an interferometer is involved , take note of the path length difference between the two rays that interfere .
Be certain to use the wavelength in the medium involved , since it differs from the wavelength in vacuum .
Note also that there is an additional phase shift when light reflects from a medium with a greater index of refraction .
Identify exactly what needs to be determined in the problem ( identify the unknowns ) .
A written list is useful .
Draw a diagram of the situation .
Labeling the diagram is useful .
Make a list of what is given or can be inferred from the problem as stated ( identify the knowns ) .
Solve the appropriate equation for the quantity to be determined ( the unknown ) and enter the knowns .
Slits , gratings , and the Rayleigh limit involve equations .
For thin-film interference , you have constructive interference for a total shift that is an integral number of wavelengths .
You have destructive interference for a total shift of a half-integral number of wavelengths .
Always keep in mind that crest to crest is constructive whereas crest to trough is destructive .
Check to see if the answer is reasonable : Does it make sense ?
Angles in interference patterns can not be greater than , for example .
Imagine passing a monochromatic light beam through a narrow opening—a slit just a little wider than the wavelength of the light .
Instead of a simple shadow of the slit on the screen , you will see that an interference pattern appears , even though there is only one slit .
In the chapter on interference , we saw that you need two sources of waves for interference to occur .
How can there be an interference pattern when we have only one slit ?
In , we learned that , due to Huygens ’ s principle , we can imagine a wave front as equivalent to inﬁnitely many point sources of waves .
Thus , a wave from a slit can behave not as one wave but as an infinite number of point sources .
These waves can interfere with each other , resulting in an interference pattern without the presence of a second slit .
This phenomenon is called diffraction .
Another way to view this is to recognize that a slit has a small but finite width .
In the preceding chapter , we implicitly regarded slits as objects with positions but no size .
The widths of the slits were considered negligible .
When the slits have finite widths , each point along the opening can be considered a point source of light—a foundation of Huygens ’ s principle .
Because real-world optical instruments must have finite apertures ( otherwise , no light can enter ) , diffraction plays a major role in the way we interpret the output of these optical instruments .
For example , diffraction places limits on our ability to resolve images or objects .
This is a problem that we will study later in this chapter .
After passing through a narrow aperture ( opening ) , a wave propagating in a specific direction tends to spread out .
For example , sound waves that enter a room through an open door can be heard even if the listener is in a part of the room where the geometry of ray propagation dictates that there should only be silence .
Similarly , ocean waves passing through an opening in a breakwater can spread throughout the bay inside .
The spreading and bending of sound and ocean waves are two examples of diffraction , which is the bending of a wave around the edges of an opening or an obstacle—a phenomenon exhibited by all types of waves .
The diffraction of sound waves is apparent to us because wavelengths in the audible region are approximately the same size as the objects they encounter , a condition that must be satisfied if diffraction effects are to be observed easily .
Since the wavelengths of visible light range from approximately 390 to 770 nm , most objects do not diffract light significantly .
However , situations do occur in which apertures are small enough that the diffraction of light is observable .
For example , if you place your middle and index fingers close together and look through the opening at a light bulb , you can see a rather clear diffraction pattern , consisting of light and dark lines running parallel to your fingers .
Light passing through a single slit forms a diffraction pattern somewhat different from those formed by double slits or diffraction gratings , which we discussed in the chapter on interference .
shows a single-slit diffraction pattern .
Note that the central maximum is larger than maxima on either side and that the intensity decreases rapidly on either side .
In contrast , a diffraction grating produces evenly spaced lines that dim slowly on either side of the center .
The analysis of single-slit diffraction is illustrated in .
Here , the light arrives at the slit , illuminating it uniformly and is in phase across its width .
We then consider light propagating onwards from different parts of the same slit .
According to Huygens ’ s principle , every part of the wave front in the slit emits wavelets , as we discussed in .
These are like rays that start out in phase and head in all directions .
( Each ray is perpendicular to the wave front of a wavelet . )
Assuming the screen is very far away compared with the size of the slit , rays heading toward a common destination are nearly parallel .
When they travel straight ahead , as in part ( a ) of the figure , they remain in phase , and we observe a central maximum .
However , when rays travel at an angle relative to the original direction of the beam , each ray travels a different distance to a common location , and they can arrive in or out of phase .
In part ( b ) , the ray from the bottom travels a distance of one wavelength farther than the ray from the top .
Thus , a ray from the center travels a distance less than the one at the bottom edge of the slit , arrives out of phase , and interferes destructively .
A ray from slightly above the center and one from slightly above the bottom also cancel one another .
In fact , each ray from the slit interferes destructively with another ray .
In other words , a pair-wise cancellation of all rays results in a dark minimum in intensity at this angle .
By symmetry , another minimum occurs at the same angle to the right of the incident direction ( toward the bottom of the figure ) of the light .
At the larger angle shown in part ( c ) , the path lengths differ by for rays from the top and bottom of the slit .
One ray travels a distance different from the ray from the bottom and arrives in phase , interfering constructively .
Two rays , each from slightly above those two , also add constructively .
Most rays from the slit have another ray to interfere with constructively , and a maximum in intensity occurs at this angle .
However , not all rays interfere constructively for this situation , so the maximum is not as intense as the central maximum .
Finally , in part ( d ) , the angle shown is large enough to produce a second minimum .
As seen in the figure , the difference in path length for rays from either side of the slit is D sin , and we see that a destructive minimum is obtained when this distance is an integral multiple of the wavelength .
Thus , to obtain destructive interference for a single slit , where D is the slit width , is the light ’ s wavelength , is the angle relative to the original direction of the light , and m is the order of the minimum .
shows a graph of intensity for single-slit interference , and it is apparent that the maxima on either side of the central maximum are much less intense and not as wide .
This effect is explored in .
Visible light of wavelength 550 nm falls on a single slit and produces its second diffraction minimum at an angle of relative to the incident direction of the light , as in .
( a ) What is the width of the slit ?
( b ) At what angle is the first minimum produced ?
From the given information , and assuming the screen is far away from the slit , we can use the equation first to find D , and again to find the angle for the first minimum We are given that , , and .
Solving the equation for D and substituting known values gives Solving the equation for and substituting the known values gives Thus the angle is We see that the slit is narrow ( it is only a few times greater than the wavelength of light ) .
This is consistent with the fact that light must interact with an object comparable in size to its wavelength in order to exhibit significant wave effects such as this single-slit diffraction pattern .
We also see that the central maximum extends on either side of the original beam , for a width of about .
The angle between the first and second minima is only about .
Thus , the second maximum is only about half as wide as the central maximum .
Check Your Understanding Suppose the slit width in is increased to What are the new angular positions for the first , second , and third minima ?
Would a fourth minimum exist ?
To calculate the intensity of the diffraction pattern , we follow the phasor method used for calculations with ac circuits in .
The amplitude of the phasor for each Huygens wavelet is the amplitude of the resultant phasor is E , and the phase difference between the wavelets from the first and the last sources is With , the phasor diagram approaches a circular arc of length and radius r .
Since the length of the arc is for any , the radius r of the arc must decrease as increases ( or equivalently , as the phasors form tighter spirals ) .
The phasor diagram for ( the center of the diffraction pattern ) is shown in ( a ) using .
In this case , the phasors are laid end to end in a straight line of length the radius r goes to infinity , and the resultant has its maximum value The intensity of the light can be obtained using the relation from .
The intensity of the maximum is then where .
The phasor diagrams for the first two zeros of the diffraction pattern are shown in parts ( b ) and ( d ) of the figure .
In both cases , the phasors add to zero , after rotating through rad for and rad for .
The next two maxima beyond the central maxima are represented by the phasor diagrams of parts ( c ) and ( e ) .
In part ( c ) , the phasors have rotated through rad and have formed a resultant phasor of magnitude .
The proof is left as an exercise for the student .
These two maxima actually correspond to values of slightly less than rad and rad .
Since the total length of the arc of the phasor diagram is always the radius of the arc decreases as increases .
As a result , and turn out to be slightly larger for arcs that have not quite curled through rad and rad , respectively .
The exact values of for the maxima are investigated in .
In solving that problem , you will find that they are less than , but very close to , To calculate the intensity at an arbitrary point P on the screen , we return to the phasor diagram of .
Since the arc subtends an angle at the center of the circle , and where E is the amplitude of the resultant field .
Solving the second equation for E and then substituting r from the first equation , we find Now defining we obtain This equation relates the amplitude of the resultant field at any point in the diffraction pattern to the amplitude at the central maximum .
The intensity is proportional to the square of the amplitude , so is the intensity at the center of the pattern .
Substituting rad into yields a similar result for .
A plot of is shown in and directly below it is a photograph of an actual diffraction pattern .
Notice that the central peak is much brighter than the others , and that the zeros of the pattern are located at those points where which occurs when rad .
This corresponds to or which is .
Light of wavelength 550 nm passes through a slit of width and produces a diffraction pattern similar to that shown in .
( a ) Find the locations of the first two minima in terms of the angle from the central maximum and ( b ) determine the intensity relative to the central maximum at a point halfway between these two minima .
The minima are given by , .
The first two minima are for and and can be used to determine the intensity once the angle has been worked out .
Solving for gives us so that and The halfway point between and is gives From , we can calculate This position , halfway between two minima , is very close to the location of the maximum , expected near .
Check Your Understanding For the experiment in , at what angle from the center is the third maximum and what is its intensity relative to the central maximum ?
If the slit width D is varied , the intensity distribution changes , as illustrated in .
The central peak is distributed over the region from to .
For small , this corresponds to an angular width Hence , an increase in the slit width results in a decrease in the width of the central peak .
For a slit with the central peak is very sharp , whereas if , it becomes quite broad .
experiment A diffraction by Andrew Duffy offers not only a quick set up but also the ability to change the slit width instantly .
Run the simulation and select “ Single slit. ” You can adjust the slit width and see the effect on the diffraction pattern on a screen and as a graph .
preparation require optics can but lot of in a When we studied interference in Young ’ s double-slit experiment , we ignored the diffraction effect in each slit .
We assumed that the slits were so narrow that on the screen you saw only the interference of light from just two point sources .
If the slit is smaller than the wavelength , then ( a ) shows that there is just a spreading of light and no peaks or troughs on the screen .
Therefore , it was reasonable to leave out the diffraction effect in that chapter .
However , if you make the slit wider , ( b ) and ( c ) show that you can not ignore diffraction .
In this section , we study the complications to the double-slit experiment that arise when you also need to take into account the diffraction effect of each slit .
To calculate the diffraction pattern for two ( or any number of ) slits , we need to generalize the method we just used for a single slit .
That is , across each slit , we place a uniform distribution of point sources that radiate Huygens wavelets , and then we sum the wavelets from all the slits .
This gives the intensity at any point on the screen .
In other words , the locations of the interference fringes are given by the equation , the same as when we considered the slits to be point sources , but the intensities of the fringes are now reduced by diffraction effects , according to .
[ Note that in the chapter on interference , we wrote and used the integer m to refer to interference fringes .
also uses m , but this time to refer to diffraction minima .
If both equations are used simultaneously , it is good practice to use a different variable ( such as n ) for one of these integers in order to keep them distinct . ]
Interference and diffraction effects operate simultaneously and generally produce minima at different angles .
This gives rise to a complicated pattern on the screen , in which some of the maxima of interference from the two slits are missing if the maximum of the interference is in the same direction as the minimum of the diffraction .
We refer to such a missing peak as a missing order .
One example of a diffraction pattern on the screen is shown in .
The solid line with multiple peaks of various heights is the intensity observed on the screen .
It is a product of the interference pattern of waves from separate slits and the diffraction of waves from within one slit .
shows that the intensity of the fringe for is zero , but what about the other fringes ?
Calculate the intensity for the fringe at relative to Determine the angle for the double-slit interference fringe , using the equation from , then determine the relative intensity in that direction due to diffraction by using .
From the chapter on interference , we know that the bright interference fringes occur at , or the intensity of the central peak .
The phasor approach accounts for the downward slope in the diffraction intensity ( blue line ) so that the peak near occurs at a value of ever so slightly smaller than we have shown here .
Suppose that in Young ’ s experiment , slits of width 0.020 mm are separated by 0.20 mm .
If the slits are illuminated by monochromatic light of wavelength 500 nm , how many bright fringes are observed in the central peak of the diffraction pattern ?
From diffraction minimum position angular , first the the of is Using for , we find which is the maximum interference order that fits inside the central peak .
We note that are missing orders as matches exactly .
Accordingly , we observe bright fringes for for a total of 19 bright fringes .
Check Your Understanding For the experiment in , show that is also a missing order .
In Explore the effects of double-slit diffraction .
written by Fu-Kwun Hwang , select using the slider and see what happens when you control the slit width , slit separation and the wavelength .
Can you make an order go “ missing ? ” Analyzing the interference of light passing through two slits lays out the theoretical framework of interference and gives us a historical insight into Thomas Young ’ s experiments .
However , most modern-day applications of slit interference use not just two slits but many , approaching infinity for practical purposes .
The key optical element is called a diffraction grating , an important tool in optical analysis .
The analysis of multi-slit interference in allows us to consider what happens when the number of slits N approaches infinity .
Recall that secondary maxima appear between the principal maxima .
We can see there will be an infinite number of secondary maxima that appear , and an infinite number of dark fringes between them .
This makes the spacing between the fringes , and therefore the width of the maxima , infinitesimally small .
Furthermore , because the intensity of the secondary maxima is proportional to , it approaches zero so that the secondary maxima are no longer seen .
What remains are only the principal maxima , now very bright and very narrow .
In reality , the number of slits is not infinite , but it can be very large—large enough to produce the equivalent effect .
A prime example is an optical element called a diffraction grating .
A diffraction grating can be manufactured by carving glass with a sharp tool in a large number of precisely positioned parallel lines , with untouched regions acting like slits .
This type of grating can be photographically mass produced rather cheaply .
Because there can be over 1000 lines per millimeter across the grating , when a section as small as a few millimeters is illuminated by an incoming ray , the number of illuminated slits is effectively infinite , providing for very sharp principal maxima .
Diffraction gratings work both for transmission of light , as in , and for reflection of light , as on butterfly wings and the Australian opal in .
Natural diffraction gratings also occur in the feathers of certain birds such as the hummingbird .
Tiny , finger-like structures in regular patterns act as reflection gratings , producing constructive interference that gives the feathers colors not solely due to their pigmentation .
This is called iridescence .
Where are diffraction gratings used in applications ?
Diffraction gratings are commonly used for spectroscopic dispersion and analysis of light .
What makes them particularly useful is the fact that they form a sharper pattern than double slits do .
That is , their bright fringes are narrower and brighter while their dark regions are darker .
Diffraction gratings are key components of monochromators used , for example , in optical imaging of particular wavelengths from biological or medical samples .
A diffraction grating can be chosen to specifically analyze a wavelength emitted by molecules in diseased cells in a biopsy sample or to help excite strategic molecules in the sample with a selected wavelength of light .
Another vital use is in optical fiber technologies where fibers are designed to provide optimum performance at specific wavelengths .
A range of diffraction gratings are available for selecting wavelengths for such use .
Diffraction gratings with 10,000 lines per centimeter are readily available .
Suppose you have one , and you send a beam of white light through it to a screen 2.00 m away .
( a ) Find the angles for the first-order diffraction of the shortest and longest wavelengths of visible light ( 380 and 760 nm , respectively ) .
( b ) What is the distance between the ends of the rainbow of visible light produced on the screen for first-order interference ?
( See . )
Once a value for the diffraction grating ’ s slit spacing d has been determined , the angles for the sharp lines can be found using the equation Since there are 10,000 lines per centimeter , each line is separated by 1/10,000 of a centimeter .
Once we know the angles , we an find the distances along the screen by using simple trigonometry .
The distance between slits is Let us call red ( 760 nm ) .
The distances on the secreen are labeled in .
Notice that We can solve for That is , and The distance between them is therefore The large distance between the red and violet ends of the rainbow produced from the white light indicates the potential this diffraction grating has as a spectroscopic tool .
The more it can spread out the wavelengths ( greater dispersion ) , the more detail can be seen in a spectrum .
This depends on the quality of the diffraction grating—it must be very precisely made in addition to having closely spaced lines .
Check Your Understanding If the line spacing of a diffraction grating d is not precisely known , we can use a light source with a well-determined wavelength to measure it .
Suppose the first-order constructive fringe of the emission line of hydrogen is measured at using a spectrometer with a diffraction grating .
What is the line spacing of this grating ?
Take we used for double-slit diffraction and try increasing the number of slits from to .
The primary peaks become sharper , and the secondary peaks become less and less pronounced .
By the time you reach the maximum number of , the system is behaving much like a diffraction grating .
Light diffracts as it moves through space , bending around obstacles , interfering constructively and destructively .
This can be used as a spectroscopic tool—a diffraction grating disperses light according to wavelength , for example , and is used to produce spectra—but diffraction also limits the detail we can obtain in images .
( a ) shows the effect of passing light through a small circular aperture .
Instead of a bright spot with sharp edges , we obtain a spot with a fuzzy edge surrounded by circles of light .
This pattern is caused by diffraction , similar to that produced by a single slit .
Light from different parts of the circular aperture interferes constructively and destructively .
The effect is most noticeable when the aperture is small , but the effect is there for large apertures as well .
How does diffraction affect the detail that can be observed when light passes through an aperture ?
( b ) shows the diffraction pattern produced by two point-light sources that are close to one another .
The pattern is similar to that for a single point source , and it is still possible to tell that there are two light sources rather than one .
If they are closer together , as in ( c ) , we can not distinguish them , thus limiting the detail or resolution we can obtain .
This limit is an inescapable consequence of the wave nature of light .
Diffraction limits the resolution in many situations .
The acuity of our vision is limited because light passes through the pupil , which is the circular aperture of the eye .
Be aware that the diffraction-like spreading of light is due to the limited diameter of a light beam , not the interaction with an aperture .
Thus , light passing through a lens with a diameter D shows this effect and spreads , blurring the image , just as light passing through an aperture of diameter D does .
Thus , diffraction limits the resolution of any system having a lens or mirror .
Telescopes are also limited by diffraction , because of the finite diameter D of the primary mirror .
Just what is the limit ?
To answer that question , consider the diffraction pattern for a circular aperture , which has a central maximum that is wider and brighter than the maxima surrounding it ( similar to a slit ) ( ( a ) ) .
It can be shown that , for a circular aperture of diameter D , the first minimum in the diffraction pattern occurs at ( providing the aperture is large compared with the wavelength of light , which is the case for most optical instruments ) .
The accepted criterion for determining the diffraction limit to resolution based on this angle is known as the Rayleigh criterion , which was developed by Lord Rayleigh in the nineteenth century .
The diffraction limit to resolution states that two images are just resolvable when the center of the diffraction pattern of one is directly over the first minimum of the diffraction pattern of the other ( ( b ) ) .
In this expression , has units of radians .
This angle is also commonly known as the diffraction limit .
All attempts to observe the size and shape of objects are limited by the wavelength of the probe .
Even the small wavelength of light prohibits exact precision .
When extremely small wavelength probes are used , as with an electron microscope , the system is disturbed , still limiting our knowledge .
Heisenberg ’ s uncertainty principle asserts that this limit is fundamental and inescapable , as we shall see in the chapter on quantum mechanics .
The primary mirror of the orbiting Hubble Space Telescope has a diameter of 2.40 m. Being in orbit , this telescope avoids the degrading effects of atmospheric distortion on its resolution .
( a ) What is the angle between two justresolvable point light sources ( perhaps two stars ) ?
Assume an average light wavelength of 550 nm .
( b ) If these two stars are at a distance of 2 million light-years , which is the distance of the Andromeda Galaxy , how close together can they be and still be resolved ?
( A light-year , or ly , is the distance light travels in 1 year . )
The Rayleigh criterion stated in , , gives the smallest possible angle between point sources , or the best obtainable resolution .
Once this angle is known , we can calculate the distance between the stars , since we are given how far away they are .
As noticed , diffraction effects are most noticeable when light interacts with objects having sizes on the order of the wavelength of light .
However , the effect is still there , and there is a diffraction limit to what is observable .
The actual resolution of the Hubble Telescope is not quite as good as that found here .
As with all instruments , there are other effects , such as nonuniformities in mirrors or aberrations in lenses that further limit resolution .
However , gives an indication of the extent of the detail observable with the Hubble because of its size and quality , and especially because it is above Earth ’ s atmosphere .
The answer in part ( b ) indicates that two stars separated by about half a light-year can be resolved .
The average distance between stars in a galaxy is on the order of five light-years in the outer parts and about one light-year near the galactic center .
Therefore , the Hubble can resolve most of the individual stars in Andromeda Galaxy , even though it lies at such a huge distance that its light takes 2 million years to reach us .
shows another mirror used to observe radio waves from outer space .
Check Your Understanding What is the angular resolution of the Arecibo telescope shown in when operated at 21-cm wavelength ?
How does it compare to the resolution of the Hubble Telescope ?
Diffraction is not only a problem for optical instruments but also for the electromagnetic radiation itself .
Any beam of light having a finite diameter D and a wavelength exhibits diffraction spreading .
The beam spreads out with an angle given by , .
Take , for example , a laser beam made of rays as parallel as possible ( angles between rays as close to as possible ) instead spreads out at an angle , where D is the diameter of the beam and is its wavelength .
This spreading is impossible to observe for a flashlight because its beam is not very parallel to start with .
However , for long-distance transmission of laser beams or microwave signals , diffraction spreading can be significant .
To avoid this , we can increase D .
This is done for laser light sent to the moon to measure its distance from Earth .
The laser beam is expanded through a telescope to make D much larger and smaller .
In most biology laboratories , resolution is an issue when the use of the microscope is introduced .
The smaller the distance x by which two objects can be separated and still be seen as distinct , the greater the resolution .
The resolving power of a lens is defined as that distance x .
An expression for resolving power is obtained from the Rayleigh criterion .
( a ) shows two point objects separated by a distance x .
( b ) shows a lens and an object at point P .
The NA here is a measure of the ability of the lens to gather light and resolve fine detail .
The angle subtended by the lens at its focus is defined to be .
From the figure and again using the small angle approximation , we can write The NA for a lens is , where n is the index of refraction of the medium between the objective lens and the object at point P .
From this definition for NA , we can see that In a microscope , NA is important because it relates to the resolving power of a lens .
A lens with a large NA is able to resolve finer details .
Lenses with larger NA are also able to collect more light and so give a brighter image .
Another way to describe this situation is that the larger the NA , the larger the cone of light that can be brought into the lens , so more of the diffraction modes are collected .
Thus the microscope has more information to form a clear image , and its resolving power is higher .
One of the consequences of diffraction is that the focal point of a beam has a finite width and intensity distribution .
Imagine focusing when only considering geometric optics , as in ( a ) .
The focal point is regarded as an infinitely small point with a huge intensity and the capacity to incinerate most samples , irrespective of the NA of the objective lens—an unphysical oversimplification .
For wave optics , due to diffraction , we take into account the phenomenon in which the focal point spreads to become a focal spot ( ( b ) ) with the size of the spot decreasing with increasing NA .
Consequently , the intensity in the focal spot increases with increasing NA .
The higher the NA , the greater the chances of photodegrading the specimen .
However , the spot never becomes a true point .
In a different type of microscope , molecules within a specimen are made to emit light through a mechanism called fluorescence .
By controlling the molecules emitting light , it has become possible to construct images with resolution much finer than the Rayleigh criterion , thus circumventing the diffraction limit .
The development of super-resolved fluorescence microscopy led to the 2014 Nobel Prize in Chemistry .
In this Optical Resolution Model , two diffraction patterns for light through two circular apertures are shown side by side in by Fu-Kwun Hwang .
Watch the patterns merge as you decrease the aperture diameters .
Since X-ray photons are very energetic , they have relatively short wavelengths , on the order of m to m. Thus , typical X-ray photons act like rays when they encounter macroscopic objects , like teeth , and produce sharp shadows .
However , since atoms are on the order of 0.1 nm in size , X-rays can be used to detect the location , shape , and size of atoms and molecules .
The process is called X-ray diffraction , and it involves the interference of X-rays to produce patterns that can be analyzed for information about the structures that scattered the X-rays .
Perhaps the most famous example of X-ray diffraction is the discovery of the double-helical structure of DNA in 1953 by an international team of scientists working at England ’ s Cavendish Laboratory—American James Watson , Englishman Francis Crick , and New Zealand-born Maurice Wilkins .
Using X-ray diffraction data produced by Rosalind Franklin , they were the first to model the double-helix structure of DNA that is so crucial to life .
For this work , Watson , Crick , and Wilkins were awarded the 1962 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine .
( There is some debate and controversy over the issue that Rosalind Franklin was not included in the prize , although she died in 1958 , before the prize was awarded . )
shows a diffraction pattern produced by the scattering of X-rays from a crystal .
This process is known as X-ray crystallography because of the information it can yield about crystal structure , and it was the type of data Rosalind Franklin supplied to Watson and Crick for DNA .
Not only do X-rays confirm the size and shape of atoms , they give information about the atomic arrangements in materials .
For example , more recent research in high-temperature superconductors involves complex materials whose lattice arrangements are crucial to obtaining a superconducting material .
These can be studied using X-ray crystallography .
Historically , the scattering of X-rays from crystals was used to prove that X-rays are energetic electromagnetic ( EM ) waves .
This was suspected from the time of the discovery of X-rays in 1895 , but it was not until 1912 that the German Max von Laue ( 1879–1960 ) convinced two of his colleagues to scatter X-rays from crystals .
If a diffraction pattern is obtained , he reasoned , then the X-rays must be waves , and their wavelength could be determined .
( The spacing of atoms in various crystals was reasonably well known at the time , based on good values for Avogadro ’ s number . )
The experiments were convincing , and the 1914 Nobel Prize in Physics was given to von Laue for his suggestion leading to the proof that X-rays are EM waves .
In 1915 , the unique father-and-son team of Sir William Henry Bragg and his son Sir William Lawrence Bragg were awarded a joint Nobel Prize for inventing the X-ray spectrometer and the then-new science of X-ray analysis .
In ways reminiscent of thin-film interference , we consider two plane waves at X-ray wavelengths , each one reflecting off a different plane of atoms within a crystal ’ s lattice , as shown in .
From the geometry , the difference in path lengths is .
Constructive interference results when this distance is an integer multiple of the wavelength .
This condition is captured by the Bragg equation , where m is a positive integer and d is the spacing between the planes .
Following the Law of Reflection , both the incident and reflected waves are described by the same angle , but unlike the general practice in geometric optics , is measured with respect to the surface itself , rather than the normal .
Common table salt is composed mainly of NaCl crystals .
In a NaCl crystal , there is a family of planes 0.252 nm apart .
If the first-order maximum is observed at an incidence angle of , what is the wavelength of the X-ray scattering from this crystal ?
Use the Bragg equation , , , to solve for .
For first-order , and the plane spacing d is known .
Solving the Bragg equation for wavelength yields The determined wavelength fits within the X-ray region of the electromagnetic spectrum .
Once again , the wave nature of light makes itself prominent when the wavelength is comparable to the size of the physical structures it interacts with .
Check Your Understanding For the experiment described in , what are the two other angles where interference maxima may be observed ?
What limits the number of maxima ?
Although depicts a crystal as a two-dimensional array of scattering centers for simplicity , real crystals are structures in three dimensions .
Scattering can occur simultaneously from different families of planes at different orientations and spacing patterns known as called Bragg planes , as shown in .
The resulting interference pattern can be quite complex .
A hologram , such as the one in , is a true three-dimensional image recorded on film by lasers .
Holograms are used for amusement ; decoration on novelty items and magazine covers ; security on credit cards and driver ’ s licenses ( a laser and other equipment are needed to reproduce them ) ; and for serious three-dimensional information storage .
You can see that a hologram is a true three-dimensional image because objects change relative position in the image when viewed from different angles .
The name hologram means “ entire picture ” ( from the Greek holo , as in holistic ) because the image is three-dimensional .
Holography is the process of producing holograms and , although they are recorded on photographic film , the process is quite different from normal photography .
Holography uses light interference or wave optics , whereas normal photography uses geometric optics .
shows one method of producing a hologram .
Coherent light from a laser is split by a mirror , with part of the light illuminating the object .
The remainder , called the reference beam , shines directly on a piece of film .
Light scattered from the object interferes with the reference beam , producing constructive and destructive interference .
As a result , the exposed film looks foggy , but close examination reveals a complicated interference pattern stored on it .
Where the interference was constructive , the film ( a negative actually ) is darkened .
Holography is sometimes called lens-less photography , because it uses the wave characteristics of light , as contrasted to normal photography , which uses geometric optics and requires lenses .
Light falling on a hologram can form a three-dimensional image of the original object .
The process is complicated in detail , but the basics can be understood , as shown in , in which a laser of the same type that exposed the film is now used to illuminate it .
The myriad tiny exposed regions of the film are dark and block the light , whereas less exposed regions allow light to pass .
The film thus acts much like a collection of diffraction gratings with various spacing patterns .
Light passing through the hologram is diffracted in various directions , producing both real and virtual images of the object used to expose the film .
The interference pattern is the same as that produced by the object .
Moving your eye to various places in the interference pattern gives you different perspectives , just as looking directly at the object would .
The image thus looks like the object and is three dimensional like the object .
The hologram illustrated in is a transmission hologram .
Holograms that are viewed with reflected light , such as the white light holograms on credit cards , are reflection holograms and are more common .
White light holograms often appear a little blurry with rainbow edges , because the diffraction patterns of various colors of light are at slightly different locations due to their different wavelengths .
Further uses of holography include all types of three-dimensional information storage , such as of statues in museums , engineering studies of structures , and images of human organs .
Invented in the late 1940s by Dennis Gabor ( 1900–1970 ) , who won the 1971 Nobel Prize in Physics for his work , holography became far more practical with the development of the laser .
Since lasers produce coherent single-wavelength light , their interference patterns are more pronounced .
The precision is so great that it is even possible to record numerous holograms on a single piece of film by just changing the angle of the film for each successive image .
This is how the holograms that move as you walk by them are produced—a kind of lens-less movie .
In a similar way , in the medical field , holograms have allowed complete three-dimensional holographic displays of objects from a stack of images .
Storing these images for future use is relatively easy .
With the use of an endoscope , high-resolution , three-dimensional holographic images of internal organs and tissues can be made .
The special theory of relativity was proposed in 1905 by Albert Einstein ( 1879–1955 ) .
It describes how time , space , and physical phenomena appear in different frames of reference that are moving at constant velocity with respect to each other .
This differs from Einstein ’ s later work on general relativity , which deals with any frame of reference , including accelerated frames .
The theory of relativity led to a profound change in the way we perceive space and time .
The “ common sense ” rules that we use to relate space and time measurements in the Newtonian worldview differ seriously from the correct rules at speeds near the speed of light .
For example , the special theory of relativity tells us that measurements of length and time intervals are not the same in reference frames moving relative to one another .
A particle might be observed to have a lifetime of in one reference frame , but a lifetime of in another ; and an object might be measured to be 2.0 m long in one frame and 3.0 m long in another frame .
Unlike Newtonian mechanics , which describes the motion of particles , or Maxwell 's equations , which specify how the electromagnetic field behaves , special relativity is not restricted to a particular type of phenomenon .
Instead , its rules on space and time affect all fundamental physical theories .
The modifications of Newtonian mechanics in special relativity do not invalidate classical Newtonian mechanics or require its replacement .
Instead , the equations of relativistic mechanics differ meaningfully from those of classical Newtonian mechanics only for objects moving at relativistic speeds ( i.e. , speeds less than , but comparable to , the speed of light ) .
In the macroscopic world that you encounter in your daily life , the relativistic equations reduce to classical equations , and the predictions of classical Newtonian mechanics agree closely enough with experimental results to disregard relativistic corrections .
Suppose you calculate the hypotenuse of a right triangle given the base angles and adjacent sides .
Whether you calculate the hypotenuse from one of the sides and the cosine of the base angle , or from the Pythagorean theorem , the results should agree .
Predictions based on different principles of physics must also agree , whether we consider them principles of mechanics or principles of electromagnetism .
Albert Einstein pondered a disagreement between predictions based on electromagnetism and on assumptions made in classical mechanics .
Specifically , suppose an observer measures the velocity of a light pulse in the observer ’ s own rest frame ; that is , in the frame of reference in which the observer is at rest .
If this principle is correct , the pulse of light that the observer measures as traveling with speed c travels at speed c + u measured in the frame of the second observer .
To reconcile difficulties of this kind , Einstein constructed his special theory of relativity , which introduced radical new ideas about time and space that have since been confirmed experimentally .
All velocities are measured relative to some frame of reference .
The frames of reference in which mechanics takes the simplest form are those that are not accelerating .
Newton ’ s first law , the law of inertia , holds exactly in such a frame .
An inertial frame of reference is a reference frame in which a body at rest remains at rest and a body in motion moves at a constant speed in a straight line unless acted upon by an outside force .
For example , to a passenger inside a plane flying at constant speed and constant altitude , physics seems to work exactly the same as when the passenger is standing on the surface of Earth .
When the plane is taking off , however , matters are somewhat more complicated .
In this case , the passenger at rest inside the plane concludes that a net force F on an object is not equal to the product of mass and acceleration , ma .
Instead , F is equal to ma plus a fictitious force .
This situation is not as simple as in an inertial frame .
The term “ special ” in “ special relativity ” refers to dealing only with inertial frames of reference .
Einstein ’ s later theory of general relativity deals with all kinds of reference frames , including accelerating , and therefore non-inertial , reference frames .
Not only are the principles of classical mechanics simplest in inertial frames , but they are the same in all inertial frames .
Einstein based the first postulate of his theory on the idea that this is true for all the laws of physics , not merely those in mechanics .
The laws of physics are the same in all inertial frames of reference .
This postulate denies the existence of a special or preferred inertial frame .
The laws of nature do not give us a way to endow any one inertial frame with special properties .
For example , we can not identify any inertial frame as being in a state of “ absolute rest. ” We can only determine the relative motion of one frame with respect to another .
There is , however , more to this postulate than meets the eye .
The laws of physics include only those that satisfy this postulate .
We will see that the definitions of energy and momentum must be altered to fit this postulate .
Another outcome of this postulate is the famous equation which relates energy to mass .
The second postulate upon which Einstein based his theory of special relativity deals with the speed of light .
Late in the nineteenth century , the major tenets of classical physics were well established .
Two of the most important were the laws of electromagnetism and Newton ’ s laws .
Investigations such as Young ’ s double-slit experiment in the early 1800s had convincingly demonstrated that light is a wave .
Maxwell ’ s equations of electromagnetism implied that electromagnetic waves travel at in a vacuum , but they do not specify the frame of reference in which light has this speed .
Many types of waves were known , and all travelled in some medium .
Scientists therefore assumed that some medium carried the light , even in a vacuum , and that light travels at a speed c relative to that medium ( often called “ the aether ” ) .
Starting in the mid-1880s , the American physicist A.A. Michelson , later aided by E.W .
Morley , made a series of direct measurements of the speed of light .
They intended to deduce from their data the speed v at which Earth was moving through the mysterious medium for light waves .
The speed of light measured on Earth should have been c v when Earth ’ s motion was opposite to the medium ’ s flow at speed u past the Earth , and c – v when Earth was moving in the same direction as the medium .
The results of their measurements were startling .
The Michelson-Morley experiment demonstrated that the speed of light in a vacuum is independent of the motion of Earth about the Sun .
The eventual conclusion derived from this result is that light , unlike mechanical waves such as sound , does not need a medium to carry it .
Furthermore , the Michelson-Morley results implied that the speed of light c is independent of the motion of the source relative to the observer .
That is , everyone observes light to move at speed c regardless of how they move relative to the light source or to one another .
For several years , many scientists tried unsuccessfully to explain these results within the framework of Newton ’ s laws .
In addition , there was a contradiction between the principles of electromagnetism and the assumption made in Newton ’ s laws about relative velocity .
Classically , the velocity of an object in one frame of reference and the velocity of that object in a second frame of reference relative to the first should combine like simple vectors to give the velocity seen in the second frame .
If that were correct , then two observers moving at different speeds would see light traveling at different speeds .
Imagine what a light wave would look like to a person traveling along with it ( in vacuum ) at a speed c .
If such a motion were possible , then the wave would be stationary relative to the observer .
It would have electric and magnetic fields whose strengths varied with position but were constant in time .
This is not allowed by Maxwell ’ s equations .
So either Maxwell ’ s equations are different in different inertial frames , or an object with mass can not travel at speed c .
Einstein concluded that the latter is true : An object with mass can not travel at speed c .
Maxwell ’ s equations are correct , but Newton ’ s addition of velocities is not correct for light .
Not until 1905 , when Einstein published his first paper on special relativity , was the currently accepted conclusion reached .
Based mostly on his analysis that the laws of electricity and magnetism would not allow another speed for light , and only slightly aware of the Michelson-Morley experiment , Einstein detailed his second postulate of special relativity .
Light travels in a vacuum with the same speed c in any direction in all inertial frames .
In other words , the speed of light has the same definite speed for any observer , regardless of the relative motion of the source .
This deceptively simple and counterintuitive postulate , along with the first postulate , leave all else open for change .
Among the changes are the loss of agreement on the time between events , the variation of distance with speed , and the realization that matter and energy can be converted into one another .
We describe these concepts in the following sections .
Check Your Understanding Explain how special relativity differs from general relativity .
Do time intervals depend on who observes them ?
Intuitively , it seems that the time for a process , such as the elapsed time for a foot race , should be the same for all observers .
In everyday experiences , disagreements over elapsed time have to do with the accuracy of measuring time .
No one would be likely to argue that the actual time interval was different for the moving runner and for the stationary clock displayed .
Carefully considering just how time is measured , however , shows that elapsed time does depends on the relative motion of an observer with respect to the process being measured .
Consider how we measure elapsed time .
If we use a stopwatch , for example , how do we know when to start and stop the watch ?
One method is to use the arrival of light from the event .
For example , if you ’ re in a moving car and observe the light arriving from a traffic signal change from green to red , you know it ’ s time to step on the brake pedal .
The timing is more accurate if some sort of electronic detection is used , avoiding human reaction times and other complications .
Now suppose two observers use this method to measure the time interval between two flashes of light from flash lamps that are a distance apart .
An observer A is seated midway on a rail car with two flash lamps at opposite sides equidistant from her .
A pulse of light is emitted from each flash lamp and moves toward observer A , shown in frame ( a ) of the figure .
The rail car is moving rapidly in the direction indicated by the velocity vector in the diagram .
An observer B standing on the platform is facing the rail car as it passes and observes both flashes of light reach him simultaneously , as shown in frame ( c ) .
He measures the distances from where he saw the pulses originate , finds them equal , and concludes that the pulses were emitted simultaneously .
However , because of Observer A ’ s motion , the pulse from the right of the railcar , from the direction the car is moving , reaches her before the pulse from the left , as shown in frame ( b ) .
She also measures the distances from within her frame of reference , finds them equal , and concludes that the pulses were not emitted simultaneously .
The two observers reach conflicting conclusions about whether the two events at well-separated locations were simultaneous .
Both frames of reference are valid , and both conclusions are valid .
Whether two events at separate locations are simultaneous depends on the motion of the observer relative to the locations of the events .
Here , the relative velocity between observers affects whether two events a distance apart are observed to be simultaneous .
Simultaneity is not absolute .
We might have guessed ( incorrectly ) that if light is emitted simultaneously , then two observers halfway between the sources would see the flashes simultaneously .
But careful analysis shows this can not be the case if the speed of light is the same in all inertial frames .
This type of thought experiment ( in German , “ Gedankenexperiment ” ) shows that seemingly obvious conclusions must be changed to agree with the postulates of relativity .
The validity of thought experiments can only be determined by actual observation , and careful experiments have repeatedly confirmed Einstein ’ s theory of relativity .
The analysis of simultaneity shows that Einstein ’ s postulates imply an important effect : Time intervals have different values when measured in different inertial frames .
Suppose , for example , an astronaut measures the time it takes for a pulse of light to travel a distance perpendicular to the direction of his ship ’ s motion ( relative to an earthbound observer ) , bounce off a mirror , and return .
How does the elapsed time that the astronaut measures in the spacecraft compare with the elapsed time that an earthbound observer measures by observing what is happening in the spacecraft ?
Examining this question leads to a profound result .
The elapsed time for a process depends on which observer is measuring it .
In this case , the time measured by the astronaut ( within the spaceship where the astronaut is at rest ) is smaller than the time measured by the earthbound observer ( to whom the astronaut is moving ) .
The time elapsed for the same process is different for the observers , because the distance the light pulse travels in the astronaut ’ s frame is smaller than in the earthbound frame , as seen in .
Light travels at the same speed in each frame , so it takes more time to travel the greater distance in the earthbound frame .
Time dilation is the lengthening of the time interval between two events for an observer in an inertial frame that is moving with respect to the rest frame of the events ( in which the events occur at the same location ) .
To quantitatively compare the time measurements in the two inertial frames , we can relate the distances in to each other , then express each distance in terms of the time of travel ( respectively either or ) of the pulse in the corresponding reference frame .
The resulting equation can then be solved for in terms of The lengths D and L in are the sides of a right triangle with hypotenuse s .
From the Pythagorean theorem , The lengths 2 s and 2 L are , respectively , the distances that the pulse of light and the spacecraft travel in time in the earthbound observer ’ s frame .
The length D is the distance that the light pulse travels in time in the astronaut ’ s frame .
This gives us three equations : Note that we used Einstein ’ s second postulate by taking the speed of light to be c in both inertial frames .
Note the asymmetry between the two measurements .
Only one of them is a measurement of the time interval between two events—the emission and arrival of the light pulse—at the same position .
It is a measurement of the time interval in the rest frame of a single clock .
The measurement in the earthbound frame involves comparing the time interval between two events that occur at different locations .
The time interval between events that occur at a single location has a separate name to distinguish it from the time measured by the earthbound observer , and we use the separate symbol to refer to it throughout this chapter .
The proper time interval between two events is the time interval measured by an observer for whom both events occur at the same location .
The equation relating and is truly remarkable .
First , as stated earlier , elapsed time is not the same for different observers moving relative to one another , even though both are in inertial frames .
A proper time interval for an observer who , like the astronaut , is moving with the apparatus , is smaller than the time interval for other observers .
It is the smallest possible measured time between two events .
The earthbound observer sees time intervals within the moving system as dilated ( i.e. , lengthened ) relative to how the observer moving relative to Earth sees them within the moving system .
Alternatively , according to the earthbound observer , less time passes between events within the moving frame .
Note that the shortest elapsed time between events is in the inertial frame in which the observer sees the events ( e.g. , the emission and arrival of the light signal ) occur at the same point .
This time effect is real and is not caused by inaccurate clocks or improper measurements .
Time-interval measurements of the same event differ for observers in relative motion .
The dilation of time is an intrinsic property of time itself .
All clocks moving relative to an observer , including biological clocks , such as a person ’ s heartbeat , or aging , are observed to run more slowly compared with a clock that is stationary relative to the observer .
then is extremely small , and the Note that if the relative velocity is much less than the speed of light elapsed times and are nearly equal .
At low velocities , physics based on modern relativity approaches classical physics—everyday experiences involve very small relativistic effects .
However , for speeds near the speed of light , is close to one , so is very small and becomes significantly larger than There is considerable experimental evidence that the equation is correct .
One example is found in cosmic ray particles that continuously rain down on Earth from deep space .
Some collisions of these particles with nuclei in the upper atmosphere result in short-lived particles called muons .
The half-life ( amount of time for half of a material to decay ) of a muon is 1.52 μs when it is at rest relative to the observer who measures the half-life .
This is the proper time interval This short time allows very few muons to reach Earth ’ s surface and be detected if Newtonian assumptions about time and space were correct .
However , muons produced by cosmic ray particles have a range of velocities , with some moving near the speed of light .
It has been found that the muon ’ s half-life as measured by an earthbound observer varies with velocity exactly as predicted by the equation The faster the muon moves , the longer it lives .
We on Earth see the muon last much longer than its half-life predicts within its own rest frame .
As viewed from our frame , the muon decays more slowly than it does when at rest relative to us .
A far larger fraction of muons reach the ground as a result .
Before we present the first example of solving a problem in relativity , we state a strategy you can use as a guideline for these calculations .
Make a list of what is given or can be inferred from the problem as stated ( identify the knowns ) .
Look in particular for information on relative velocity v .
Identify exactly what needs to be determined in the problem ( identify the unknowns ) .
Make certain you understand the conceptual aspects of the problem before making any calculations ( express the answer as an equation ) .
Decide , for example , which observer sees time dilated or length contracted before working with the equations or using them to carry out the calculation .
If you have thought about who sees what , who is moving with the event being observed , who sees proper time , and so on , you will find it much easier to determine if your calculation is reasonable .
Determine the primary type of calculation to be done to find the unknowns identified above ( do the calculation ) .
You will find the section summary helpful in determining whether a length contraction , relativistic kinetic energy , or some other concept is involved .
Note that you should not round off during the calculation .
As noted in the text , you must often perform your calculations to many digits to see the desired effect .
You may round off at the very end of the problem solution , but do not use a rounded number in a subsequent calculation .
Also , check the answer to see if it is reasonable : Does it make sense ?
This may be more difficult for relativity , which has few everyday examples to provide experience with what is reasonable .
But you can look for velocities greater than c or relativistic effects that are in the wrong direction ( such as a time contraction where a dilation was expected ) .
The Hypersonic Technology Vehicle 2 ( HTV-2 ) is an experimental rocket vehicle capable of traveling at 21,000 km/h ( 5830 m/s ) .
If an electronic clock in the HTV-2 measures a time interval of exactly 1-s duration , what would observers on Earth measure the time interval to be ?
Apply the time dilation formula to relate the proper time interval of the signal in HTV-2 to the time interval measured on the ground .
Identify the knowns : Identify the unknown : Express the answer as an equation : Do the calculation .
Use the expression for to determine from : The very high speed of the HTV-2 is still only 10 times the speed of light .
Relativistic effects for the HTV-2 are negligible for almost all purposes , but are not zero .
How fast must a vehicle travel for 1 second of time measured on a passenger ’ s watch in the vehicle to differ by 1 % for an observer measuring it from the ground outside ?
Use the time dilation formula to find v/c for the given ratio of times .
Identify the known : Identify the unknown : v/c .
Express the answer as an equation : Do the calculation : The result shows that an object must travel at very roughly 10 % of the speed of light for its motion to produce significant relativistic time dilation effects .
Suppose a cosmic ray colliding with a nucleus in Earth ’ s upper atmosphere produces a muon that has a velocity The muon then travels at constant velocity and lives 2.20 μs as measured in the muon ’ s frame of reference .
( You can imagine this as the muon ’ s internal clock . )
How long does the muon live as measured by an earthbound observer ?
As we will discuss later , in the muon ’ s reference frame , it travels a shorter distance than measured in Earth ’ s reference frame .
Identify the knowns : Identify the unknown : Express the answer as an equation .
Use : with Do the calculation .
Use the expression for to determine from : Remember to keep extra significant figures until the final answer .
One implication of this example is that because at 95.0 % of the speed of light the relativistic effects are significant .
The two time intervals differ by a factor of 3.20 , when classically they would be the same .
Something moving at 0.950 c is said to be highly relativistic .
A non-flat screen , older-style television display works by accelerating electrons over a short distance to relativistic speed , and then using electromagnetic fields to control where the electron beam strikes a fluorescent layer at the front of the tube .
Suppose the electrons travel at through a distance of from the start of the beam to the screen .
( a ) What is the time of travel of an electron in the rest frame of the television set ?
( b ) What is the electron ’ s time of travel in its own rest frame ?
( a ) Calculate the time from Even though the speed is relativistic , the calculation is entirely in one frame of reference , and relativity is therefore not involved .
Identify the knowns : Identify the unknown : the time of travel Express the answer as an equation : Do the calculation : The time of travel is extremely short , as expected .
Because the calculation is entirely within a single frame of reference , relativity is not involved , even though the electron speed is close to c .
( b ) In the frame of reference of the electron , the vacuum tube is moving and the electron is stationary .
The electron-emitting cathode leaves the electron and the front of the vacuum tube strikes the electron with the electron at the same location .
Therefore we use the time dilation formula to relate the proper time in the electron rest frame to the time in the television frame .
Identify the knowns ( from part a ) : Identify the unknown : Express the answer as an equation : Do the calculation : The time of travel is shorter in the electron frame of reference .
Because the problem requires finding the time interval measured in different reference frames for the same process , relativity is involved .
If we had tried to calculate the time in the electron rest frame by simply dividing the 0.200 m by the speed , the result would be slightly incorrect because of the relativistic speed of the electron .
Check Your Understanding What is if An intriguing consequence of time dilation is that a space traveler moving at a high velocity relative to Earth would age less than the astronaut ’ s earthbound twin .
This is often known as the twin paradox .
Imagine the astronaut moving at such a velocity that as in .
A trip that takes 2.00 years in her frame would take 60.0 years in the earthbound twin ’ s frame .
Suppose the astronaut travels 1.00 year to another star system , briefly explores the area , and then travels 1.00 year back .
An astronaut who was 40 years old at the start of the trip would be would be 42 when the spaceship returns .
Everything on Earth , however , would have aged 60.0 years .
The earthbound twin , if still alive , would be 100 years old .
The situation would seem different to the astronaut in .
Because motion is relative , the spaceship would seem to be stationary and Earth would appear to move .
( This is the sensation you have when flying in a jet . )
The paradox here is that the two twins can not both be correct .
As with all paradoxes , conflicting conclusions come from a false premise .
In fact , the astronaut ’ s motion is significantly different from that of the earthbound twin .
The astronaut accelerates to a high velocity and then decelerates to view the star system .
To return to Earth , she again accelerates and decelerates .
The spacecraft is not in a single inertial frame to which the time dilation formula can be directly applied .
That is , the astronaut twin changes inertial references .
The earthbound twin does not experience these accelerations and remains in the same inertial frame .
Thus , the situation is not symmetric , and it is incorrect to claim that the astronaut observes the same effects as her twin .
The lack of symmetry between the twins will be still more evident when we analyze the journey later in this chapter in terms of the path the astronaut follows through four-dimensional space-time .
In 1971 , American physicists Joseph Hafele and Richard Keating verified time dilation at low relative velocities by flying extremely accurate atomic clocks around the world on commercial aircraft .
They measured elapsed time to an accuracy of a few nanoseconds and compared it with the time measured by clocks left behind .
Hafele and Keating ’ s results were within experimental uncertainties of the predictions of relativity .
Both special and general relativity had to be taken into account , because gravity and accelerations were involved as well as relative motion .
Check Your Understanding a .
A particle travels at and lives when at rest relative to an observer .
How long does the particle live as viewed in the laboratory ?
What is the time interval that the computer in spacecraft B calculates ?
The length of the train car in is the same for all the passengers .
All of them would agree on the simultaneous location of the two ends of the car and obtain the same result for the distance between them .
But simultaneous events in one inertial frame need not be simultaneous in another .
If the train could travel at relativistic speeds , an observer on the ground would see the simultaneous locations of the two endpoints of the car at a different distance apart than observers inside the car .
Measured distances need not be the same for different observers when relativistic speeds are involved .
Two observers passing each other always see the same value of their relative speed .
Even though time dilation implies that the train passenger and the observer standing alongside the tracks measure different times for the train to pass , they still agree that relative speed , which is distance divided by elapsed time , is the same .
If an observer on the ground and one on the train measure a different time for the length of the train to pass the ground observer , agreeing on their relative speed means they must also see different distances traveled .
The muon discussed in illustrates this concept .
To an observer on Earth , the muon travels at 0.950 c for 7.05 μs from the time it is produced until it decays .
Therefore , it travels a distance relative to Earth of : In the muon frame , the lifetime of the muon is 2.20 μs .
In this frame of reference , the Earth , air , and ground have only enough time to travel : The distance between the same two events ( production and decay of a muon ) depends on who measures it and how they are moving relative to it .
Proper length is the distance between two points measured by an observer who is at rest relative to both of the points .
The earthbound observer measures the proper length because the points at which the muon is produced and decays are stationary relative to Earth .
To the muon , Earth , air , and clouds are moving , so the distance L it sees is not the proper length .
To relate distances measured by different observers , note that the velocity relative to the earthbound observer in our muon example is given by The time relative to the earthbound observer is because the object being timed is moving relative to this observer .
If we measure the length of anything moving relative to our frame , we find its length L to be smaller than the proper length that would be measured if the object were stationary .
For example , in the muon ’ s rest frame , the distance Earth moves between where the muon was produced and where it decayed is shorter than the distance traveled as seen from the Earth ’ s frame .
Those points are fixed relative to Earth but are moving relative to the muon .
Clouds and other objects are also contracted along the direction of motion as seen from muon ’ s rest frame .
Thus , two observers measure different distances along their direction of relative motion , depending on which one is measuring distances between objects at rest .
But what about distances measured in a direction perpendicular to the relative motion ?
Imagine two observers moving along their x -axes and passing each other while holding meter sticks vertically in the y -direction .
shows two meter sticks M and that are at rest in the reference frames of two boys S and respectively .
The sticks are held so that as they pass each other , their lower ends ( the 0-cm marks ) coincide .
Assume that when S looks at his stick M afterwards , he finds a line painted on it , just below the top of the stick .
Because the brush is attached to the top of the other boy ’ s stick S can only conclude that stick is less than 1.0 m long .
Now when the boys approach each other , like S , sees a meter stick moving toward him with speed v .
Because their situations are symmetric , each boy must make the same measurement of the stick in the other frame .
So , if S measures stick to be less than 1.0 m long , must measure stick M to be also less than 1.0 m long , and must see his paintbrush pass over the top of stick M and not paint a line on it .
In other words , after the same event , one boy sees a painted line on a stick , while the other does not see such a line on that same stick !
We are therefore forced to conclude our original assumption that S saw a line painted below the top of his stick was wrong !
Instead , S finds the line painted right at the 100-cm mark on M. Then both boys will agree that a line is painted on M , and they will also agree that both sticks are exactly 1 m long .
We conclude then that measurements of a transverse length must be the same in different inertial frames .
Suppose an astronaut , such as the twin in the twin paradox discussion , travels so fast that ( a ) The astronaut travels from Earth to the nearest star system , Alpha Centauri , 4.300 light years ( ly ) away as measured by an earthbound observer .
How far apart are Earth and Alpha Centauri as measured by the astronaut ?
( b ) In terms of c , what is the astronaut ’ s velocity relative to Earth ?
You may neglect the motion of Earth relative to the sun .
First , note that a light year ( ly ) is a convenient unit of distance on an astronomical scale—it is the distance light travels in a year .
For part ( a ) , the 4.300-ly distance between Alpha Centauri and Earth is the proper distance because it is measured by an earthbound observer to whom both stars are ( approximately ) stationary .
To the astronaut , Earth and Alpha Centauri are moving past at the same velocity , so the distance between them is the contracted length L .
In part ( b ) , we are given so we can find v by rearranging the definition of to express v in terms of c .
For part ( a ) : Identify the knowns : Identify the unknown : L .
Express the answer as an equation : Do the calculation : For part ( b ) : Identify the known : Identify the unknown : v in terms of c .
Express the answer as an equation .
Start with : Then solve for the unknown v/c by first squaring both sides and then rearranging : Do the calculation : or Remember not to round off calculations until the final answer , or you could get erroneous results .
This is especially true for special relativity calculations , where the differences might only be revealed after several decimal places .
The relativistic effect is large here and we see that v is approaching ( not equaling ) the speed of light .
Because the distance as measured by the astronaut is so much smaller , the astronaut can travel it in much less time in her frame .
People traveling at extremely high velocities could cover very large distances ( thousands or even millions of light years ) and age only a few years on the way .
However , like emigrants in past centuries who left their home , these people would leave the Earth they know forever .
Even if they returned , thousands to millions of years would have passed on Earth , obliterating most of what now exists .
There is also a more serious practical obstacle to traveling at such velocities ; immensely greater energies would be needed to achieve such high velocities than classical physics predicts can be attained .
This will be discussed later in the chapter .
Why don ’ t we notice length contraction in everyday life ?
The distance to the grocery store does not seem to depend on whether we are moving or not .
Examining the equation lengths are nearly equal , which is the classical expectation .
But length contraction is real , if not commonly experienced .
For example , a charged particle such as an electron traveling at relativistic velocity has electric field lines that are compressed along the direction of motion as seen by a stationary observer .
As the electron passes a detector , such as a coil of wire , its field interacts much more briefly , an effect observed at particle accelerators such as the 3-km-long Stanford Linear Accelerator ( SLAC ) .
In fact , to an electron traveling down the beam pipe at SLAC , the accelerator and Earth are all moving by and are length contracted .
The relativistic effect is so great that the accelerator is only 0.5 m long to the electron .
It is actually easier to get the electron beam down the pipe , because the beam does not have to be as precisely aimed to get we see that at low velocities the down a short pipe as it would to get down a pipe 3 km long .
This , again , is an experimental verification of the special theory of relativity .
Check Your Understanding A particle is traveling through Earth ’ s atmosphere at a speed of 0.750 c .
To an earthbound observer , the distance it travels is 2.50 km .
How far does the particle travel as viewed from the particle ’ s reference frame ?
We have used the postulates of relativity to examine , in particular examples , how observers in different frames of reference measure different values for lengths and the time intervals .
We can gain further insight into how the postulates of relativity change the Newtonian view of time and space by examining the transformation equations that give the space and time coordinates of events in one inertial reference frame in terms of those in another .
We first examine how position and time coordinates transform between inertial frames according to the view in Newtonian physics .
Then we examine how this has to be changed to agree with the postulates of relativity .
Finally , we examine the resulting Lorentz transformation equations and some of their consequences in terms of four-dimensional space-time diagrams , to support the view that the consequences of special relativity result from the properties of time and space itself , rather than electromagnetism .
An event is specified by its location and time ( x , y , z , t ) relative to one particular inertial frame of reference S .
As an example , ( x , y , z , t ) could denote the position of a particle at time t , and we could be looking at these positions for many different times to follow the motion of the particle .
Suppose a second frame of reference moves with velocity v with respect to the first .
For simplicity , assume this relative velocity is along the x -axis .
The relation between the time and coordinates in the two frames of reference is then Implicit in these equations is the assumption that time measurements made by observers in both S and are the same .
That is , These four equations are known collectively as the Galilean transformation .
We can obtain the Galilean velocity and acceleration transformation equations by differentiating these equations with respect to time .
We use u for the velocity of a particle throughout this chapter to distinguish it from v , the relative velocity of two reference frames .
Velocities in each frame differ by the velocity that one frame has as seen from the other frame .
Observers in both frames of reference measure the same value of the acceleration .
Because the mass is unchanged by the transformation , and distances between points are uncharged , observers in both frames see the same forces acting between objects and the same form of Newton ’ s second and third laws in all inertial frames .
The laws of mechanics are consistent with the first postulate of relativity .
The Galilean transformation nevertheless violates Einstein ’ s postulates , because the velocity equations state that a pulse of light moving with speed c along the x -axis would travel at speed in the other inertial frame .
Specifically , the spherical pulse has radius at time t in the unprimed frame , and also has radius at time in the primed frame .
Expressing these relations in Cartesian coordinates gives The left-hand sides of the two expressions can be set equal because both are zero .
Because and we obtain This can not be satisfied for nonzero relative velocity v of the two frames if we assume the Galilean transformation results in with To find the correct set of transformation equations , assume the two coordinate systems S and in .
First suppose that an event occurs at in and at in S , as depicted in the figure .
Suppose that at the instant that the origins of the coordinate systems in S and coincide , a flash bulb emits a spherically spreading pulse of light starting from the origin .
They are named in honor of H.A .
Lorentz ( 1853–1928 ) , who first proposed them .
Interestingly , he justified the transformation on what was eventually discovered to be a fallacious hypothesis .
The correct theoretical basis is Einstein ’ s special theory of relativity .
The reverse transformation expresses the variables in S in terms of those in Simply interchanging the primed and unprimed variables and substituting gives : Spacecraft is on its way to Alpha Centauri when Spacecraft S passes it at relative speed c /2 .
The captain of sends a radio signal that lasts 1.2 s according to that ship ’ s clock .
Use the Lorentz transformation to find the time interval of the signal measured by the communications officer of spaceship S .
Identify the known : Identify the unknown : Express the answer as an equation .
With this gives : Note that the Lorentz transformation reproduces the time dilation equation .
The surveyor in frame S has measured the two ends of the stick simultaneously , and found them at rest at and a distance apart .
The spaceship crew measures the simultaneous location of the ends of the sticks in their frame .
To relate the lengths recorded by observers in and S , respectively , write the second of the four Lorentz transformation equations as : Do the calculation .
Because the length of the moving stick is equal to : Note that the Lorentz transformation gave the length contraction equation for the street .
The observer shown in standing by the railroad tracks sees the two bulbs flash simultaneously at both ends of the 26 m long passenger car when the middle of the car passes him at a speed of c /2 .
Find the separation in time between when the bulbs flashed as seen by the train passenger seated in the middle of the car .
Identify the known : Note that the spatial separation of the two events is between the two lamps , not the distance of the lamp to the passenger .
Identify the unknown : Again , note that the time interval is between the flashes of the lamps , not between arrival times for reaching the passenger .
When phenomena such as the twin paradox , time dilation , length contraction , and the dependence of simultaneity on relative motion are viewed in this way , they are seen to be characteristic of the nature of space and time , rather than specific aspects of electromagnetism .
In three-dimensional space , positions are specified by three coordinates on a set of Cartesian axes , and the displacement of one point from another is given by : The distance between the points is The distance is invariant under a rotation of axes .
If a new set of Cartesian axes rotated around the origin relative to the original axes are used , each point in space will have new coordinates in terms of the new axes , but the distance given by That has the same value that had .
Something similar happens with the Lorentz transformation in space-time .
The path of a particle through space-time consists of the events ( x , y , z¸ ct ) specifying a location at each time of its motion .
The path through space-time is called the world line of the particle .
The world line of a particle that remains at rest at the same location is a straight line that is parallel to the time axis .
If the particle moves at constant velocity parallel to the x -axis , its world line would be a sloped line corresponding to a simple displacement vs. time graph .
If the particle accelerates , its world line is curved .
The increment of s along the world line of the particle is given in differential form as Just as the distance is invariant under rotation of the space axes , the space-time interval : is invariant under the Lorentz transformation .
However , there are some differences between a three-dimensional axis rotation and a Lorentz transformation involving the time axis , because of differences in how the metric , or rule for measuring the displacements and differ .
Although is invariant under spatial rotations and is invariant also under Lorentz transformation , the Lorentz transformation involving the time axis does not preserve some features , such as the axes remaining perpendicular or the length scale along each axis remaining the same .
Note that the quantity can have either sign , depending on the coordinates of the space-time events involved .
It is the same interval of proper time discussed earlier .
It also follows from the relation between and that that because is Lorentz invariant , the proper time is also Lorentz invariant .
All observers in all inertial frames agree on the proper time intervals between the same two events .
Starting with a particular event in space-time as the origin of the space-time graph shown , the world line of a particle that remains at rest at the initial location of the event at the origin then is the time axis .
Any plane through the time axis parallel to the spatial axes contains all the events that are simultaneous with each other and with the intersection of the plane and the time axis , as seen in the rest frame of the event at the origin .
It is useful to picture a light cone on the graph , formed by the world lines of all light beams passing through the origin event A , as shown in .
The light cone , according to the postulates of relativity , has sides at an angle of if the time axis is measured in units of ct , and , according to the postulates of relativity , the light cone remains the same in all inertial frames .
Because the event A is arbitrary , every point in the space-time diagram has a light cone associated with it .
Consider now the world line of a particle through space-time .
Any world line outside of the cone , such as one passing from A through C , would involve speeds greater than c , and would therefore not be possible .
Events such as C that lie outside the light cone are said to have a space-like separation from event A .
They are characterized by : An event like B that lies in the upper cone is reachable without exceeding the speed of light in vacuum , and is characterized by The event is said to have a time-like separation from A .
Time-like events that fall into the upper half of the light cone occur at greater values of t than the time of the event A at the vertex and are in the future relative to A .
Events that have time-like separation from A and fall in the lower half of the light cone are in the past , and can affect the event at the origin .
Therefore , which of the events with space-like separation comes before the other in time also depends on the frame of reference of the observer .
Similarly for any event with time-like separation from the event at the origin , a frame of reference can be found that will make the events occur at the same location .
Because the relations and are Lorentz invariant , whether two events are time-like and can be made to occur at the same place or space-like and can be made to occur at the same time is the same for all observers .
All observers in different inertial frames of reference agree on whether two events have a time-like or space-like separation .
The twin paradox discussed earlier involves an astronaut twin traveling at near light speed to a distant star system , and returning to Earth .
Because of time dilation , the space twin is predicted to age much less than the earthbound twin .
This seems paradoxical because we might have expected at first glance for the relative motion to be symmetrical and naively thought it possible to also argue that the earthbound twin should age less .
To analyze this in terms of a space-time diagram , assume that the origin of the axes used is fixed in Earth .
The world line of the earthbound twin is then along the time axis .
The world line of the astronaut twin , who travels to the distant star and then returns , must deviate from a straight line path in order to allow a return trip .
As seen in , the circumstances of the two twins are not at all symmetrical .
Their paths in space-time are of manifestly different length .
The twin paradox is therefore seen to be no paradox at all .
The situation of the two twins is not symmetrical in the space-time diagram .
The rotation of the time and space axes are both through the same angle .
The mesh of dashed lines parallel to the two axes show how coordinates of an event would be read along the primed axes .
This would be done by following a line parallel to the and one parallel to the -axis , as shown by the dashed lines .
The length scale of both axes are changed by : The line labeled at to the x -axis corresponds to the edge of the light cone , and is unaffected by the Lorentz transformation , in accordance with the second postulate of relativity .
The line , and the light cone it represents , are the same for both the S and frame of reference .
Simultaneity of events at separated locations depends on the frame of reference used to describe them , as given by the scissors-like “ rotation ” to new time and space coordinates as described .
If two events have the same t values in the unprimed frame of reference , they need not have the same values measured along the and would then not be simultaneous in the primed frame .
As a specific example , consider the near-light-speed train in which flash lamps at the two ends of the car have flashed simultaneously in the frame of reference of an observer on the ground .
The space-time graph is shown .
The flashes of the two lamps are represented by the dots labeled “ Left flash lamp ” and “ Right flash lamp ” that lie on the light cone in the past .
The world line of both pulses travel along the edge of the light cone to arrive at the observer on the ground simultaneously .
Their arrival is the event at the origin .
They therefore had to be emitted simultaneously in the unprimed frame , as represented by the point labeled as t ( both ) .
But time is measured along the in the frame of reference of the observer seated in the middle of the train car .
So in her frame of reference , the emission event of the bulbs labeled as ( left ) and ( right ) were not simultaneous .
In terms of the space-time diagram , the two observers are merely using different time axes for the same events because they are in different inertial frames , and the conclusions of both observers are equally valid .
As the analysis in terms of the space-time diagrams further suggests , the property of how simultaneity of events depends on the frame of reference results from the properties of space and time itself , rather than from anything specifically about electromagnetism .
Remaining in place in a kayak in a fast-moving river takes effort .
The river current pulls the kayak along .
Trying to paddle against the flow can move the kayak upstream relative to the water , but that only accounts for part of its velocity relative to the shore .
The kayak ’ s motion is an example of how velocities in Newtonian mechanics combine by vector addition .
The kayak ’ s velocity is the vector sum of its velocity relative to the water and the water ’ s velocity relative to the riverbank .
However , the relativistic addition of velocities is quite different .
Imagine a car traveling at night along a straight road , as in .
The driver sees the light leaving the headlights at speed c within the car ’ s frame of reference .
If the Galilean transformation applied to light , then the light from the car ’ s headlights would approach the pedestrian at a speed contrary to Einstein ’ s postulates .
Both the distance traveled and the time of travel are different in the two frames of reference , and they must differ in a way that makes the speed of light the same in all inertial frames .
The correct rules for transforming velocities from one frame to another can be obtained from the Lorentz transformation equations .
Suppose an object P is moving at constant velocity as measured in the frame .
The frame is moving along its at velocity v .
When the speed v of relative to S is comparable to the speed of light , the relativistic velocity addition law gives a much smaller result than the classical ( Galilean ) velocity addition does .
Suppose a spaceship heading directly toward Earth at half the speed of light sends a signal to us on a laserproduced beam of light .
Given that the light leaves the ship at speed c as observed from the ship , calculate the speed at which it approaches Earth .
Because the light and the spaceship are moving at relativistic speeds , we can not use simple velocity addition .
Instead , we determine the speed at which the light approaches Earth using relativistic velocity addition .
Identify the knowns : Identify the unknown : u .
Express the answer as an equation : Do the calculation : Relativistic velocity addition gives the correct result .
Light leaves the ship at speed c and approaches Earth at speed c .
The speed of light is independent of the relative motion of source and observer , whether the observer is on the ship or earthbound .
Velocities can not add to greater than the speed of light , provided that v is less than c and does not exceed c .
The following example illustrates that relativistic velocity addition is not as symmetric as classical velocity addition .
Suppose the spaceship in the previous example approaches Earth at half the speed of light and shoots a canister at a speed of 0.750 c .
( a ) At what velocity does an earthbound observer see the canister if it is shot directly toward Earth ?
( b ) If it is shot directly away from Earth ?
Because the canister and the spaceship are moving at relativistic speeds , we must determine the speed of the canister by an earthbound observer using relativistic velocity addition instead of simple velocity addition .
Identify the knowns : Identify the unknown : u .
Express the answer as an equation : Do the calculation : Identify the knowns : Identify the unknown : u .
But relativistic velocities do not add as simply as they do classically .
In part ( a ) , the canister does approach Earth faster , but at less than the vector sum of the velocities , which would give 1.250 c .
In part ( b ) , the canister moves away from Earth at a velocity of which is faster than the −0.250 c expected classically .
The differences in velocities are not even symmetric : In part ( a ) , an observer on Earth sees the canister and the ship moving apart at a speed of 0.409 c , and at a speed of 0.900 c in part ( b ) .
Check Your Understanding Distances along a direction perpendicular to the relative motion of the two frames are the same in both frames .
Why then are velocities perpendicular to the x -direction different in the two frames ?
As discussed in the chapter on sound , if a source of sound and a listener are moving farther apart , the listener encounters fewer cycles of a wave in each second , and therefore lower frequency , than if their separation remains constant .
For the same reason , the listener detects a higher frequency if the source and listener are getting closer .
The resulting Doppler shift in detected frequency occurs for any form of wave .
For sound waves , however , the equations for the Doppler shift differ markedly depending on whether it is the source , the observer , or the air , which is moving .
Light requires no medium , and the Doppler shift for light traveling in vacuum depends only on the relative speed of the observer and source .
Suppose an observer in S sees light from a source in moving away at velocity v .
The wavelength of the light could be measured within —for example , by using a mirror to set up standing waves and measuring the distance between nodes .
These distances are proper lengths with as their rest frame , and change by a factor when measured in the observer ’ s frame S , where the ruler measuring the wavelength in is seen as moving .
The overall increase from both effects gives where is the wavelength of the light seen by the source in and is the wavelength that the observer detects within S .
The observed wavelength of electromagnetic radiation is longer ( called a “ red shift ” ) than that emitted by the source when the source moves away from the observer .
Similarly , the wavelength is shorter ( called a “ blue shift ” ) when the source moves toward the observer .
In terms of source frequency and observed frequency , this equation can be written as Notice that the signs are different from those of the wavelength equation .
Suppose a galaxy is moving away from Earth at a speed 0.825 c .
It emits radio waves with a wavelength of 0.525 m. What wavelength would we detect on Earth ?
Because the galaxy is moving at a relativistic speed , we must determine the Doppler shift of the radio waves using the relativistic Doppler shift instead of the classical Doppler shift .
Identify the knowns : Identify the unknown : Express the answer as an equation : Do the calculation : Because the galaxy is moving away from Earth , we expect the wavelengths of radiation it emits to be redshifted .
The wavelength we calculated is 1.70 m , which is redshifted from the original wavelength of 0.525 m. You will see in that detecting redshifted radiation led to present-day understanding of the origin and evolution of the universe .
Check Your Understanding Suppose a space probe moves away from Earth at a speed 0.350 c .
It sends a radio-wave message back to Earth at a frequency of 1.50 GHz .
At what frequency is the message received on Earth ?
The relativistic Doppler effect has applications ranging from Doppler radar storm monitoring to providing information on the motion and distance of stars .
We describe some of these applications in the exercises .
Momentum is a central concept in physics .
The broadest form of Newton ’ s second law is stated in terms of momentum .
Momentum is conserved whenever the net external force on a system is zero .
This makes momentum conservation a fundamental tool for analyzing collisions .
Much of what we know about subatomic structure comes from the analysis of collisions of accelerator-produced relativistic particles , and momentum conservation plays a crucial role in this analysis .
The first postulate of relativity states that the laws of physics are the same in all inertial frames .
Does the law of conservation of momentum survive this requirement at high velocities ?
It can be shown that the momentum calculated as merely even if it is conserved in one frame of reference , may not be conserved in another after applying the Lorentz transformation to the velocities .
The factor that occurs here has the same form as the previous relativistic factor except that it is now in terms of the velocity of the particle u instead of the relative velocity v of two frames of reference .
With p expressed in this way , total momentum is conserved whenever the net external force is zero , just as in classical physics .
Again we see that the relativistic quantity becomes virtually the same as the classical quantity at low velocities , where u / c is small and is very nearly equal to 1 .
Relativistic momentum has the same intuitive role as classical momentum .
It is greatest for large masses moving at high velocities , but because of the factor relativistic momentum approaches infinity as u approaches c .
This is another indication that an object with mass can not reach the speed of light .
If it did , its momentum would become infinite—an unreasonable value .
The relativistically correct definition of momentum as is sometimes taken to imply that mass varies with velocity : particularly in older textbooks .
However , note that m is the mass of the object as measured by a person at rest relative to the object .
Thus , m is defined to be the rest mass , which could be measured at rest , perhaps using gravity .
When a mass is moving relative to an observer , the only way that its mass can be determined is through collisions or other means involving momentum .
Because the mass of a moving object can not be determined independently of momentum , the only meaningful mass is rest mass .
Therefore , when we use the term “ mass , ” assume it to be identical to “ rest mass. ” Relativistic momentum is defined in such a way that conservation of momentum holds in all inertial frames .
Whenever the net external force on a system is zero , relativistic momentum is conserved , just as is the case for classical momentum .
This has been verified in numerous experiments .
Check Your Understanding What is the momentum of an electron traveling at a speed 0.985 c ?
The rest mass of the electron is The tokamak in is a form of experimental fusion reactor , which can change mass to energy .
Nuclear reactors are proof of the relationship between energy and matter .
Conservation of energy is one of the most important laws in physics .
Not only does energy have many important forms , but each form can be converted to any other .
We know that classically , the total amount of energy in a system remains constant .
Relativistically , energy is still conserved , but energy-mass equivalence must now be taken into account , for example , in the reactions that occur within a nuclear reactor .
Relativistic energy is intentionally defined so that it is conserved in all inertial frames , just as is the case for relativistic momentum .
As a consequence , several fundamental quantities are related in ways not known in classical physics .
All of these relationships have been verified by experimental results and have fundamental consequences .
The altered definition of energy contains some of the most fundamental and spectacular new insights into nature in recent history .
The first postulate of relativity states that the laws of physics are the same in all inertial frames .
Einstein showed that the law of conservation of energy of a particle is valid relativistically , but for energy expressed in terms of velocity and mass in a way consistent with relativity .
Consider first the relativistic expression for the kinetic energy .
We again use u for velocity to distinguish it from relative velocity v between observers .
Classically , kinetic energy is related to mass and speed by the familiar expression The corresponding relativistic expression for kinetic energy can be obtained from the work-energy theorem .
This theorem states that the net work on a system goes into kinetic energy .
Specifically , if a force , expressed as to its final kinetic energy .
In some cases , as in the limit of small speed here , most terms are very small .
Thus , the expression derived here for is not exact , but it is a very accurate approximation .
We know that becomes infinite as u approaches c , so that also becomes infinite as the velocity approaches the speed of light .
The increase in is far larger than in as v approaches c. An infinite amount of work ( and , hence , an infinite amount of energy input ) is required to accelerate a mass to the speed of light .
No object with mass can attain the speed of light .
The speed of light is the ultimate speed limit for any particle having mass .
All of this is consistent with the fact that velocities less than c always add to less than c .
Both the relativistic form for kinetic energy and the ultimate speed limit being c have been confirmed in detail in numerous experiments .
No matter how much energy is put into accelerating a mass , its velocity can only approach—not reach—the speed of light .
An electron has a velocity ( a ) Calculate the kinetic energy in MeV of the electron .
( b ) Compare this with the classical value for kinetic energy at this velocity .
( The mass of an electron is ) The expression for relativistic kinetic energy is always correct , but for ( a ) , it must be used because the velocity is highly relativistic ( close to c ) .
First , we calculate the relativistic factor and then use it to determine the relativistic kinetic energy .
For ( b ) , we calculate the classical kinetic energy ( which would be close to the relativistic value if v were less than a few percent of c ) and see that it is not the same .
For part ( a ) : Identify the knowns : Identify the unknown : Express the answer as an equation : with Do the calculation .
Note also that the classical value is much smaller than the relativistic value .
In fact , in this case .
This illustrates how difficult it is to get a mass moving close to the speed of light .
Much more energy is needed than predicted classically .
Ever-increasing amounts of energy are needed to get the velocity of a mass a little closer to that of light .
An energy of 3 MeV is a very small amount for an electron , and it can be achieved with present-day particle accelerators .
SLAC , for example , can accelerate electrons to over Is there any point in getting v a little closer to c than 99.0 % or 99.9 % ?
The answer is yes .
We learn a great deal by doing this .
The energy that goes into a high-velocity mass can be converted into any other form , including into entirely new particles .
In the Large Hadron Collider in , charged particles are accelerated before entering the ring-like structure .
There , two beams of particles are accelerated to their final speed of about 99.7 % the speed of light in opposite directions , and made to collide , producing totally new species of particles .
Most of what we know about the substructure of matter and the collection of exotic short-lived particles in nature has been learned this way .
Patterns in the characteristics of these previously unknown particles hint at a basic substructure for all matter .
These particles and some of their characteristics will be discussed in a later chapter on particle physics .
For example , when a neutral pion of mass m at rest decays into two photons , the photons have zero mass but are observed to have total energy corresponding to for the pion .
Similarly , when a particle of mass m decays into two or more particles with smaller total mass , the observed kinetic energy imparted to the products of the decay corresponds to the decrease in mass .
Thus , E is the total relativistic energy of the particle , and is its rest energy .
Total energy E of a particle is where m is mass , c is the speed of light , and u is the velocity of the mass relative to an observer .
Rest energy of an object is This is the correct form of Einstein ’ s most famous equation , which for the first time showed that energy is related to the mass of an object at rest .
For example , if energy is stored in the object , its rest mass increases .
This also implies that mass can be destroyed to release energy .
The implications of these first two equations regarding relativistic energy are so broad that they were not completely recognized for some years after Einstein published them in 1905 , nor was the experimental proof that they are correct widely recognized at first .
Einstein , it should be noted , did understand and describe the meanings and implications of his theory .
Calculate the rest energy of a 1.00-g mass .
One gram is a small mass—less than one-half the mass of a penny .
We can multiply this mass , in SI units , by the speed of light squared to find the equivalent rest energy .
Identify the knowns : Identify the unknown : Express the answer as an equation : Do the calculation : Convert units .
Noting that we see the rest energy is : This is an enormous amount of energy for a 1.00-g mass .
Rest energy is large because the speed of light c is a large number and is a very large number , so that is huge for any macroscopic mass .
The rest mass energy for 1.00 g is about twice the energy released by the Hiroshima atomic bomb and about 10,000 times the kinetic energy of a large aircraft carrier .
Today , the practical applications of the conversion of mass into another form of energy , such as in nuclear weapons and nuclear power plants , are well known .
But examples also existed when Einstein first proposed the correct form of relativistic energy , and he did describe some of them .
Nuclear radiation had been discovered in the previous decade , and it had been a mystery as to where its energy originated .
The explanation was that , in some nuclear processes , a small amount of mass is destroyed and energy is released and carried by nuclear radiation .
But the amount of mass destroyed is so small that it is difficult to detect that any is missing .
Although Einstein proposed this as the source of energy in the radioactive salts then being studied , it was many years before there was broad recognition that mass could be and , in fact , commonly is , converted to energy .
Because of the relationship of rest energy to mass , we now consider mass to be a form of energy rather than something separate .
There had not been even a hint of this prior to Einstein ’ s work .
Energy-mass equivalence is now known to be the source of the sun ’ s energy , the energy of nuclear decay , and even one of the sources of energy keeping Earth ’ s interior hot .
What happens to energy stored in an object at rest , such as the energy put into a battery by charging it , or the energy stored in a toy gun ’ s compressed spring ?
The energy input becomes part of the total energy of the object and thus increases its rest mass .
All stored and potential energy becomes mass in a system .
In seeming contradiction , the principle of conservation of mass ( meaning total mass is constant ) was one of the great laws verified by nineteenth-century science .
Why was it not noticed to be incorrect ?
The following example helps answer this question .
( b ) What percent increase is this , given that the battery ’ s mass is 20.0 kg ?
In part ( a ) , we first must find the energy stored as chemical energy in the battery , which equals the electrical energy the battery can provide .
Because we have to calculate the charge q in which is the product of the current I and the time t .
We then multiply the result by 12.0 V. We can then calculate the battery ’ s increase in mass using Part ( b ) is a simple ratio converted into a percentage .
Express the answer as an equation : Do the calculation : Both the actual increase in mass and the percent increase are very small , because energy is divided by a very large number .
We would have to be able to measure the mass of the battery to a precision of a billionth of a percent , or 1 part in to notice this increase .
It is no wonder that the mass variation is not readily observed .
In fact , this change in mass is so small that we may question how anyone could verify that it is real .
The answer is found in nuclear processes in which the percentage of mass destroyed is large enough to be measured accurately .
The mass of the fuel of a nuclear reactor , for example , is measurably smaller when its energy has been used .
In that case , stored energy has been released ( converted mostly into thermal energy to power electric generators ) and the rest mass has decreased .
A decrease in mass also occurs from using the energy stored in a battery , except that the stored energy is much greater in nuclear processes , making the change in mass measurable in practice as well as in theory .
We know classically that kinetic energy and momentum are related to each other , because : Relativistically , we can obtain a relationship between energy and momentum by algebraically manipulating their defining equations .
This yields : where E is the relativistic total energy , and p is the relativistic momentum .
This relationship between relativistic energy and relativistic momentum is more complicated than the classical version , but we can gain some interesting new insights by examining it .
First , total energy is related to momentum and rest mass .
At rest , momentum is zero , and the equation gives the total energy to be the rest energy ( so this equation is consistent with the discussion of rest energy above ) .
However , as the mass is accelerated , its momentum p increases , thus increasing the total energy .
At sufficiently high velocities , the rest energy term becomes negligible compared with the momentum term thus , at extremely relativistic velocities .
the equation If we consider momentum p to be distinct for a particle that has no mass .
If we take m to be zero in this equation , then Massless particles have this momentum .
There are several massless particles found in nature , including photons ( which are packets of electromagnetic radiation ) .
Another implication is that a massless particle must travel at speed c and only at speed c .
It is beyond the scope of this text to examine the relationship in the equation in detail , but you can see that the relationship has important implications in special relativity .
from mass , we can determine the implications of Check Your Understanding What is the kinetic energy of an electron if its speed is 0.992 c ?
Two of the most revolutionary concepts of the twentieth century were the description of light as a collection of particles , and the treatment of particles as waves .
These wave properties of matter have led to the discovery of technologies such as electron microscopy , which allows us to examine submicroscopic objects such as grains of pollen , as shown above .
In this chapter , you will learn about the energy quantum , a concept that was introduced in 1900 by the German physicist Max Planck to explain blackbody radiation .
We discuss how Albert Einstein extended Planck ’ s concept to a quantum of light ( a “ photon ” ) to explain the photoelectric effect .
We also show how American physicist Arthur H. Compton used the photon concept in 1923 to explain wavelength shifts observed in X-rays .
All bodies emit electromagnetic radiation over a range of wavelengths .
In an earlier chapter , we learned that a cooler body radiates less energy than a warmer body .
We also know by observation that when a body is heated and its temperature rises , the perceived wavelength of its emitted radiation changes from infrared to red , and then from red to orange , and so forth .
As its temperature rises , the body glows with the colors corresponding to ever-smaller wavelengths of the electromagnetic spectrum .
This is the underlying principle of the incandescent light bulb : A hot metal filament glows red , and when heating continues , its glow eventually covers the entire visible portion of the electromagnetic spectrum .
The temperature ( T ) of the object that emits radiation , or the emitter , determines the wavelength at which the radiated energy is at its maximum .
For example , the Sun , whose surface temperature is in the range between 5000 K and 6000 K , radiates most strongly in a range of wavelengths about 560 nm in the visible part of the electromagnetic spectrum .
Your body , when at its normal temperature of about 300 K , radiates most strongly in the infrared part of the spectrum .
Radiation that is incident on an object is partially absorbed and partially reflected .
At thermodynamic equilibrium , the rate at which an object absorbs radiation is the same as the rate at which it emits it .
Therefore , a good absorber of radiation ( any object that absorbs radiation ) is also a good emitter .
A perfect absorber absorbs all electromagnetic radiation incident on it ; such an object is called a blackbody .
The inside walls of a cavity radiator are rough and blackened so that any radiation that enters through a tiny hole in the cavity wall becomes trapped inside the cavity .
At thermodynamic equilibrium ( at temperature T ) , the cavity walls absorb exactly as much radiation as they emit .
Furthermore , inside the cavity , the radiation entering the hole is balanced by the radiation leaving it .
The emission spectrum of a blackbody can be obtained by analyzing the light radiating from the hole .
Electromagnetic waves emitted by a blackbody are called blackbody radiation .
The intensity of blackbody radiation depends on the wavelength of the emitted radiation and on the temperature T of the blackbody .
The function is the power intensity that is radiated per unit wavelength ; in other words , it is the power radiated per unit area of the hole in a cavity radiator per unit wavelength .
According to this definition , is the power per unit area that is emitted in the wavelength interval from to The intensity distribution among wavelengths of radiation emitted by cavities was studied experimentally at the end of the nineteenth century .
Generally , radiation emitted by materials only approximately follows the blackbody radiation curve ; however , spectra of common stars do follow the blackbody radiation curve very closely .
Two important laws summarize the experimental findings of blackbody radiation : Wien ’ s displacement law and Stefan ’ s law .
Wien ’ s displacement law is illustrated in by the curve connecting the maxima on the intensity curves .
In these curves , we see that the hotter the body , the shorter the wavelength corresponding to the emission peak in the radiation curve .
Quantitatively , Wien ’ s law reads where is the position of the maximum in the radiation curve .
In other words , is the wavelength at which a blackbody radiates most strongly at a given temperature T .
Note that in , the temperature is in kelvins .
Wien ’ s displacement law allows us to estimate the temperatures of distant stars by measuring the wavelength of radiation they emit .
On a clear evening during the winter months , if you happen to be in the Northern Hemisphere and look up at the sky , you can see the constellation Orion ( The Hunter ) .
One star in this constellation , Rigel , flickers in a blue color and another star , Betelgeuse , has a reddish color , as shown in .
Which of these two stars is cooler , Betelgeuse or Rigel ?
We treat each star as a blackbody .
Then according to Wien ’ s law , its temperature is inversely proportional to the of wavelength of its peak intensity .
The wavelength red light .
Even if we do not know the precise wavelengths , we can still set up a proportion .
Writing Wien ’ s law for the blue star and for the red star , we have of blue light is shorter than the wavelength When simplified , gives Therefore , Betelgeuse is cooler than Rigel .
Note that Wien ’ s displacement law tells us that the higher the temperature of an emitting body , the shorter the wavelength of the radiation it emits .
The qualitative analysis presented in this example is generally valid for any emitting body , whether it is a big object such as a star or a small object such as the glowing filament in an incandescent lightbulb .
Check Your Understanding The flame of a peach-scented candle has a yellowish color and the flame of a Bunsen ’ s burner in a chemistry lab has a bluish color .
Which flame has a higher temperature ?
The second experimental relation is Stefan ’ s law , which concerns the total power of blackbody radiation emitted across the entire spectrum of wavelengths at a given temperature .
In , this total power is represented by the area under the blackbody radiation curve for a given T .
As the temperature of a blackbody increases , the total emitted power also increases .
A star such as our Sun will eventually evolve to a “ red giant ” star and then to a “ white dwarf ” star .
A typical white dwarf is approximately the size of Earth , and its surface temperature is about A typical red giant has a surface temperature of and a radius ~100,000 times larger than that of a white dwarf .
What is the average radiated power per unit area and the total power radiated by each of these types of stars ?
How do they compare ?
If we treat the star as a blackbody , then according to Stefan ’ s law , the total power that the star radiates is proportional to the fourth power of its temperature .
To find the power radiated per unit area of the surface , we do not need to make any assumptions about the shape of the star because P / A depends only on temperature .
However , to compute the total power , we need to make an assumption that the energy radiates through a spherical surface enclosing the star , so that the surface area is where R is its radius .
A simple proportion based on Stefan ’ s law gives The power emitted per unit area by a white dwarf is about 5000 times that the power emitted by a red giant .
Denoting this ratio by gives We see that the total power emitted by a white dwarf is a tiny fraction of the total power emitted by a red giant .
Despite its relatively lower temperature , the overall power radiated by a red giant far exceeds that of the white dwarf because the red giant has a much larger surface area .
To estimate the absolute value of the emitted power per unit area , we again use Stefan ’ s law .
For the white dwarf , we obtain The analogous result for the red giant is obtained by scaling the result for a white dwarf : To estimate the total power emitted by a white dwarf , in principle , we could use .
However , to find its surface area , we need to know the average radius , which is not given in this example .
Therefore , the solution stops here .
The same is also true for the red giant star .
Check Your Understanding An iron poker is being heated .
As its temperature rises , the poker begins to glow—first dull red , then bright red , then orange , and then yellow .
Use either the blackbody radiation curve or Wien ’ s law to explain these changes in the color of the glow .
Check Your Understanding Suppose that two stars , and radiate exactly the same total power .
If the radius of star is three times that of star what is the ratio of the surface temperatures of these stars ?
Which one is hotter ?
The term “ blackbody ” was coined by Gustav R. Kirchhoff in 1862 .
The blackbody radiation curve was known experimentally , but its shape eluded physical explanation until the year 1900 .
The physical model of a blackbody at temperature T is that of the electromagnetic waves enclosed in a cavity ( see ) and at thermodynamic equilibrium with the cavity walls .
The waves can exchange energy with the walls .
The objective here is to find the energy density distribution among various modes of vibration at various wavelengths ( or frequencies ) .
In other words , we want to know how much energy is carried by a single wavelength or a band of wavelengths .
Once we know the energy distribution , we can use standard statistical methods ( similar to those studied in a previous chapter ) to obtain the blackbody radiation curve , Stefan ’ s law , and Wien ’ s displacement law .
When the physical model is correct , the theoretical predictions should be the same as the experimental curves .
In a classical approach to the blackbody radiation problem , in which radiation is treated as waves ( as you have studied in previous chapters ) , the modes of electromagnetic waves trapped in the cavity are in equilibrium and continually exchange their energies with the cavity walls .
There is no physical reason why a wave should do otherwise : Any amount of energy can be exchanged , either by being transferred from the wave to the material in the wall or by being received by the wave from the material in the wall .
This classical picture is the basis of the model developed by Lord Rayleigh and , independently , by Sir James Jeans .
The result of this classical model for blackbody radiation curves is known as the Rayleigh–Jeans law .
However , as shown in , the Rayleigh–Jeans law fails to correctly reproduce experimental results .
In the limit of short wavelengths , the Rayleigh–Jeans law predicts infinite radiation intensity , which is inconsistent with the experimental results in which radiation intensity has finite values in the ultraviolet region of the spectrum .
This divergence between the results of classical theory and experiments , which came to be called the ultraviolet catastrophe , shows how classical physics fails to explain the mechanism of blackbody radiation .
The blackbody radiation problem was solved in 1900 by Max Planck .
Planck used the same idea as the Rayleigh–Jeans model in the sense that he treated the electromagnetic waves between the walls inside the cavity classically , and assumed that the radiation is in equilibrium with the cavity walls .
The innovative idea that Planck introduced in his model is the assumption that the cavity radiation originates from atomic oscillations inside the cavity walls , and that these oscillations can have only discrete values of energy .
Therefore , the radiation trapped inside the cavity walls can exchange energy with the walls only in discrete amounts .
Planck ’ s hypothesis of discrete energy values , which he called quanta , assumes that the oscillators inside the cavity walls have quantized energies .
This was a brand new idea that went beyond the classical physics of the nineteenth century because , as you learned in a previous chapter , in the classical picture , the energy of an oscillator can take on any continuous value .
Planck assumed that the energy of an oscillator can have only discrete , or quantized , values : In , f is the frequency of Planck ’ s oscillator .
The natural number n that enumerates these discrete energies is called a quantum number .
The physical constant h is called Planck ’ s constant : Each discrete energy value corresponds to a quantum state of a Planck oscillator .
Quantum states are enumerated by quantum numbers .
For example , when Planck ’ s oscillator is in its first quantum state , its energy is when it is in the quantum state , its energy is when it is in the quantum state , and so on .
Note that shows that there are infinitely many quantum states , which can be represented as a sequence { hf , 2 hf , 3 hf , … , ( n – 1 ) hf , nhf , ( n + 1 ) hf , … } .
Each two consecutive quantum states in this sequence are separated by an energy jump , An oscillator in the wall can receive energy from the radiation in the cavity ( absorption ) , or it can give away energy to the radiation in the cavity ( emission ) .
The absorption process sends the oscillator to a higher quantum state , and the emission process sends the oscillator to a lower quantum state .
Whichever way this exchange of energy goes , the smallest amount of energy that can be exchanged is hf .
There is no upper limit to how much energy can be exchanged , but whatever is exchanged must be an integer multiple of hf .
If the energy packet does not have this exact amount , it is neither absorbed nor emitted at the wall of the blackbody .
This law is in agreement with the experimental blackbody radiation curve ( see ) .
In addition , Wien ’ s displacement law and Stefan ’ s law can both be derived from .
A quantum oscillator in the cavity wall in is vibrating at a frequency of Calculate the spacing between its energy levels .
Energy states of a quantum oscillator are given by .
The energy spacing is obtained by finding the energy difference between two adjacent quantum states for quantum numbers n + 1 and n .
We can substitute the given frequency and Planck ’ s constant directly into the equation : Note that we do not specify what kind of material was used to build the cavity .
Here , a quantum oscillator is a theoretical model of an atom or molecule of material in the wall .
Check Your Understanding A molecule is vibrating at a frequency of What is the smallest spacing between its vibrational energy levels ?
A 1.0-kg mass oscillates at the end of a spring with a spring constant of 1000 N/m .
The amplitude of these oscillations is 0.10 m. Use the concept of quantization to find the energy spacing for this classical oscillator .
Is the energy quantization significant for macroscopic systems , such as this oscillator ?
We use as though the system were a quantum oscillator , but with the frequency f of the mass vibrating on a spring .
To evaluate whether or not quantization has a significant effect , we compare the quantum energy spacing with the macroscopic total energy of this classical oscillator .
Therefore , for all practical purposes , the energy of a classical oscillator takes on continuous values .
This is why classical principles may be applied to macroscopic systems encountered in everyday life without loss of accuracy .
Check Your Understanding Would the result in be different if the mass were not 1.0 kg but a tiny mass of 1.0 µ g , and the amplitude of vibrations were 0.10 µ m ?
When Planck first published his result , the hypothesis of energy quanta was not taken seriously by the physics community because it did not follow from any established physics theory at that time .
It was perceived , even by Planck himself , as a useful mathematical trick that led to a good theoretical “ fit ” to the experimental curve .
This perception was changed in 1905 when Einstein published his explanation of the photoelectric effect , in which he gave Planck ’ s energy quantum a new meaning : that of a particle of light .
When a metal surface is exposed to a monochromatic electromagnetic wave of sufficiently short wavelength ( or equivalently , above a threshold frequency ) , the incident radiation is absorbed and the exposed surface emits electrons .
This phenomenon is known as the photoelectric effect .
Electrons that are emitted in this process are called photoelectrons .
The experimental setup to study the photoelectric effect is shown schematically in .
The target material serves as the anode , which becomes the emitter of photoelectrons when it is illuminated by monochromatic radiation .
We call this electrode the photoelectrode .
Photoelectrons are collected at the cathode , which is kept at a lower potential with respect to the anode .
The potential difference between the electrodes can be increased or decreased , or its polarity can be reversed .
The electrodes are enclosed in an evacuated glass tube so that photoelectrons do not lose their kinetic energy on collisions with air molecules in the space between electrodes .
When the target material is not exposed to radiation , no current is registered in this circuit because the circuit is broken ( note , there is a gap between the electrodes ) .
But when the target material is connected to the negative terminal of a battery and exposed to radiation , a current is registered in this circuit ; this current is called the photocurrent .
Suppose that we now reverse the potential difference between the electrodes so that the target material now connects with the positive terminal of a battery , and then we slowly increase the voltage .
The photocurrent gradually dies out and eventually stops flowing completely at some value of this reversed voltage .
The potential difference at which the photocurrent stops flowing is called the stopping potential .
Let ’ s examine each of these characteristics .
When radiation strikes the target material in the electrode , electrons are emitted almost instantaneously , even at very low intensities of incident radiation .
This absence of lag time contradicts our understanding based on classical physics .
Classical physics predicts that for low-energy radiation , it would take significant time before irradiated electrons could gain sufficient energy to leave the electrode surface ; however , such an energy buildup is not observed .
Typical experimental curves are shown in , in which the photocurrent is plotted versus the applied potential difference between the electrodes .
For the positive potential difference , the current steadily grows until it reaches a plateau .
Furthering the potential increase beyond this point does not increase the photocurrent at all .
A higher intensity of radiation produces a higher value of photocurrent .
For the negative potential difference , as the absolute value of the potential difference increases , the value of the photocurrent decreases and becomes zero at the stopping potential .
For any intensity of incident radiation , whether the intensity is high or low , the value of the stopping potential always stays at one value .
To understand why this result is unusual from the point of view of classical physics , we first have to analyze the energy of photoelectrons .
A photoelectron that leaves the surface has kinetic energy K .
It gained this energy from the incident electromagnetic wave .
When the stopping potential is applied , the photoelectron loses its initial kinetic energy and comes to rest .
Thus , its energy balance becomes so that In the presence of the stopping potential , the largest kinetic energy that a photoelectron can have is its initial kinetic energy , which it has at the surface of the photoelectrode .
Therefore , the largest kinetic energy of photoelectrons can be directly measured by measuring the stopping potential : At this point we can see where the classical theory is at odds with the experimental results .
In classical theory , the photoelectron absorbs electromagnetic energy in a continuous way ; this means that when the incident radiation has a high intensity , the kinetic energy in is expected to be high .
Similarly , when the radiation has a low intensity , the kinetic energy is expected to be low .
But the experiment shows that the maximum kinetic energy of photoelectrons is independent of the light intensity .
For any metal surface , there is a minimum frequency of incident radiation below which photocurrent does not occur .
The value of this cut-off frequency for the photoelectric effect is a physical property of the metal : Different materials have different values of cut-off frequency .
Experimental data show a typical linear trend ( see ) .
The kinetic energy of photoelectrons at the surface grows linearly with the increasing frequency of incident radiation .
Measurements for all metal surfaces give linear plots with one slope .
None of these observed phenomena is in accord with the classical understanding of nature .
According to the classical description , the kinetic energy of photoelectrons should not depend on the frequency of incident radiation at all , and there should be no cut-off frequency .
Instead , in the classical picture , electrons receive energy from the incident electromagnetic wave in a continuous way , and the amount of energy they receive depends only on the intensity of the incident light and nothing else .
So in the classical understanding , as long as the light is shining , the photoelectric effect is expected to continue .
The photoelectric effect was explained in 1905 by A. Einstein .
Einstein reasoned that if Planck ’ s hypothesis about energy quanta was correct for describing the energy exchange between electromagnetic radiation and cavity walls , it should also work to describe energy absorption from electromagnetic radiation by the surface of a photoelectrode .
He postulated that an electromagnetic wave carries its energy in discrete packets .
Einstein ’ s postulate goes beyond Planck ’ s hypothesis because it states that the light itself consists of energy quanta .
In other words , it states that electromagnetic waves are quantized .
In Einstein ’ s approach , a beam of monochromatic light of frequency f is made of photons .
A photon is a particle of light .
Each photon moves at the speed of light and carries an energy quantum A photon ’ s energy depends only on its frequency f .
Explicitly , the energy of a photon is where is Planck ’ s constant .
In the photoelectric effect , photons arrive at the metal surface and each photon gives away all of its energy to only one electron on the metal surface .
This transfer of energy from photon to electron is of the “ all or nothing ” type , and there are no fractional transfers in which a photon would lose only part of its energy and survive .
The essence of a quantum phenomenon is either a photon transfers its entire energy and ceases to exist or there is no transfer at all .
This is in contrast with the classical picture , where fractional energy transfers are permitted .
Having this quantum understanding , the energy balance for an electron on the surface that receives the energy from a photon is where is the kinetic energy , given by , that an electron has at the very instant it gets detached from the surface .
In this energy balance equation , is the energy needed to detach a photoelectron from the surface .
This energy is called the work function of the metal .
Each metal has its characteristic work function , as illustrated in .
To obtain the kinetic energy of photoelectrons at the surface , we simply invert the energy balance equation and use to express the energy of the absorbed photon .
This gives us the expression for the kinetic energy of photoelectrons , which explicitly depends on the frequency of incident radiation : This equation has a simple mathematical form but its physics is profound .
We can now elaborate on the physical meaning behind .
In Einstein ’ s interpretation , interactions take place between individual electrons and individual photons .
The absence of a lag time means that these one-on-one interactions occur instantaneously .
This interaction time can not be increased by lowering the light intensity .
The light intensity corresponds to the number of photons arriving at the metal surface per unit time .
Even at very low light intensities , the photoelectric effect still occurs because the interaction is between one electron and one photon .
As long as there is at least one photon with enough energy to transfer it to a bound electron , a photoelectron will appear on the surface of the photoelectrode .
The existence of the cut-off frequency for the photoelectric effect follows from because the kinetic energy of the photoelectron can take only positive values .
This means that there must be some threshold frequency for which the kinetic energy is zero , In this way , we obtain the explicit formula for cut-off frequency : Cut-off frequency depends only on the work function of the metal and is in direct proportion to it .
When the work function is large ( when electrons are bound fast to the metal surface ) , the energy of the threshold photon must be large to produce a photoelectron , and then the corresponding threshold frequency is large .
Photons with frequencies larger than the threshold frequency always produce photoelectrons because they have Photons with frequencies smaller than do not have enough energy to produce photoelectrons .
Therefore , when incident radiation has a frequency below the cutoff frequency , the photoelectric effect is not observed .
Radiation with wavelength 300 nm is incident on a silver surface .
Will photoelectrons be observed ?
Photoelectrons can be ejected from the metal surface only when the incident radiation has a shorter wavelength than the cut-off wavelength .
The work function of silver is .
To make the estimate , we use .
The threshold wavelength for observing the photoelectric effect in silver is The incident radiation has wavelength 300 nm , which is longer than the cut-off wavelength ; photoelectrons are not observed .
If the photoelectrode were made of sodium instead of silver , the cut-off wavelength would be 504 nm and photoelectrons would be observed .
therefore , in Einstein ’ s model tells us that the maximum kinetic energy of photoelectrons is a linear function of the frequency of incident radiation , which is illustrated in .
For any metal , the slope of this plot has a value of Planck ’ s constant .
The intercept with the -axis gives us a value of the work function that is characteristic for the metal .
On the other hand , can be directly measured in the experiment by measuring the value of the stopping potential ( see ) at which the photocurrent stops .
These direct measurements allow us to determine experimentally the value of Planck ’ s constant , as well as work functions of materials .
Einstein ’ s model also gives a straightforward explanation for the photocurrent values shown in .
For example , doubling the intensity of radiation translates to doubling the number of photons that strike the surface per unit time .
The larger the number of photons , the larger is the number of photoelectrons , which leads to a larger photocurrent in the circuit .
This is how radiation intensity affects the photocurrent .
The stopping potential does not change with the radiation intensity because the kinetic energy of photoelectrons ( see ) does not depend on the radiation intensity .
When a 180-nm light is used in an experiment with an unknown metal , the measured photocurrent drops to zero at potential – 0.80 V. Determine the work function of the metal and its cut-off frequency for the photoelectric effect .
To find the cut-off frequency we use , but first we must find the work function To find we use and .
A 430-nm violet light is incident on a calcium photoelectrode with a work function of 2.71 eV .
Find the energy of the incident photons and the maximum kinetic energy of ejected electrons .
The energy of the incident photon is where we use To obtain the maximum energy of the ejected electrons , we use .
In this experimental setup , photoelectrons stop flowing at the stopping potential of 0.17 V. Check Your Understanding A yellow 589-nm light is incident on a surface whose work function is 1.20 eV .
What is the stopping potential ?
What is the cut-off wavelength ?
Two of Einstein ’ s influential ideas introduced in 1905 were the theory of special relativity and the concept of a light quantum , which we now call a photon .
Beyond 1905 , Einstein went further to suggest that freely propagating electromagnetic waves consisted of photons that are particles of light in the same sense that electrons or other massive particles are particles of matter .
Unlike a particle of matter that is characterized by its rest mass a photon is massless .
In a vacuum , unlike a particle of matter that may vary its speed but can not reach the speed of light , a photon travels at only one speed , which is exactly the speed of light .
From the point of view of Newtonian classical mechanics , these two characteristics imply that a photon should not exist at all .
For example , how can we find the linear momentum or kinetic energy of a body whose mass is zero ?
This apparent paradox vanishes if we describe a photon as a relativistic particle .
According to the theory of special relativity , any particle in nature obeys the relativistic energy equation This relation can also be applied to a photon .
In , E is the total energy of a particle , p is its linear momentum , and is its rest mass .
For a photon , we simply set in this equation .
and can be combined into the explicit relation between a photon ’ s momentum and its wavelength : Notice that this equation gives us only the magnitude of the photon ’ s momentum and contains no information about the direction in which the photon is moving .
The propagation vector shows the direction of the photon ’ s linear momentum vector .
The magnitude of the wave vector is and is called the wave number .
Notice that this equation does not introduce any new physics .
We can verify that the magnitude of the vector in is the same as that given by .
The Compton effect is the term used for an unusual result observed when X-rays are scattered on some materials .
By classical theory , when an electromagnetic wave is scattered off atoms , the wavelength of the scattered radiation is expected to be the same as the wavelength of the incident radiation .
Contrary to this prediction of classical physics , observations show that when X-rays are scattered off some materials , such as graphite , the scattered X-rays have different wavelengths from the wavelength of the incident X-rays .
This classically unexplainable phenomenon was studied experimentally by Arthur H. Compton and his collaborators , and Compton gave its explanation in 1923 .
To explain the shift in wavelengths measured in the experiment , Compton used Einstein ’ s idea of light as a particle .
The Compton effect has a very important place in the history of physics because it shows that electromagnetic radiation can not be explained as a purely wave phenomenon .
The explanation of the Compton effect gave a convincing argument to the physics community that electromagnetic waves can indeed behave like a stream of photons , which placed the concept of a photon on firm ground .
The schematics of Compton ’ s experimental setup are shown in .
This scattering angle , is the angle between the direction of the scattered beam and the direction of the incident beam .
In this experiment , we know the intensity and the wavelength of the incoming ( incident ) beam ; and for a given scattering angle we measure the intensity and the wavelength of the outgoing ( scattered ) beam .
Typical results of these measurements are shown in , where the x -axis is the wavelength of the scattered X-rays and the y -axis is the intensity of the scattered X-rays , measured for different scattering angles ( indicated on the graphs ) .
For all scattering angles ( except for we measure two intensity peaks .
One peak is located at the wavelength which is the wavelength of the incident beam .
The other peak is located at some other wavelength , The two peaks are separated by which depends on the scattering angle of the outgoing beam ( in the direction of observation ) .
The separation is called the Compton shift .
As given by Compton , the explanation of the Compton shift is that in the target material , graphite , valence electrons are loosely bound in the atoms and behave like free electrons .
Compton assumed that the incident X-ray radiation is a stream of photons .
An incoming photon in this stream collides with a valence electron in the graphite target .
In the course of this collision , the incoming photon transfers some part of its energy and momentum to the target electron and leaves the scene as a scattered photon .
This model explains in qualitative terms why the scattered radiation has a longer wavelength than the incident radiation .
Put simply , a photon that has lost some of its energy emerges as a photon with a lower frequency , or equivalently , with a longer wavelength .
To show that his model was correct , Compton used it to derive the expression for the Compton shift .
In his derivation , he assumed that both photon and electron are relativistic particles and that the collision obeys two commonsense principles : ( 1 ) the conservation of linear momentum and ( 2 ) the conservation of total relativistic energy .
In the following derivation of the Compton shift , and denote the energy and momentum , respectively , of an incident photon with frequency f .
The photon collides with a relativistic electron at rest , which means that immediately before the collision , the electron ’ s energy is entirely its rest mass energy , Immediately after the collision , the electron has energy E and momentum both of which satisfy .
Immediately after the collision , the outgoing photon has energy momentum and frequency The direction of the incident photon is horizontal from left to right , and the direction of the outgoing photon is at the angle as illustrated in .
The scattering angle is the angle between the momentum vectors and and we can write their scalar product : Following Compton ’ s argument , we assume that the colliding photon and electron form an isolated system .
This assumption is valid for weakly bound electrons that , to a good approximation , can be treated as free particles .
The entire physics of Compton scattering is contained in these three preceding equations––the remaining part is algebra .
At this point , we could jump to the concluding formula for the Compton shift , but it is beneficial to highlight the main algebraic steps that lead to Compton ’ s formula , which we give here as follows .
We start with rearranging the terms in and squaring it : simplify , and divide both sides by to obtain In the next step , we substitute for Now we can use to express this form of the energy equation in terms of momenta .
The result is To eliminate we turn to the momentum equation , rearrange its terms , and square it to obtain The product of the momentum vectors is given by .
Scattering data measured for molybdenum , graphite , calcite , and many other target materials are in accord with this theoretical result .
The nonshifted peak shown in is due to photon collisions with tightly bound inner electrons in the target material .
Photons that collide with the inner electrons of the target atoms in fact collide with the entire atom .
In this extreme case , the rest mass in must be changed to the rest mass of the atom .
This type of shift is four orders of magnitude smaller than the shift caused by collisions with electrons and is so small that it can be neglected .
Compton scattering is an example of inelastic scattering , in which the scattered radiation has a longer wavelength than the wavelength of the incident radiation .
In today ’ s usage , the term “ Compton scattering ” is used for the inelastic scattering of photons by free , charged particles .
In Compton scattering , treating photons as particles with momenta that can be transferred to charged particles provides the theoretical background to explain the wavelength shifts measured in experiments ; this is the evidence that radiation consists of photons .
An incident 71-pm X-ray is incident on a calcite target .
Find the wavelength of the X-ray scattered at a angle .
What is the largest shift that can be expected in this experiment ?
To find the wavelength of the scattered X-ray , first we must find the Compton shift for the given scattering angle , We use .
Then we add this shift to the incident wavelength to obtain the scattered wavelength .
Therefore , these measurements require highly sensitive detectors .
Check Your Understanding An incident 71-pm X-ray is incident on a calcite target .
Find the wavelength of the X-ray scattered at a angle .
What is the smallest shift that can be expected in this experiment ?
Historically , Bohr ’ s model of the hydrogen atom is the very first model of atomic structure that correctly explained the radiation spectra of atomic hydrogen .
The model has a special place in the history of physics because it introduced an early quantum theory , which brought about new developments in scientific thought and later culminated in the development of quantum mechanics .
To understand the specifics of Bohr ’ s model , we must first review the nineteenth-century discoveries that prompted its formulation .
When we use a prism to analyze white light coming from the sun , several dark lines in the solar spectrum are observed .
Solar absorption lines are called Fraunhofer lines after Joseph von Fraunhofer , who accurately measured their wavelengths .
During 1854–1861 , Gustav Kirchhoff and Robert Bunsen discovered that for the various chemical elements , the line emission spectrum of an element exactly matches its line absorption spectrum .
The difference between the absorption spectrum and the emission spectrum is explained in .
An absorption spectrum is observed when light passes through a gas .
This spectrum appears as black lines that occur only at certain wavelengths on the background of the continuous spectrum of white light .
The missing wavelengths tell us which wavelengths of the radiation are absorbed by the gas .
The emission spectrum is observed when light is emitted by a gas .
This spectrum is seen as colorful lines on the black background ( see and ) .
Positions of the emission lines tell us which wavelengths of the radiation are emitted by the gas .
Each chemical element has its own characteristic emission spectrum .
For each element , the positions of its emission lines are exactly the same as the positions of its absorption lines .
This means that atoms of a specific element absorb radiation only at specific wavelengths and radiation that does not have these wavelengths is not absorbed by the element at all .
This also means that the radiation emitted by atoms of each element has exactly the same wavelengths as the radiation they absorb .
Emission spectra of the elements have complex structures ; they become even more complex for elements with higher atomic numbers .
The simplest spectrum , shown in , belongs to the hydrogen atom .
Only four lines are visible to the human eye .
As you read from right to left in , these lines are : red ( 656 nm ) , called the Hline ; aqua ( 486 nm ) , blue ( 434 nm ) , and violet ( 410 nm ) .
The lines with wavelengths shorter than 400 nm appear in the ultraviolet part of the spectrum ( , far left ) and are invisible to the human eye .
There are infinitely many invisible spectral lines in the series for hydrogen .
An empirical formula to describe the positions ( wavelengths ) of the hydrogen emission lines in this series was discovered in 1885 by Johann Balmer .
It is known as the Balmer formula : The constant is called the Rydberg constant for hydrogen .
In , the positive integer n takes on values for the four visible lines in this series .
The series of emission lines given by the Balmer formula is called the Balmer series for hydrogen .
Other emission lines of hydrogen that were discovered in the twentieth century are described by the Rydberg formula , which summarizes all of the experimental data : the series of spectral lines is called the Lyman series .
When When the series is called the Balmer series , and in this case , the Rydberg formula coincides with the Balmer formula .
When the series is called the Paschen series .
When the series is called the Pfund series .
When we have the Humphreys series .
As you may guess , there are infinitely many such spectral bands in the spectrum of hydrogen because can be any positive integer number .
The Rydberg formula for hydrogen gives the exact positions of the spectral lines as they are observed in a laboratory ; however , at the beginning of the twentieth century , nobody could explain why it worked so well .
The Rydberg formula remained unexplained until the first successful model of the hydrogen atom was proposed in 1913. the series is called the Brackett series .
When Calculate the longest and the shortest wavelengths in the Balmer series .
We can use either the Balmer formula or the Rydberg formula .
The longest wavelength is obtained when is largest , which is when because for the Balmer series .
The smallest wavelength is obtained when is smallest , which is when The long-wave limit : The short-wave limit : Note that there are infinitely many spectral lines lying between these two limits .
Check Your Understanding What are the limits of the Lyman series ?
Can you see these spectral lines ?
The key to unlocking the mystery of atomic spectra is in understanding atomic structure .
Scientists have long known that matter is made of atoms .
According to nineteenth-century science , atoms are the smallest indivisible quantities of matter .
This scientific belief was shattered by a series of groundbreaking experiments that proved the existence of subatomic particles , such as electrons , protons , and neutrons .
The electron was discovered and identified as the smallest quantity of electric charge by J.J. Thomson in 1897 in his cathode ray experiments , also known as β-ray experiments : A β -ray is a beam of electrons .
In 1904 , Thomson proposed the first model of atomic structure , known as the “ plum pudding ” model , in which an atom consisted of an unknown positively charged matter with negative electrons embedded in it like plums in a pudding .
Around 1900 , E. Rutherford , and independently , Paul Ulrich Villard , classified all radiation known at that time as -rays , β -rays , and γ -rays ( a γ -ray is a beam of highly energetic photons ) .
In 1907 , Rutherford and Thomas Royds used spectroscopy methods to show that positively charged particles of -radiation ( called -particles ) are in fact doubly ionized atoms of helium .
In 1909 , Rutherford , Ernest Marsden , and Hans Geiger used -particles in their famous scattering experiment that disproved Thomson ’ s model ( see ) .
In the Rutherford gold foil experiment ( also known as the Geiger–Marsden experiment ) , -particles were incident on a thin gold foil and were scattered by gold atoms inside the foil ( see ) .
The outgoing particles were detected by a scintillation screen surrounding the gold target ( for a detailed description of the experimental setup , see ) .
When a scattered particle struck the screen , a tiny flash of light ( scintillation ) was observed at that location .
By counting the scintillations seen at various angles with respect to the direction of the incident beam , the scientists could determine what fraction of the incident particles were scattered and what fraction were not deflected at all .
If the plum pudding model were correct , there would be no back-scattered -particles .
However , the results of the Rutherford experiment showed that , although a sizable fraction of -particles emerged from the foil not scattered at all as though the foil were not in their way , a significant fraction of -particles were back-scattered toward the source .
This kind of result was possible only when most of the mass and the entire positive charge of the gold atom were concentrated in a tiny space inside the atom .
In 1911 , Rutherford proposed a nuclear model of the atom .
In Rutherford ’ s model , an atom contained a positively charged nucleus of negligible size , almost like a point , but included almost the entire mass of the atom .
The atom also contained negative electrons that were located within the atom but relatively far away from the nucleus .
Ten years later , Rutherford coined the name proton for the nucleus of hydrogen and the name neutron for a hypothetical electrically neutral particle that would mediate the binding of positive protons in the nucleus ( the neutron was discovered in 1932 by James Chadwick ) .
Rutherford is credited with the discovery of the atomic nucleus ; however , the Rutherford model of atomic structure does not explain the Rydberg formula for the hydrogen emission lines .
Bohr ’ s model of the hydrogen atom , proposed by Niels Bohr in 1913 , was the first quantum model that correctly explained the hydrogen emission spectrum .
Bohr ’ s model combines the classical mechanics of planetary motion with the quantum concept of photons .
Once Rutherford had established the existence of the atomic nucleus , Bohr ’ s intuition that the negative electron in the hydrogen atom must revolve around the positive nucleus became a logical consequence of the inverse-squaredistance law of electrostatic attraction .
In the same way as Earth revolves around the sun , the negative electron in the hydrogen atom can revolve around the positive nucleus .
However , an accelerating charge radiates its energy .
Classically , if the electron moved around the nucleus in a planetary fashion , it would be undergoing centripetal acceleration , and thus would be radiating energy that would cause it to spiral down into the nucleus .
Such a planetary hydrogen atom would not be stable , which is contrary to what we know about ordinary hydrogen atoms that do not disintegrate .
Moreover , the classical motion of the electron is not able to explain the discrete emission spectrum of hydrogen .
To circumvent these two difficulties , Bohr proposed the following three postulates of Bohr ’ s model : The negative electron moves around the positive nucleus ( proton ) in a circular orbit .
All electron orbits are centered at the nucleus .
Not all classically possible orbits are available to an electron bound to the nucleus .
The allowed electron orbits satisfy the first quantization condition : In the n th orbit , the angular momentum of the electron can take only discrete values : This postulate says that the electron ’ s angular momentum is quantized .
When an atom emits a photon , the electron transits to a lower-energy orbit .
Electron transitions with the simultaneous photon absorption or photon emission take place instantaneously .
The allowed electron transitions satisfy the second quantization condition : is the energy of either an emitted or an absorbed photon with frequency f .
The second quantization where condition states that an electron ’ s change in energy in the hydrogen atom is quantized .
Note that in Bohr ’ s model , along with two nonclassical quantization postulates , we also have the classical description of the electron as a particle that is subjected to the Coulomb force , and its motion must obey Newton ’ s laws of motion .
The hydrogen atom , as an isolated system , must obey the laws of conservation of energy and momentum in the way we know from classical physics .
Having this theoretical framework in mind , we are ready to proceed with our analysis .
To obtain the size of the electron ’ s n th orbit and the electron ’ s speed in it , we turn to Newtonian mechanics .
As a charged particle , the electron experiences an electrostatic pull toward the positively charged nucleus in the center of its circular orbit .
This electrostatic pull is the centripetal force that causes the electron to move in a circle around the nucleus .
Therefore , the magnitude of centripetal force is identified with the magnitude of the electrostatic force : Here , denotes the value of the elementary charge .
We see from that the size of the orbit grows as the square of n .
This means that the second orbit is four times as large as the first orbit , and the third orbit is nine times as large as the first orbit , and so on .
We also see from that the electron ’ s speed in the orbit decreases as the orbit size increases .
The electron ’ s speed is largest in the first Bohr orbit , for which is the orbit closest to the nucleus .
Now we use to find the potential energy of the electron : The total energy of the electron is the sum of and : Note that the energy depends only on the index n because the remaining symbols in are physical constants .
This set of allowed electron energies is called the energy spectrum of hydrogen .
The index n that enumerates energy levels in Bohr ’ s model is called the energy quantum number .
We identify the energy of the electron inside the hydrogen atom with the energy of the hydrogen atom .
Note that the smallest value of energy is obtained for so the hydrogen atom can not have energy smaller than that .
This smallest value of the electron energy in the hydrogen atom is called the ground state energy of the hydrogen atom and its value is The hydrogen atom may have other energies that are higher than the ground state .
These higher energy states are known as excited energy states of a hydrogen atom .
There is only one ground state , but there are infinitely many excited states because there are infinitely many values of n in .
If we keep increasing n in , we find that the limit is In this limit , the electron is no longer bound to the nucleus but becomes a free electron .
An electron remains bound in the hydrogen atom as long as its energy is negative .
An electron that orbits the nucleus in the first Bohr orbit , closest to the nucleus , is in the ground state , where its energy has the smallest value .
In the ground state , the electron is most strongly bound to the nucleus and its energy is given by .
If we want to remove this electron from the atom , we must supply it with enough energy , to at least balance out its ground state energy The energy that is needed to remove the electron from the atom is called the ionization energy .
The ionization energy that is needed to remove the electron from the first Bohr orbit is called the ionization limit of the hydrogen atom .
The ionization limit in that we obtain in Bohr ’ s model agrees with experimental value .
To obtain the wavelengths of the emitted radiation when an electron makes a transition from the n th orbit to the m th orbit , we use the second of Bohr ’ s quantization conditions and for energies .
The emission of energy from the atom can occur only when an electron makes a transition from an excited state to a lower-energy state .
In the course of such a transition , the emitted photon carries away the difference of energies between the states involved in the transition .
Transitions between the allowed electron orbits are illustrated in .
We can repeat the same steps that led to to obtain the wavelength of the absorbed radiation ; this again gives but this time for the positions of absorption lines in the absorption spectrum of hydrogen .
The difference between the electron energies in these two orbits is the energy of the absorbed photon .
If a hydrogen atom in the ground state absorbs a 93.7-nm photon , corresponding to a transition line in the Lyman series , how does this affect the atom ’ s energy and size ?
How much energy is needed to ionize the atom when it is in this excited state ?
Give your answers in absolute units , and relative to the ground state .
Before the absorption , the atom is in its ground state .
This means that the electron transition takes place from the orbit to some higher n th orbit .
First , we must determine for the absorbed wavelength Then , we can use to find the energy of the excited state and its ionization energy and use to find the radius of the atom in the excited state .
To estimate n , we use .
The energy of the fifth excited state is : After absorbing the 93.7-nm photon , the energy of the hydrogen atom is larger than it was before the absorption .
Ionization of the atom when it is in the fifth excited state requites 36 times less energy than is needed when the atom is in the ground state : We can analyze any spectral line in the spectrum of hydrogen in the same way .
Thus , the experimental measurements of spectral lines provide us with information about the atomic structure of the hydrogen atom .
Check Your Understanding When an electron in a hydrogen atom is in the first excited state , what prediction does the Bohr model give about its orbital speed and kinetic energy ?
What is the magnitude of its orbital angular momentum ?
Bohr ’ s model of the hydrogen atom also correctly predicts the spectra of some hydrogen-like ions .
Hydrogen-like ions are atoms of elements with an atomic number Z larger than one ( for hydrogen ) but with all electrons removed except one .
Assuming that the charge of the nucleus is not but we can repeat all steps , beginning with , to obtain the results for a hydrogen-like ion : where is the Bohr orbit of hydrogen , and where is the ionization limit of a hydrogen atom .
These equations are good approximations as long as the atomic number Z is not too large .
The Bohr model is important because it was the first model to postulate the quantization of electron orbits in atoms .
Thus , it represents an early quantum theory that gave a start to developing modern quantum theory .
It introduced the concept of a quantum number to describe atomic states .
The limitation of the early quantum theory is that it can not describe atoms in which the number of electrons orbiting the nucleus is larger than one .
The Bohr model of hydrogen is a semi-classical model because it combines the classical concept of electron orbits with the new concept of quantization .
The remarkable success of this model prompted many physicists to seek an explanation for why such a model should work at all , and to seek an understanding of the physics behind the postulates of early quantum theory .
This search brought about the onset of an entirely new concept of “ matter waves. ” Compton ’ s formula established that an electromagnetic wave can behave like a particle of light when interacting with matter .
In 1924 , Louis de Broglie proposed a new speculative hypothesis that electrons and other particles of matter can behave like waves .
Today , this idea is known as de Broglie ’ s hypothesis of matter waves .
In 1926 , De Broglie ’ s hypothesis , together with Bohr ’ s early quantum theory , led to the development of a new theory of wave quantum mechanics to describe the physics of atoms and subatomic particles .
Quantum mechanics has paved the way for new engineering inventions and technologies , such as the laser and magnetic resonance imaging ( MRI ) .
These new technologies drive discoveries in other sciences such as biology and chemistry .
We are recalling them now in a more general context .
Any particle that has energy and momentum is a de Broglie wave of frequency f and wavelength Here , E and p are , respectively , the relativistic energy and the momentum of a particle .
De Broglie ’ s relations are usually expressed in terms of the wave vector and the wave frequency as we usually do for waves : Wave theory tells us that a wave carries its energy with the group velocity .
For matter waves , this group velocity is the velocity u of the particle .
When the problem involves a nonrelativistic object moving with a nonrelativistic speed u , such as in ( a ) when we use nonrelativistic momentum p .
However , it is simpler here to use : so we can use the If we use nonrelativistic momentum , we obtain the same result because 1 eV is much smaller than the rest mass of the electron .
For a fast electron with relativistic effects can not be neglected because its total energy is and is not negligible : We see from these estimates that De Broglie ’ s wavelengths of macroscopic objects such as a ball are immeasurably small .
Therefore , even if they exist , they are not detectable and do not affect the motion of macroscopic objects .
Check Your Understanding What is de Broglie ’ s wavelength of a nonrelativistic proton with a kinetic energy of 1.0 eV ?
Using the concept of the electron matter wave , de Broglie provided a rationale for the quantization of the electron ’ s angular momentum in the hydrogen atom , which was postulated in Bohr ’ s quantum theory .
The physical explanation for the first Bohr quantization condition comes naturally when we assume that an electron in a hydrogen atom behaves not like a particle but like a wave .
To see it clearly , imagine a stretched guitar string that is clamped at both ends and vibrates in one of its normal modes .
If the length of the string is l , the wavelengths of these vibrations can not be arbitrary but must be such that an integer k number of half-wavelengths fit exactly on the distance l between the ends .
This is the condition for a standing wave on a string .
Now suppose that instead of having the string clamped at the walls , we bend its length into a circle and fasten its ends to each other .
This produces a circular string that vibrates in normal modes , satisfying the same standing-wave condition , but the number of half-wavelengths must now be an even number and the length l is now connected to the radius of the circle .
Providing a physical explanation for Bohr ’ s quantization condition is a convincing theoretical argument for the existence of matter waves .
Find the de Broglie wavelength of an electron in the ground state of hydrogen .
We combine the first quantization condition in with and use for the first Bohr radius with When and the Bohr quantization condition gives The electron wavelength is : We obtain the same result when we use directly .
Check Your Understanding Find the de Broglie wavelength of an electron in the third excited state of hydrogen .
Experimental confirmation of matter waves came in 1927 when C. Davisson and L. Germer performed a series of electronscattering experiments that clearly showed that electrons do behave like waves .
Davisson and Germer did not set up their experiment to confirm de Broglie ’ s hypothesis : The confirmation came as a byproduct of their routine experimental studies of metal surfaces under electron bombardment .
In the particular experiment that provided the very first evidence of electron waves ( known today as the Davisson–Germer experiment ) , they studied a surface of nickel .
Their nickel sample was specially prepared in a high-temperature oven to change its usual polycrystalline structure to a form in which large single-crystal domains occupy the volume .
shows the experimental setup .
Thermal electrons are released from a heated element ( usually made of tungsten ) in the electron gun and accelerated through a potential difference becoming a well-collimated beam of electrons produced by an electron gun .
The kinetic energy K of the electrons is adjusted by selecting a value of the potential difference in the electron gun .
This produces a beam of electrons with a set value of linear momentum , in accordance with the conservation of energy : The electron beam is incident on the nickel sample in the direction normal to its surface .
At the surface , it scatters in various directions .
The intensity of the beam scattered in a selected direction is measured by a highly sensitive detector .
When the nickel target has a polycrystalline form with many randomly oriented microscopic crystals , the incident electrons scatter off its surface in various random directions .
As a result , the intensity of the scattered electron beam is much the same in any direction , resembling a diffuse reflection of light from a porous surface .
However , when the nickel target has a regular crystalline structure , the intensity of the scattered electron beam shows a clear maximum at a specific angle and the results show a clear diffraction pattern ( see ) .
Similar diffraction patterns formed by X-rays scattered by various crystalline solids were studied in 1912 by father-and-son physicists William H. Bragg and William L. Bragg .
The Bragg law in X-ray crystallography provides a connection between the wavelength of the radiation incident on a crystalline lattice , the lattice spacing , and the position of the interference maximum in the diffracted radiation ( see ) .
The lattice spacing of the Davisson–Germer target , determined with X-ray crystallography , was measured to be Unlike X-ray crystallography in which X-rays penetrate the sample , in the original Davisson–Germer experiment , only the surface atoms interact with the incident electron beam .
For the surface diffraction , the maximum intensity of the reflected electron beam is observed for scattering angles that satisfy the condition ( see ) .
The proximity of this theoretical result to the Davisson–Germer experimental value of is a convincing argument for the existence of de Broglie matter waves .
Diffraction lines measured with low-energy electrons , such as those used in the Davisson–Germer experiment , are quite broad ( see ) because the incident electrons are scattered only from the surface .
The resolution of diffraction images greatly improves when a higher-energy electron beam passes through a thin metal foil .
This occurs because the diffraction image is created by scattering off many crystalline planes inside the volume , and the maxima produced in scattering at Bragg angles are sharp ( see ) .
Since the work of Davisson and Germer , de Broglie ’ s hypothesis has been extensively tested with various experimental techniques , and the existence of de Broglie waves has been confirmed for numerous elementary particles .
Neutrons have been used in scattering experiments to determine crystalline structures of solids from interference patterns formed by neutron matter waves .
The neutron has zero charge and its mass is comparable with the mass of a positively charged proton .
Both neutrons and protons can be seen as matter waves .
Therefore , the property of being a matter wave is not specific to electrically charged particles but is true of all particles in motion .
Matter waves of molecules as large as carbon have been measured .
All physical objects , small or large , have an associated matter wave as long as they remain in motion .
The universal character of de Broglie matter waves is firmly established .
Suppose that a neutron beam is used in a diffraction experiment on a typical crystalline solid .
Estimate the kinetic energy of a neutron ( in eV ) in the neutron beam and compare it with kinetic energy of an ideal gas in equilibrium at room temperature .
We assume that a typical crystal spacing a is of the order of 1.0 Å .
To observe a diffraction pattern on such a lattice , the neutron wavelength must be on the same order of magnitude as the lattice spacing .
We use to find the momentum p and kinetic energy K .
To compare this energy with the energy of ideal gas in equilibrium at room temperature we use the relation where is the Boltzmann constant .
Neutrons with energies in this range , which is typical for an ideal gas at room temperature , are called “ thermal neutrons. ” In a supercollider at CERN , protons can be accelerated to velocities of 0.75 c .
What are their de Broglie wavelengths at this speed ?
What are their kinetic energies ?
The rest mass energy of a proton is When the proton ’ s velocity is known , we have and We obtain the wavelength and kinetic energy K from relativistic relations .
The energy of radiation detected by a radio-signal receiving antenna comes as the energy of an electromagnetic wave .
The same energy of radiation detected by a photocurrent in the photoelectric effect comes as the energy of individual photon particles .
Therefore , the question arises about the nature of electromagnetic radiation : Is a photon a wave or is it a particle ?
Similar questions may be asked about other known forms of energy .
For example , an electron that forms part of an electric current in a circuit behaves like a particle moving in unison with other electrons inside the conductor .
The same electron behaves as a wave when it passes through a solid crystalline structure and forms a diffraction image .
Is an electron a wave or is it a particle ?
The same question can be extended to all particles of matter—elementary particles , as well as compound molecules—asking about their true physical nature .
At our present state of knowledge , such questions about the true nature of things do not have conclusive answers .
All we can say is that wave-particle duality exists in nature : Under some experimental conditions , a particle appears to act as a particle , and under different experimental conditions , a particle appears to act a wave .
Conversely , under some physical circumstances electromagnetic radiation acts as a wave , and under other physical circumstances , radiation acts as a beam of photons .
This dualistic interpretation is not a new physics concept brought about by specific discoveries in the twentieth century .
It was already present in a debate between Isaac Newton and Christiaan Huygens about the nature of light , beginning in the year 1670 .
According to Newton , a beam of light is a collection of corpuscles of light .
According to Huygens , light is a wave .
The corpuscular hypothesis failed in 1803 , when Thomas Young announced his double-slit interference experiment with light ( see ) , which firmly established light as a wave .
In James Clerk Maxwell ’ s theory of electromagnetism ( completed by the year 1873 ) , light is an electromagnetic wave .
Maxwell ’ s classical view of radiation as an electromagnetic wave is still valid today ; however , it is unable to explain blackbody radiation and the photoelectric effect , where light acts as a beam of photons .
A similar dichotomy existed in the interpretation of electricity .
From Benjamin Franklin ’ s observations of electricity in 1751 until J.J. Thomson ’ s discovery of the electron in 1897 , electric current was seen as a flow in a continuous electric medium .
Within this theory of electric fluid , the present theory of electric circuits was developed , and electromagnetism and electromagnetic induction were discovered .
Thomson ’ s experiment showed that the unit of negative electric charge ( an electron ) can travel in a vacuum without any medium to carry the charge around , as in electric circuits .
This discovery changed the way in which electricity is understood today and gave the electron its particle status .
In Bohr ’ s early quantum theory of the hydrogen atom , both the electron and the proton are particles of matter .
Likewise , in the Compton scattering of X-rays on electrons , the electron is a particle .
On the other hand , in electron-scattering experiments on crystalline structures , the electron behaves as a wave .
As a matter of fact , to investigate this question , we do not need a complex model of a crystal but just a couple of simple slits in a screen that is opaque to electrons .
In other words , to gather convincing evidence about the nature of an electron , we need to repeat the Young double-slit experiment with electrons .
If the electron is a wave , we should observe the formation of interference patterns typical for waves , such as those described in , even when electrons come through the slits one by one .
However , if the electron is a not a wave but a particle , the interference fringes will not be formed .
The very first double-slit experiment with a beam of electrons , performed by Claus Jönsson in Germany in 1961 , demonstrated that a beam of electrons indeed forms an interference pattern , which means that electrons collectively behave as a wave .
The first double-slit experiments with single electrons passing through the slits one-by-one were performed by Giulio Pozzi in 1974 in Italy and by Akira Tonomura in 1989 in Japan .
They show that interference fringes are formed gradually , even when electrons pass through the slits individually .
This demonstrates conclusively that electron-diffraction images are formed because of the wave nature of electrons .
The results seen in double-slit experiments with electrons are illustrated by the images of the interference pattern in .
In one experimental setup for studying interference patterns of electron waves , two slits are created in a goldcoated silicon membrane .
Each slit is 62-nm wide and long , and the separation between the slits is 272 nm .
The electron beam is created in an electron gun by heating a tungsten element and by accelerating the electrons across a 600-V potential .
The beam is subsequently collimated using electromagnetic lenses , and the collimated beam of electrons is sent through the slits .
Find the angular position of the first-order bright fringe on the viewing screen .
Check Your Understanding For the situation described in , find the angular position of the fifth-order bright fringe on the viewing screen .
The wave-particle dual nature of matter particles and of radiation is a declaration of our inability to describe physical reality within one unified classical theory because separately neither a classical particle approach nor a classical wave approach can fully explain the observed phenomena .
This limitation of the classical approach was realized by the year 1928 , and a foundation for a new statistical theory , called quantum mechanics , was put in place by Bohr , Edwin Schrödinger , Werner Heisenberg , and Paul Dirac .
Quantum mechanics takes de Broglie ’ s idea of matter waves to be the fundamental property of all particles and gives it a statistical interpretation .
According to this interpretation , a wave that is associated with a particle carries information about the probable positions of the particle and about its other properties .
A single particle is seen as a moving wave packet such as the one shown in .
We can intuitively sense from this example that if a particle is a wave packet , we will not be able to measure its exact position in the same sense as we can not pinpoint a location of a wave packet in a vibrating guitar string .
For example , if we know the exact position of a body ( which means that in ) at the same time we can not know its momentum , because then the uncertainty in its momentum becomes infinite ( because in ) .
Heisenberg ’ s principle is a consequence of the wave nature of particles .
We routinely use many electronic devices that exploit wave-particle duality without even realizing the sophistication of the physics underlying their operation .
One example of a technology based on the particle properties of photons and electrons is a charge-coupled device , which is used for light detection in any instrumentation where high-quality digital data are required , such as in digital cameras or in medical sensors .
An example in which the wave properties of electrons is exploited is an electron microscope .
In 1931 , physicist Ernst Ruska—building on the idea that magnetic fields can direct an electron beam just as lenses can direct a beam of light in an optical microscope—developed the first prototype of the electron microscope .
This development originated the field of electron microscopy .
In the transmission electron microscope ( TEM ) , shown in , electrons are produced by a hot tungsten element and accelerated by a potential difference in an electron gun , which gives them up to 400 keV in kinetic energy .
After leaving the electron gun , the electron beam is focused by electromagnetic lenses ( a system of condensing lenses ) and transmitted through a specimen sample to be viewed .
The image of the sample is reconstructed from the transmitted electron beam .
The magnified image may be viewed either directly on a fluorescent screen or indirectly by sending it , for example , to a digital camera or a computer monitor .
The entire setup consisting of the electron gun , the lenses , the specimen , and the fluorescent screen are enclosed in a vacuum chamber to prevent the energy loss from the beam .
Resolution of the TEM is limited only by spherical aberration ( discussed in a previous chapter ) .
Modern high-resolution models of a TEM can have resolving power greater than 0.5 Å and magnifications higher than 50 million times .
For comparison , the best resolving power obtained with light microscopy is currently about 97 nm .
A limitation of the TEM is that the samples must be about 100-nm thick and biological samples require a special preparation involving chemical “ fixing ” to stabilize them for ultrathin slicing .
Such limitations do not appear in the scanning electron microscope ( SEM ) , which was invented by Manfred von Ardenne in 1937 .
In an SEM , a typical energy of the electron beam is up to 40 keV and the beam is not transmitted through a sample but is scattered off its surface .
Surface topography of the sample is reconstructed by analyzing back-scattered electrons , transmitted electrons , and the emitted radiation produced by electrons interacting with atoms in the sample .
The resolving power of an SEM is better than 1 nm , and the magnification can be more than 250 times better than that obtained with a light microscope .
The samples scanned by an SEM can be as large as several centimeters but they must be specially prepared , depending on electrical properties of the sample .
High magnifications of the TEM and SEM allow us to see individual molecules .
High resolving powers of the TEM and SEM allow us to see fine details , such as those shown in the SEM micrograph of pollen at the beginning of this chapter .
If a 1.0-pm electron beam of a TEM passes through a circular opening , what is the angle between the two just-resolvable point sources for this microscope ?
Check Your Understanding Suppose that the diameter of the aperture in is halved .
How does it affect the resolving power ?
Quantum mechanics is a powerful framework for understanding the motions and interactions of particles at small scales , such as atoms and molecules .
The ideas behind quantum mechanics often appear quite strange .
In many ways , our everyday experience with the macroscopic physical world does not prepare us for the microscopic world of quantum mechanics .
The purpose of this chapter is to introduce you to this exciting world .
Pictured above is a quantum-computer processor .
This device is the “ brain ” of a quantum computer that operates at nearabsolute zero temperatures .
Unlike a digital computer , which encodes information in binary digits ( definite states of either zero or one ) , a quantum computer encodes information in quantum bits or qubits ( mixed states of zero and one ) .
Quantum computers are discussed in the first section of this chapter .
In the preceding chapter , we saw that particles act in some cases like particles and in other cases like waves .
But what does it mean for a particle to “ act like a wave ” ?
What precisely is “ waving ” ?
What rules govern how this wave changes and propagates ?
How is the wave function used to make predictions ?
For example , if the amplitude of an electron wave is given by a function of position and time , , defined for all x , where exactly is the electron ?
The purpose of this chapter is to answer these questions .
A clue to the physical meaning of the wave function is provided by the two-slit interference of monochromatic light .
( See also and . )
The wave function of a light wave is given by E ( x , t ) , and its energy density is given by , where E is the electric field strength .
The energy of an individual photon depends only on the frequency of light , so is proportional to the number of photons .
When light waves from interfere with light waves from at the viewing screen ( a distance D away ) , an interference pattern is produced ( part ( a ) of the figure ) .
Bright fringes correspond to points of constructive interference of the light waves , and dark fringes correspond to points of destructive interference of the light waves ( part ( b ) ) .
Suppose the screen is initially unexposed to light .
If the screen is exposed to very weak light , the interference pattern appears gradually ( ( c ) , left to right ) .
Individual photon hits on the screen appear as dots .
The dot density is expected to be large at locations where the interference pattern will be , ultimately , the most intense .
In other words , the probability ( per unit area ) that a single photon will strike a particular spot on the screen is proportional to the square of the total electric field , at that point .
Under the right conditions , the same interference pattern develops for matter particles , such as electrons .
Visit this to learn more about quantum wave interference .
The square of the matter wave in one dimension has a similar interpretation as the square of the electric field .
It gives the probability that a particle will be found at a particular position and time per unit length , also called the probability density .
Examples of wave functions and their squares for a particular time t are given in .
If the wave function varies slowly over the interval , the probability a particle is found in the interval is approximately Notice that squaring the wave function ensures that the probability is positive .
( This is analogous to squaring the electric field strength—which may be positive or negative—to obtain a positive value of intensity . )
However , if the wave function does not vary slowly , we must integrate : This probability is just the area under the function between x and .
For now , we stick to the simple one-dimensional case .
A ball is constrained to move along a line inside a tube of length L .
The ball is equally likely to be found anywhere in the tube at some time t .
What is the probability of finding the ball in the left half of the tube at that time ?
( The answer is 50 % , of course , but how do we get this answer by using the probabilistic interpretation of the quantum mechanical wave function ? )
The first step is to write down the wave function .
The ball is equally like to be found anywhere in the box , so one way to describe the ball with a constant wave function .
The normalization condition can be used to find the value of the function and a simple integration over half of the box yields the final answer .
The wave function of the ball can be written as where C is a constant , and otherwise .
The particle is constrained to be in the tube , so outside the tube and the first and last integrations are zero .
Two observations are noteworthy .
First , this result corresponds to the area under the constant function from to L /2 ( the area of a square left of L /2 ) .
Second , this calculation requires an integration of the square of the wave function .
A common mistake in performing such calculations is to forget to square the wave function before integration .
A ball is again constrained to move along a line inside a tube of length L .
This time , the ball is found preferentially in the middle of the tube .
One way to represent its wave function is with a simple cosine function .
What is the probability of finding the ball in the last one-quarter of the tube ?
We use the same strategy as before .
In this case , the wave function has two unknown constants : One is associated with the wavelength of the wave and the other is the amplitude of the wave .
We determine the amplitude by using the boundary conditions of the problem , and we evaluate the wavelength by using the normalization condition .
Integration of the square of the wave function over the last quarter of the tube yields the final answer .
The calculation is simplified by centering our coordinate system on the peak of the wave function .
The wave function of the ball can be written where A is the amplitude of the wave function and is its wave number .
Beyond this interval , the amplitude of the wave function is zero because the ball is confined to the tube .
Requiring the wave function to terminate at the right end of the tube gives Evaluating the wave function at gives This equation is satisfied if the argument of the cosine is an integral multiple of and so on .
The ball has a definite wavelength .
If the tube is of macroscopic length , the momentum of the ball is This momentum is much too small to be measured by any human instrument .
We are now in position to begin to answer the questions posed at the beginning of this section .
Second , how is the wave function used to make predictions ?
If it is necessary to find the probability that a particle will be found in a certain interval , square the wave function and integrate over the interval of interest .
Soon , you will learn soon that the wave function can be used to make many other kinds of predictions , as well .
Third , if a matter wave is given by the wave function , where exactly is the particle ?
This answer is called the Copenhagen interpretation of the wave function , or of quantum mechanics .
To illustrate this interpretation , consider the simple case of a particle that can occupy a small container either at or .
In classical physics , we assume the particle is located either at or when the observer is not looking .
However , in quantum mechanics , the particle may exist in a state of indefinite position—that is , it may be located at and when the observer is not looking .
The assumption that a particle can only have one value of position ( when the observer is not looking ) is abandoned .
Similar comments can be made of other measurable quantities , such as momentum and energy .
When the radioactive substance decays , the Geiger detects it and triggers the hammer to release the poison , which subsequently kills the cat .
The radioactive decay is a random [ probabilistic ] process , and there is no way to predict when it will happen .
Physicists say the atom exists in a state known as a superposition—both decayed and not decayed at the same time .
However , this interpretation remains the most commonly taught view of quantum mechanics .
Two-state systems ( left and right , atom decays and does not decay , and so on ) are often used to illustrate the principles of quantum mechanics .
These systems find many applications in nature , including electron spin and mixed states of particles , atoms , and even molecules .
Two-state systems are also finding application in the quantum computer , as mentioned in the introduction of this chapter .
Unlike a digital computer , which encodes information in binary digits ( zeroes and ones ) , a quantum computer stores and manipulates data in the form of quantum bits , or qubits .
In general , a qubit is not in a state of zero or one , but rather in a mixed state of zero and one .
If a large number of qubits are placed in the same quantum state , the measurement of an individual qubit would produce a zero with a probability p , and a one with a probability Many scientists believe that quantum computers are the future of the computer industry .
Later in this section , you will see how to use the wave function to describe particles that are “ free ” or bound by forces to other particles .
The specific form of the wave function depends on the details of the physical system .
A peculiarity of quantum theory is that these functions are usually complex functions .
A complex function is one that contains one or more imaginary numbers .
Experimental measurements produce real ( nonimaginary ) numbers only , so the above procedure to use the wave function must be slightly modified .
In general , the probability that a particle is found in the narrow interval ( x , x + dx ) at time t is given by where is the complex conjugate of the wave function .
The complex conjugate of a function is obtaining by replacing every occurrence of in that function with .
This procedure eliminates complex numbers in all predictions because the product is always a real number .
Check Your Understanding If , what is the product ?
Consider the motion of a free particle that moves along the x -direction .
As the name suggests , a free particle experiences no forces and so moves with a constant velocity .
As we will see in a later section of this chapter , a formal quantum mechanical treatment of a free particle indicates that its wave function has real and complex parts .
In particular , the wave function is given by where A is the amplitude , k is the wave number , and is the angular this equation can be written in the form where is the phase angle .
If the wave function varies slowly over the interval in that interval is If A has real and complex parts , where a and b are real constants ) , then frequency .
Using Euler ’ s formula , the probability of finding the particle Notice that the complex numbers have vanished .
Thus , is a real quantity .
One possible wave function is Determine the normalization constant .
In classical mechanics , the solution to an equation of motion is a function of a measurable quantity , such as x ( t ) , where x is the position and t is the time .
Note that the particle has one value of position for any time t .
In quantum mechanics , however , the solution to an equation of motion is a wave function , The particle has many values of position for any time t , and only the probability density of finding the particle , , can be known .
The average value of position for a large number of particles with the same wave function is expected to be This is called the expectation value of the position .
It is usually written where the x is sandwiched between the wave functions .
The reason for this will become apparent soon .
Formally , x is called the position operator .
At this point , it is important to stress that a wave function can be written in terms of other quantities as well , such as velocity ( v ) , momentum ( p ) , and kinetic energy ( K ) .
The expectation value of momentum , for example , can be written Where dp is used instead of dx to indicate an infinitesimal interval in momentum .
In some cases , we know the wave function in position , but seek the expectation of momentum .
The procedure for doing this is where the quantity in parentheses , sandwiched between the wave functions , is called the momentum operator in the x -direction .
[ The momentum operator in is said to be the position-space representation of the momentum operator . ]
The momentum operator must act ( operate ) on the wave function to the right , and then the result must be multiplied by the complex conjugate of the wave function on the left , before integration .
The momentum operator in the x -direction is sometimes denoted Momentum operators for the y and z -directions are defined similarly .
This operator and many others are derived in a more advanced course in modern physics .
In some cases , this derivation is relatively simple .
For example , the kinetic energy operator is just Thus , if we seek an expectation value of kinetic energy of a particle in one dimension , two successive ordinary derivatives of the wave function are required before integration .
Expectation-value calculations are often simplified by exploiting the symmetry of wave functions .
Symmetric wave functions can be even or odd .
An even function is a function that satisfies In contrast , an odd function is a function that satisfies An example of even and odd functions is shown in .
An even function is symmetric about the y -axis .
This function is produced by reflecting for x > 0 about the vertical y -axis .
By comparison , an odd function is generated by reflecting the function about the y -axis and then about the x -axis .
( An odd function is also referred to as an anti-symmetric function . )
In general , an even function times an even function produces an even function .
A simple example of an even function is the product ( even times even is even ) .
Similarly , an odd function times an odd function produces an even function , such as x sin x ( odd times odd is even ) .
However , an odd function times an even function produces an odd function , such as ( odd times even is odd ) .
The integral over all space of an odd function is zero , because the total area of the function above the x -axis cancels the ( negative ) area below it .
As the next example shows , this property of odd functions is very useful .
The normalized wave function of a particle is Find the expectation value of position .
Substitute the wave function into and evaluate .
The position operator introduces a multiplicative factor only , so the position operator need not be “ sandwiched. ” First multiply , then integrate : The function in the integrand is odd since it is the product of an odd function ( x ) and an even function .
The integral vanishes because the total area of the function about the x -axis cancels the ( negative ) area below it .
The result is not surprising since the probability density function is symmetric about .
The time-dependent wave function of a particle confined to a region between 0 and L is where is angular frequency and E is the energy of the particle .
( Note : The function varies as a sine because of the limits ( 0 to L ) .
When the sine factor is zero and the wave function is zero , consistent with the boundary conditions . )
Calculate the expectation values of position , momentum , and kinetic energy .
We must first normalize the wave function to find A .
Then we use the operators to calculate the expectation values .
Computation of the normalization constant : The expectation value of position is The expectation value of momentum in the x -direction also requires an integral .
As a result , the integral vanishes .
The expectation value of kinetic energy in the x -direction requires the associated operator to act on the wave function : Thus , the expectation value of the kinetic energy is The average position of a large number of particles in this state is L /2 .
The average momentum of these particles is zero because a given particle is equally likely to be moving right or left .
However , the particle is not at rest because its average kinetic energy is not zero .
Finally , the probability density is This probability density is largest at location L /2 and is zero at and at Note that these conclusions do not depend explicitly on time .
Check Your Understanding For the particle in the above example , find the probability of locating it between positions 0 and L /4 Quantum mechanics makes many surprising predictions .
This correspondence principle is now generally accepted .
It suggests the rules of classical mechanics are an approximation of the rules of quantum mechanics for systems with very large energies .
Quantum mechanics describes both the microscopic and macroscopic world , but classical mechanics describes only the latter .
Heisenberg ’ s uncertainty principle is a key principle in quantum mechanics .
Very roughly , it states that if we know everything about where a particle is located ( the uncertainty of position is small ) , we know nothing about its momentum ( the uncertainty of momentum is large ) , and vice versa .
Versions of the uncertainty principle also exist for other quantities as well , such as energy and time .
We discuss the momentum-position and energy-time uncertainty principles separately .
To illustrate the momentum-position uncertainty principle , consider a free particle that moves along the x -direction .
The particle moves with a constant velocity u and momentum .
According to de Broglie ’ s relations , and .
As discussed in the previous section , the wave function for this particle is given by and the probability density is uniform and independent of time .
The particle is equally likely to be found anywhere along the x -axis but has definite values of wavelength and wave number , and therefore momentum .
The uncertainty of position is infinite ( we are completely uncertain about position ) and the uncertainty of the momentum is zero ( we are completely certain about momentum ) .
This account of a free particle is consistent with Heisenberg ’ s uncertainty principle .
Similar statements can be made of localized particles .
In quantum theory , a localized particle is modeled by a linear superposition of free-particle ( or plane-wave ) states called a wave packet .
An example of a wave packet is shown in .
A wave packet contains many wavelengths and therefore by de Broglie ’ s relations many momenta—possible in quantum mechanics !
This particle also has many values of position , although the particle is confined mostly to the interval .
The particle can be better localized can be decreased ) if more plane-wave states of different wavelengths or momenta are added together in the right way is increased ) .
According to Heisenberg , these uncertainties obey the following relation .
The product of the uncertainty in position of a particle and the uncertainty in its momentum can never be less than one-half of the reduced Planck constant : This relation expresses Heisenberg ’ s uncertainty principle .
It places limits on what we can know about a particle from simultaneous measurements of position and momentum .
If is large , is small , and vice versa .
can be derived in a more advanced course in modern physics .
Even for perfect measuring devices , these uncertainties would remain because they originate in the wave-like nature of matter .
The precise value of the product depends on the specific form of the wave function .
Given the uncertainty in speed , we have to first determine the uncertainty in momentum and then invert to find the uncertainty in position .
For the electron : For the bowling ball : Unlike the position uncertainty for the electron , the position uncertainty for the bowling ball is immeasurably small .
Planck ’ s constant is very small , so the limitations imposed by the uncertainty principle are not noticeable in macroscopic systems such as a bowling ball .
Estimate the ground-state energy of a hydrogen atom using Heisenberg ’ s uncertainty principle .
( Hint : According to early experiments , the size of a hydrogen atom is approximately 0.1 nm . )
An electron bound to a hydrogen atom can be modeled by a particle bound to a one-dimensional box of length The ground-state wave function of this system is a half wave , like that given in .
This is the largest wavelength that can “ fit ” in the box , so the wave function corresponds to the lowest energy state .
Note that this function is very similar in shape to a Gaussian ( bell curve ) function .
We can take the average energy of a particle described by this function ( E ) as a good estimate of the ground state energy .
This average energy of a particle is related to its average of the momentum squared , which is related to its momentum uncertainty .
For the Gaussian function , the uncertainty product is where The particle is equally likely to be moving left as moving right , so .
The ionization energy of an electron in the ground-state energy is approximately 10 eV , so this prediction is roughly confirmed .
( Note : The product is often a useful value in performing calculations in quantum mechanics . )
Another kind of uncertainty principle concerns uncertainties in simultaneous measurements of the energy of a quantum state and its lifetime , where is the uncertainty in the energy measurement and is the uncertainty in the lifetime measurement .
The energy-time uncertainty principle does not result from a relation of the type expressed by for technical reasons beyond this discussion .
Nevertheless , the general meaning of the energy-time principle is that a quantum state that exists for only a short time can not have a definite energy .
The reason is that the frequency of a state is inversely proportional to time and the frequency connects with the energy of the state , so to measure the energy with good precision , the state must be observed for many cycles .
To illustrate , consider the excited states of an atom .
The finite lifetimes of these states can be deduced from the shapes of spectral lines observed in atomic emission spectra .
Each time an excited state decays , the emitted energy is slightly different and , therefore , the emission line is characterized by a distribution of spectral frequencies ( or wavelengths ) of the emitted photons .
As a result , all spectral lines are characterized by spectral widths .
The average energy of the emitted photon corresponds to the theoretical energy of the excited state and gives the spectral location of the peak of the emission line .
Short-lived states have broad spectral widths and long-lived states have narrow spectral widths .
An atom typically exists in an excited state for about .
Estimate the uncertainty in the frequency of emitted photons when an atom makes a transition from an excited state with the simultaneous emission of a photon with an average frequency of .
Is the emitted radiation monochromatic ?
We invert to obtain the energy uncertainty and combine it with the photon energy The spread in photon energies is .
Therefore , to obtain .
To estimate whether or not the emission is monochromatic , we evaluate .
Because the emitted photons have their frequencies within percent of the average frequency , the emitted radiation can be considered monochromatic .
Check Your Understanding A sodium atom makes a transition from the first excited state to the ground state , emitting a 589.0-nm photon with energy 2.105 eV .
If the lifetime of this excited state is , what is the uncertainty in energy of this excited state ?
What is the width of the corresponding spectral line ?
In the preceding two sections , we described how to use a quantum mechanical wave function and discussed Heisenberg ’ s uncertainty principle .
In this section , we present a complete and formal theory of quantum mechanics that can be used to make predictions .
In developing this theory , it is helpful to review the wave theory of light .
For a light wave , the electric field E ( x , t ) obeys the relation where c is the speed of light and the symbol represents a partial derivative .
( Recall from that a partial derivative is closely related to an ordinary derivative , but involves functions of more than one variable .
When taking the partial derivative of a function by a certain variable , all other variables are held constant . )
A light wave consists of a very large number of photons , so the quantity can interpreted as a probability density of finding a single photon at a particular point in space ( for example , on a viewing screen ) .
There are many solutions to this equation .
One solution of particular importance is where A is the amplitude of the electric field , k is the wave number , and is the angular frequency .
Combing this equation with gives According to de Broglie ’ s equations , we have and .
Substituting these equations in gives or Therefore , according to Einstein ’ s general energy-momentum equation , describes a particle with a zero rest mass .
This is consistent with our knowledge of a photon .
This process can be reversed .
We can begin with the energy-momentum equation of a particle and then ask what wave equation corresponds to it .
The energy-momentum equation of a nonrelativistic particle in one dimension is where p is the momentum , m is the mass , and U is the potential energy of the particle .
The wave equation that goes with it turns out to be a key equation in quantum mechanics , called Schr dinger ’ s time-dependent equation .
Once the potential energy of a particle is specified—or , equivalently , once the force on the particle is specified—we can solve this differential equation for the wave function .
The solution to Newton ’ s second law equation ( also a differential equation ) in one dimension is a function x ( t ) that specifies where an object is at any time t .
The solution to Schr dinger ’ s time-dependent equation provides a tool—the wave function—that can be used to determine where the particle is likely to be .
This equation can be also written in two or three dimensions .
Solving Schr dinger ’ s time-dependent equation often requires the aid of a computer .
Consider the special case of a free particle .
A free particle experiences no force Based on , this requires only that For simplicity , we set .
Schr dinger ’ s equation then reduces to A valid solution to this equation is completely real values .
Notice Not surprisingly , this solution contains an imaginary number because the differential equation itself contains an imaginary number .
As stressed before , however , quantum-mechanical predictions depend only on , which and yields do not obey Schrödinger ’ s equation .
The temptation to think that a wave function can be seen , touched , and felt in nature is eliminated by the appearance of an imaginary number .
In Schr dinger ’ s theory of quantum mechanics , the wave function is merely a tool for calculating things .
If the potential energy function ( U ) does not depend on time , it is possible to show that solutions , real plane-wave that the satisfies Schr dinger ’ s time-dependent equation , where is a space -independent function .
In other words , the wave function is separable into two parts : a space-only part and a timeonly part .
The factor is sometimes referred to as a time-modulation factor since it modifies the space-only function .
According to de Broglie , the energy of a matter wave is given by , where E is its total energy .
Thus , the above equation can also be written as is a time -independent function and Any linear combination of such states ( mixed state of energy or momentum ) is also valid solution to this equation .
Such states can , for example , describe a localized particle ( see ) Check Your Understanding A particle with mass m is moving along the x -axis in a potential given by the potential energy function .
Compute the product Express your answer in terms of the time-independent wave function , Combining and , Schrödinger ’ s time-dependent equation reduces to where E is the total energy of the particle ( a real number ) .
This equation is called Schr dinger ’ s time-independent equation .
Notice that we use “ big psi ” for the time-dependent wave function and “ little psi ” for the timeindependent wave function .
The wave-function solution to this equation must be multiplied by the time-modulation factor to obtain the time-dependent wave function .
In the next sections , we solve Schr dinger ’ s time-independent equation for three cases : a quantum particle in a box , a simple harmonic oscillator , and a quantum barrier .
These cases provide important lessons that can be used to solve more complicated systems .
The time-independent wave function solutions must satisfy three conditions : must be a continuous function .
The first derivative of with respect to space , , must be continuous , unless .
must not diverge ( “ blow up ” ) at The first condition avoids sudden jumps or gaps in the wave function .
The second condition requires the wave function to be smooth at all points , except in special cases .
( In a more advanced course on quantum mechanics , for example , potential spikes of infinite depth and height are used to model solids ) .
The third condition requires the wave function be normalizable .
This third condition follows from Born ’ s interpretation of quantum mechanics .
It ensures that is a finite number so we can use it to calculate probabilities .
Check Your Understanding Which of the following wave functions is a valid wave-function solution for Schr dinger ’ s equation ?
In this section , we apply Schr dinger ’ s equation to a particle bound to a one-dimensional box .
This special case provides lessons for understanding quantum mechanics in more complex systems .
The energy of the particle is quantized as a consequence of a standing wave condition inside the box .
Consider a particle of mass that is allowed to move only along the x -direction and its motion is confined to the region between hard and rigid walls located at and at .
Between the walls , the particle moves freely .
This physical situation is called the infinite square well , described by the potential energy function Combining this equation with Schr dinger ’ s time-independent wave equation gives where E is the total energy of the particle .
What types of solutions do we expect ?
The energy of the particle is a positive number , so if the value of the wave function is positive ( right side of the equation ) , the curvature of the wave function is negative , or concave down ( left side of the equation ) .
Similarly , if the value of the wave function is negative ( right side of the equation ) , the curvature of the wave function is positive or concave up ( left side of equation ) .
This condition is met by an oscillating wave function , such as a sine or cosine wave .
Since these waves are confined to the box , we envision standing waves with fixed endpoints at and .
Solutions to this equation have a probabilistic interpretation .
In particular , the square represents the probability density of finding the particle at a particular location x .
This function must be integrated to determine the probability of finding the particle in some interval of space .
We are therefore looking for a normalizable solution that satisfies the following normalization condition : The walls are rigid and impenetrable , which means that the particle is never found beyond the wall .
Mathematically , this means that the solution must vanish at the walls : We expect oscillating solutions , so the most general solution to this equation is where k is the wave number , and and are constants .
Applying the boundary condition expressed by gives Because we have , the solution must be If is zero , for all values of x and the normalization condition , , can not be satisfied .
Assuming , for then gives We discard the solution because for this quantum number would be zero everywhere—an un-normalizable and therefore unphysical solution .
Substituting into gives Computing these derivatives leads to According to de Broglie , so this expression implies that the total energy is equal to the kinetic energy , consistent with our assumption that the “ particle moves freely. ” Combining the results of and gives Strange !
A particle bound to a one-dimensional box can only have certain discrete ( quantized ) values of energy .
Further , the particle can not have a zero kinetic energy—it is impossible for a particle bound to a box to be “ at rest. ” To evaluate the allowed wave functions that correspond to these energies , we must find the normalization constant .
The state for is the first excited state , the state for is the second excited state , and so on .
The first three quantum states ( for of a particle in a box are shown in .
The wave functions in are sometimes referred to as the “ states of definite energy. ” Particles in these states are said to occupy energy levels , which are represented by the horizontal lines in .
Energy levels are analogous to rungs of a ladder that the particle can “ climb ” as it gains or loses energy .
The wave functions in are also called stationary states and standing wave states .
These functions are , do not vary in time , and “ standing waves ” because “ stationary , ” because their probability density functions , their real and imaginary parts oscillate up and down like a standing wave—like a rope waving between two children on a playground .
Stationary states are states of definite energy [ ] , but linear combinations of these states , such as ( also solutions to Schr dinger ’ s equation ) are states of mixed energy .
Energy quantization is a consequence of the boundary conditions .
If the particle is not confined to a box but wanders freely , the allowed energies are continuous .
However , in this case , only certain energies … ) are allowed .
The energy difference between adjacent energy levels is given by Conservation of energy demands that if the energy of the system changes , the energy difference is carried in some other form of energy .
For the special case of a charged particle confined to a small volume ( for example , in an atom ) , energy changes are often carried away by photons .
The frequencies of the emitted photons give us information about the energy differences ( spacings ) of the system and the volume of containment—the size of the “ box ” [ see ] .
Suppose a proton is confined to a box of width ( a typical nuclear radius ) .
What are the energies of the ground and the first excited states ?
If the proton makes a transition from the first excited state to the ground state , what are the energy and the frequency of the emitted photon ?
If we assume that the proton confined in the nucleus can be modeled as a quantum particle in a box , all we need to do is to use to find its energies and .
The mass of a proton is The emitted photon carries away the energy difference We can use the relation to find its frequency f .
The ground state : The first excited state : .
The energy of the emitted photon is .
The frequency of the emitted photon is This is the typical frequency of a gamma ray emitted by a nucleus .
The energy of this photon is about 10 million times greater than that of a visible light photon .
Note that while the minimum energy of a classical particle can be zero ( the particle can be at rest in the middle of the box ) , the minimum energy of a quantum particle is nonzero and given by .
The average particle energy in the nth quantum state—its expectation value of energy—is The result is not surprising because the standing wave state is a state of definite energy .
Any energy measurement of this system must return a value equal to one of these allowed energies .
Our analysis of the quantum particle in a box would not be complete without discussing Bohr ’ s correspondence principle .
This principle states that for large quantum numbers , the laws of quantum physics must give identical results as the laws of classical physics .
To illustrate how this principle works for a quantum particle in a box , we plot the probability density distribution for finding the particle around location x between the walls when the particle is in quantum state .
shows these probability distributions for the ground state , for the first excited state , and for a highly excited state that corresponds to a large quantum number .
We see from these plots that when a quantum particle is in the ground state , it is most likely to be found around the middle of the box , where the probability distribution has the largest value .
This is not so when the particle is in the first excited state because now the probability distribution has the zero value in the middle of the box , so there is no chance of finding the particle there .
When a quantum particle is in the first excited state , the probability distribution has two maxima , and the best chance of finding the particle is at positions close to the locations of these maxima .
This quantum picture is unlike the classical picture .
The probability density of finding a classical particle between x and depends on how much time the particle spends in this region .
Assuming that its speed u is constant , this time is which is also constant for any location between the walls .
Therefore , the probability density of finding the classical particle at x is uniform throughout the box , and there is no preferable location for finding a classical particle .
This classical picture is matched in the limit of large quantum numbers .
A small 0.40-kg cart is moving back and forth along an air track between two bumpers located 2.0 m apart .
We assume no friction ; collisions with the bumpers are perfectly elastic so that between the bumpers , the car maintains a constant speed of 0.50 m/s .
Treating the cart as a quantum particle , estimate the value of the principal quantum number that corresponds to its classical energy .
We find the kinetic energy K of the cart and its ground state energy as though it were a quantum particle .
The energy of the cart is completely kinetic , so .
Solving for n gives .
The kinetic energy of the cart is The ground state of the cart , treated as a quantum particle , is Therefore , .
We see from this example that the energy of a classical system is characterized by a very large quantum number .
Bohr ’ s correspondence principle concerns this kind of situation .
We can apply the formalism of quantum mechanics to any kind of system , quantum or classical , and the results are correct in each case .
In the limit of high quantum numbers , there is no advantage in using quantum formalism because we can obtain the same results with the less complicated formalism of classical mechanics .
However , we can not apply classical formalism to a quantum system in a low-number energy state .
Check Your Understanding ( a ) Consider an infinite square well with wall boundaries and .
What is the probability of finding a quantum particle in its ground state somewhere between and ?
( b ) Repeat question ( a ) for a classical particle .
Having found the stationary states and the energies by solving the time-independent Schr dinger equation , we use to write wave functions that are solutions of the time-dependent Schr dinger ’ s equation given by .
For a particle in a box this gives where the energies are given by .
The quantum particle in a box model has practical applications in a relatively newly emerged field of optoelectronics , which deals with devices that convert electrical signals into optical signals .
This model also deals with nanoscale physical phenomena , such as a nanoparticle trapped in a low electric potential bounded by high-potential barriers .
Oscillations are found throughout nature , in such things as electromagnetic waves , vibrating molecules , and the gentle backand-forth sway of a tree branch .
In previous chapters , we used Newtonian mechanics to study macroscopic oscillations , such as a block on a spring and a simple pendulum .
In this chapter , we begin to study oscillating systems using quantum mechanics .
We begin with a review of the classic harmonic oscillator .
A simple harmonic oscillator is a particle or system that undergoes harmonic motion about an equilibrium position , such as an object with mass vibrating on a spring .
In this section , we consider oscillations in one-dimension only .
Suppose a mass moves back-and-forth along the x -direction about the equilibrium position , .
In classical mechanics , the particle moves in response to a linear restoring force given by where x is the displacement of the particle from its equilibrium position .
The motion takes place between two turning points , , where A denotes the amplitude of the motion .
The plot of the potential energy U ( x ) of the oscillator versus its position x is a parabola .
The potential-energy function is a quadratic function of x , measured with respect to the equilibrium position .
On the same graph , we also plot the total energy E of the oscillator , as a horizontal line that intercepts the parabola at .
Then the kinetic energy K is represented as the vertical distance between the line of total energy and the potential energy parabola .
In this plot , the motion of a classical oscillator is confined to the region where its kinetic energy is nonnegative , which is what the energy relation says .
Physically , it means that a classical oscillator can never be found beyond its turning points , and its energy depends only on how far the turning points are from its equilibrium position .
The energy of a classical oscillator changes in a continuous way .
The lowest energy that a classical oscillator may have is zero , which corresponds to a situation where an object is at rest at its equilibrium position .
The zero-energy state of a classical oscillator simply means no oscillations and no motion at all ( a classical particle sitting at the bottom of the potential well in ) .
When an object oscillates , no matter how big or small its energy may be , it spends the longest time near the turning points , because this is where it slows down and reverses its direction of motion .
Therefore , the probability of finding a classical oscillator between the turning points is highest near the turning points and lowest at the equilibrium position .
( Note that this is not a statement of preference of the object to go to lower energy .
It is a statement about how quickly the object moves through various regions . )
One problem with this classical formulation is that it is not general .
We can not use it , for example , to describe vibrations of diatomic molecules , where quantum effects are important .
A first step toward a quantum formulation is to use the classical expression to limit mention of a “ spring ” constant between the atoms .
These conditions ensure that the probability density must be finite when integrated over the entire range of x from to .
How to solve is the subject of a more advanced course in quantum mechanics ; here , we simply cite the results .
The allowed energies are The wave functions that correspond to these energies ( the stationary states or states of definite energy ) are where , is the normalization constant , and polynomial .
The first four Hermite polynomials are is a polynomial of degree n called a Hermite A few sample wave functions are given in .
As the value of the principal number increases , the solutions alternate between even functions and odd functions about .
Find the amplitude A of oscillations for a classical oscillator with energy equal to the energy of a quantum oscillator in the quantum state n .
To determine the amplitude A , we set the classical energy equal to given by .
We obtain As the quantum number n increases , the energy of the oscillator and therefore the amplitude of oscillation increases ( for a fixed natural angular frequency .
For large n , the amplitude is approximately proportional to the square root of the quantum number .
Several interesting features appear in this solution .
Unlike a classical oscillator , the measured energies of a quantum oscillator can have only energy values given by .
Similarly , when the particle makes a transition from a lowerenergy state to a higher-energy state , the smallest-energy quantum that can be absorbed by the particle is hf .
A quantum oscillator can absorb or emit energy only in multiples of this smallest-energy quantum .
This is consistent with Planck ’ s hypothesis for the energy exchanges between radiation and the cavity walls in the blackbody radiation problem .
The HCl diatomic molecule consists of one chlorine atom and one hydrogen atom .
The infrared vibrational spectrum measured for hydrogen .
What is the spacing between the chloride has the lowest-frequency line centered at vibrational energies of this molecule ?
What is the force constant k of the atomic bond in the HCl molecule ?
The lowest-frequency line corresponds to the emission of lowest-frequency photons .
These photons are emitted when the molecule makes a transition between two adjacent vibrational energy levels .
Assuming that energy levels are equally spaced , we use to estimate the spacing .
The molecule is well approximated by treating the Cl atom as being infinitely heavy and the H atom as the mass m that performs the oscillations .
Treating this molecular system as a classical oscillator , the force constant is found from the classical relation .
The energy spacing is The force constant is The force between atoms in an HCl molecule is surprisingly strong .
The typical energy released in energy transitions between vibrational levels is in the infrared range .
As we will see later , transitions in between vibrational energy levels of a diatomic molecule often accompany transitions between rotational energy levels .
Check Your Understanding The vibrational frequency of the hydrogen iodide HI diatomic molecule is .
( a ) What is the force constant of the molecular bond between the hydrogen and the iodine atoms ?
( b ) What is the energy of the emitted photon when this molecule makes a transition between adjacent vibrational energy levels ?
The quantum oscillator differs from the classic oscillator in three ways : First , the ground state of a quantum oscillator is not zero .
In the classical view , the lowest energy is zero .
The nonexistence of a zero-energy state is common for all quantum-mechanical systems because of omnipresent fluctuations that are a consequence of the Heisenberg uncertainty principle .
If a quantum particle sat motionless at the bottom of the potential well , its momentum as well as its position would have to be simultaneously exact , which would violate the Heisenberg uncertainty principle .
Therefore , the lowest-energy state must be characterized by uncertainties in momentum and in position , so the ground state of a quantum particle must lie above the bottom of the potential well .
Second , a particle in a quantum harmonic oscillator potential can be found with nonzero probability outside the interval .
In a classic formulation of the problem , the particle would not have any energy to be in this region .
The probability of finding a ground-state quantum particle in the classically forbidden region is about 16 % .
Third , the probability density distributions for a quantum oscillator in the ground low-energy state , , is largest at the middle of the well .
For the particle to be found with greatest probability at the center of the well , we expect that the particle spends the most time there as it oscillates .
This is opposite to the behavior of a classical oscillator , in which the particle spends most of its time moving with relative small speeds near the turning points .
Check Your Understanding Find the expectation value of the position for a particle in the ground state of a harmonic oscillator using symmetry .
Quantum probability density distributions change in character for excited states , becoming more like the classical distribution when the quantum number gets higher .
We observe this change already for the first excited state of a quantum oscillator because the distribution peaks up around the turning points and vanishes at the equilibrium position , as seen in .
In accordance with Bohr ’ s correspondence principle , in the limit of high quantum numbers , the quantum description of a harmonic oscillator converges to the classical description , which is illustrated in .
The classical probability density distribution corresponding to the quantum energy of the state is a reasonably good approximation of the quantum probability distribution for a quantum oscillator in this excited state .
This agreement becomes increasingly better for highly excited states .
Quantum tunneling is a phenomenon in which particles penetrate a potential energy barrier with a height greater than the total energy of the particles .
The phenomenon is interesting and important because it violates the principles of classical mechanics .
Quantum tunneling is important in models of the Sun and has a wide range of applications , such as the scanning tunneling microscope and the tunnel diode .
To illustrate quantum tunneling , consider a ball rolling along a surface with a kinetic energy of 100 J .
As the ball rolls , it encounters a hill .
The potential energy of the ball placed atop the hill is 10 J .
Therefore , the ball ( with 100 J of kinetic energy ) easily rolls over the hill and continues on .
In classical mechanics , the probability that the ball passes over the hill is exactly 1—it makes it over every time .
If , however , the height of the hill is increased—a ball placed atop the hill has a potential energy of 200 J—the ball proceeds only part of the way up the hill , stops , and returns in the direction it came .
The total energy of the ball is converted entirely into potential energy before it can reach the top of the hill .
We do not expect , even after repeated attempts , for the 100-J ball to ever be found beyond the hill .
Therefore , the probability that the ball passes over the hill is exactly 0 , and probability it is turned back or “ reflected ” by the hill is exactly 1 .
The ball never makes it over the hill .
The existence of the ball beyond the hill is an impossibility or “ energetically forbidden. ” However , according to quantum mechanics , the ball has a wave function and this function is defined over all space .
The wave function may be highly localized , but there is always a chance that as the ball encounters the hill , the ball will suddenly be found beyond it .
Indeed , this probability is appreciable if the “ wave packet ” of the ball is wider than the barrier .
View this for a simulation of tunneling .
In the language of quantum mechanics , the hill is characterized by a potential barrier .
A finite-height square barrier is described by the following potential-energy function : The potential barrier is illustrated in .
When the height of the barrier is infinite , the wave packet representing an incident quantum particle is unable to penetrate it , and the quantum particle bounces back from the barrier boundary , just like a classical particle .
When the width L of the barrier is infinite and its height is finite , a part of the wave packet representing an incident quantum particle can filter through the barrier boundary and eventually perish after traveling some distance inside the barrier .
A part of the incident quantum wave packet eventually emerges on the other side of the barrier in the form of the transmitted wave packet that tunneled through the barrier .
How much of the incident wave can tunnel through a barrier depends on the barrier width L and its height , and on the energy E of the quantum particle incident on the barrier .
This is the physics of tunneling .
Barrier penetration by quantum wave functions was first analyzed theoretically by Friedrich Hund in 1927 , shortly after Schr dinger published the equation that bears his name .
A year later , George Gamow used the formalism of quantum mechanics to explain the radioactive -decay of atomic nuclei as a quantum-tunneling phenomenon .
The invention of the tunnel diode in 1957 made it clear that quantum tunneling is important to the semiconductor industry .
In modern nanotechnologies , individual atoms are manipulated using a knowledge of quantum tunneling .
Suppose a uniform and time-independent beam of electrons or other quantum particles with energy E traveling along the x -axis ( in the positive direction to the right ) encounters a potential barrier described by .
The question is : What is the probability that an individual particle in the beam will tunnel through the potential barrier ?
The answer can be found by solving the boundary-value problem for the time-independent Schr dinger equation for a particle in the beam .
The general form of this equation is given by , which we reproduce here : In , the potential function U ( x ) is defined by .
We assume that the given energy E of the incoming particle is smaller than the height of the potential barrier , , because this is the interesting physical case .
Knowing the energy E of the incoming particle , our task is to solve for a function that is continuous and has continuous first derivatives for all x .
In other words , we are looking for a “ smooth-looking ” solution ( because this is how wave functions look ) that can be given a probabilistic interpretation so that is the probability density .
We divide the real axis into three regions with the boundaries defined by the potential function in ( illustrated in ) and transcribe for each region .
These solutions are illustrated in .
In region I , there are two waves—one is incident ( moving to the right ) and one is reflected ( moving to the left ) —so none of the constants A and B in may vanish .
In region III , there is only one wave ( moving to the right ) , which is the transmitted wave , so the constant G must be zero in , .
We can write explicitly that the incident wave is and that the reflected wave is , and that the transmitted wave is .
The amplitude of the incident wave is Similarly , the amplitude of the reflected wave is and the amplitude of the transmitted wave is .
We know from the theory of waves that the square of the wave amplitude is directly proportional to the wave intensity .
If we want to know how much of the incident wave tunnels through the barrier , we need to compute the square of the amplitude of the transmitted wave .
The transmission probability or tunneling probability is the ratio of the transmitted intensity to the incident intensity , written as where L is the width of the barrier and E is the total energy of the particle .
This is the probability an individual particle in the incident beam will tunnel through the potential barrier .
Intuitively , we understand that this probability must depend on the barrier height .
Now we use the boundary conditions to find equations for the unknown constants .
and are substituted into to give and are substituted into to give Similarly , we substitute and into , differentiate , and obtain Similarly , the boundary condition reads explicitly We now have four equations for five unknown constants .
The actual algebra that leads to expression for F / A is pretty lengthy , but it can be done either by hand or with a help of computer software .
In the laboratory , we can adjust both the potential height and the width L to design nano-devices with desirable transmission coefficients .
Two copper nanowires are insulated by a copper oxide nano-layer that provides a 10.0-eV potential barrier .
Estimate the tunneling probability between the nanowires by 7.00-eV electrons through a 5.00-nm thick oxide layer .
What if the thickness of the layer were reduced to just 1.00 nm ?
What if the energy of electrons were increased to 9.00 eV ?
Treating the insulating oxide layer as a finite-height potential barrier , we use .
We identify , , , , and .
We use to compute the exponent .
Also , we need the rest mass of the electron and Planck ’ s constant .
It is typical for this type of estimate to deal with very small quantities that are often not suitable for handheld calculators .
To make correct estimates of orders , we make the conversion .
In today ’ s technologies , we can manipulate individual atoms on metal surfaces to create potential barriers that are fractions of a nanometer , giving rise to measurable tunneling currents .
One of many applications of this technology is the scanning tunneling microscope ( STM ) , which we discuss later in this section .
Check Your Understanding A proton with kinetic energy 1.00 eV is incident on a square potential barrier with height 10.00 eV .
If the proton is to have the same transmission probability as an electron of the same energy , what must the width of the barrier be relative to the barrier width encountered by an electron ?
In 1928 , Gamow identified quantum tunneling as the mechanism responsible for the radioactive decay of atomic nuclei .
He observed that some isotopes of thorium , uranium , and bismuth disintegrate by emitting -particles ( which are doubly ionized helium atoms or , simply speaking , helium nuclei ) .
In the process of emitting an -particle , the original nucleus is transformed into a new nucleus that has two fewer neutrons and two fewer protons than the original nucleus .
The -particles emitted by one isotope have approximately the same kinetic energies .
When we look at variations of these energies among isotopes of various elements , the lowest kinetic energy is about 4 MeV and the highest is about 9 MeV , so these energies are of the same order of magnitude .
This is about where the similarities between various isotopes end .
When we inspect half-lives ( a half-life is the time in which a radioactive sample loses half of its nuclei due to decay ) , different isotopes differ widely .
For example , the half-life of polonium-214 is and the half-life of uranium is 4.5 billion years .
Gamow explained this variation by considering a ‘ spherical-box ’ model of the nucleus , where -particles can bounce back and forth between the walls as free particles .
The confinement is provided by a strong nuclear potential at a spherical wall of the box .
The thickness of this wall , however , is not infinite but finite , so in principle , a nuclear particle has a chance to escape this nuclear confinement .
On the inside wall of the confining barrier is a high nuclear potential that keeps the -particle in a small confinement .
But when an -particle gets out to the other side of this wall , it is subject to electrostatic Coulomb repulsion and moves away from the nucleus .
This idea is illustrated in .
The width L of the potential barrier that separates an -particle from the outside world depends on the particle ’ s kinetic energy E .
This width is the distance between the point marked by the nuclear radius R and the point where an -particle emerges on the other side of the barrier , .
At the distance , its kinetic energy must at least match the electrostatic energy of repulsion , ( where is the charge of the nucleus ) .
In this way we can estimate the width of the nuclear barrier , We see from this estimate that the higher the energy of -particle , the narrower the width of the barrier that it is to tunnel through .
We also know that the width of the potential barrier is the most important parameter in tunneling probability .
Thus , highly energetic -particles have a good chance to escape the nucleus , and , for such nuclei , the nuclear disintegration half-life is short .
Notice that this process is highly nonlinear , meaning a small increase in the -particle energy has a disproportionately large enhancing effect on the tunneling probability and , consequently , on shortening the half-life .
This explains why the half-life of polonium that emits 8-MeV -particles is only hundreds of milliseconds and the half-life of uranium that emits 4-MeV -particles is billions of years .
Field emission is a process of emitting electrons from conducting surfaces due to a strong external electric field that is applied in the direction normal to the surface .
As we know from our study of electric fields in earlier chapters , an applied external electric field causes the electrons in a conductor to move to its surface and stay there as long as the present external field is not excessively strong .
In this situation , we have a constant electric potential throughout the inside of the conductor , including its surface .
In the language of potential energy , we say that an electron inside the conductor has a constant potential energy ( here , the x means inside the conductor ) .
Taking the origin at the surface , so that is the location of the surface , we can represent the potential energy of conduction electrons in a metal as the potential energy barrier shown in .
In the absence of the external field , the potential energy becomes a step barrier defined by and by .
When an external electric field is strong , conduction electrons at the surface may get detached from it and accelerate along electric field lines in a direction antiparallel to the external field , away from the surface .
In short , conduction electrons may escape from the surface .
The field emission can be understood as the quantum tunneling of conduction electrons through the potential barrier at the conductor ’ s surface .
The physical principle at work here is very similar to the mechanism of -emission from a radioactive nucleus .
The width L of the potential barrier that the electron must cross is the distance from the conductor ’ s surface to the point outside the surface where its kinetic energy matches the value of its potential energy in the external field .
In , this distance is measured along the dashed horizontal line from to the intercept with , so the barrier width is We see that L is inversely proportional to the strength of an external field .
When we increase the strength of the external field , the potential barrier outside the conductor becomes steeper and its width decreases for an electron with a given kinetic energy .
In turn , the probability that an electron will tunnel across the barrier ( conductor surface ) becomes exponentially larger .
The electrons that emerge on the other side of this barrier form a current ( tunneling-electron current ) that can be detected above the surface .
The tunneling-electron current is proportional to the tunneling probability .
The tunneling probability depends nonlinearly on the barrier width L , and L can be changed by adjusting .
Therefore , the tunnelingelectron current can be tuned by adjusting the strength of an external electric field at the surface .
When the strength of an external electric field is constant , the tunneling-electron current has different values at different elevations L above the surface .
The quantum tunneling phenomenon at metallic surfaces , which we have just described , is the physical principle behind the operation of the scanning tunneling microscope ( STM ) , invented in 1981 by Gerd Binnig and Heinrich Rohrer .
While the sample is kept at a suitable voltage bias , the scanning tip moves along the surface , and the tunneling-electron current between the tip and the surface is registered at each position .
The amount of the current depends on the probability of electron tunneling from the surface to the tip , which , in turn , depends on the elevation of the tip above the surface .
Hence , at each tip position , the distance from the tip to the surface is measured by measuring how many electrons tunnel out from the surface to the tip .
This method can give an unprecedented resolution of about 0.001 nm , which is about 1 % of the average diameter of an atom .
In this way , we can see individual atoms on the surface , as in the image of a carbon nanotube in .
In such a tunnel diode , electrons tunnel through a single potential barrier at a contact between two different semiconductors .
At the junction , tunneling-electron current changes nonlinearly with the applied potential difference across the junction and may rapidly decrease as the bias voltage is increased .
This is unlike the Ohm ’ s law behavior that we are familiar with in household circuits .
This kind of rapid behavior ( caused by quantum tunneling ) is desirable in high-speed electronic devices .
Another kind of electronic nano-device utilizes resonant tunneling of electrons through potential barriers that occur in quantum dots .
A quantum dot is a small region of a semiconductor nanocrystal that is grown , for example , in a silicon or aluminum arsenide crystal .
( a ) shows a quantum dot of gallium arsenide embedded in an aluminum arsenide wafer .
The quantum-dot region acts as a potential well of a finite height ( shown in ( b ) ) that has two finiteheight potential barriers at dot boundaries .
Similarly , as for a quantum particle in a box ( that is , an infinite potential well ) , lower-lying energies of a quantum particle trapped in a finite-height potential well are quantized .
Thus , a quantum dot of gallium arsenide sitting in aluminum arsenide is a potential well where low-lying energies of an electron are quantized , indicated as in part ( b ) in the figure .
However , when this voltage bias is changed in such a way that one of the barriers is lowered , so that and become aligned , as seen in part ( c ) of the figure , an electron current flows through the dot .
When the voltage bias is now increased , this alignment is lost and the current stops flowing .
When the voltage bias is increased further , the electron tunneling becomes improbable until the bias voltage reaches a value for which the outside electron energy matches the next electron energy level in the dot .
The word ‘ resonance ’ in the device name means that the tunneling-electron current occurs only when a selected energy level is matched by tuning an applied voltage bias , such as in the operation mechanism of the resonant-tunneling diode just described .
Resonant-tunneling diodes are used as super-fast nano-switches .
In this chapter , we use quantum mechanics to study the structure and properties of atoms .
This study introduces ideas and concepts that are necessary to understand more complex systems , such as molecules , crystals , and metals .
As we deepen our understanding of atoms , we build on things we already know , such as Rutherford ’ s nuclear model of the atom , Bohr ’ s model of the hydrogen atom , and de Broglie ’ s wave hypothesis .
is NGC1763 , an emission nebula in the small galaxy known as the Large Magellanic Cloud , which is a satellite of the Milky Way Galaxy .
Ultraviolet light from hot stars ionizes the hydrogen atoms in the nebula .
As protons and electrons recombine , radiation of different frequencies is emitted .
The details of this process can be correctly predicted by quantum mechanics and are examined in this chapter .
The hydrogen atom is the simplest atom in nature and , therefore , a good starting point to study atoms and atomic structure .
The hydrogen atom consists of a single negatively charged electron that moves about a positively charged proton .
In Bohr ’ s model , the electron is pulled around the proton in a perfectly circular orbit by an attractive Coulomb force .
The proton is approximately 1800 times more massive than the electron , so the proton moves very little in response to the force on the proton by the electron .
( This is analogous to the Earth-Sun system , where the Sun moves very little in response to the force exerted on it by Earth . )
An explanation of this effect using Newton ’ s laws is given in .
With the assumption of a fixed proton , we focus on the motion of the electron .
In the electric field of the proton , the potential energy of the electron is where and r is the distance between the electron and the proton .
As we saw earlier , the force on an object is equal to the negative of the gradient ( or slope ) of the potential energy function .
For the special case of a hydrogen atom , the force between the electron and proton is an attractive Coulomb force .
Notice that the potential energy function U ( r ) does not vary in time .
As a result , Schrödinger ’ s equation of the hydrogen atom reduces to two simpler equations : one that depends only on space ( x , y , z ) and another that depends only on time ( t ) .
( The separation of a wave function into spaceand time-dependent parts for time-independent potential energy functions is discussed in . )
We are most interested in the space-dependent equation : where is the three-dimensional wave function of the electron , is the mass of the electron , and E is the total energy of the electron .
Recall that the total wave function is the product of the space-dependent wave function and the time-dependent wave function .
In addition to being time-independent , U ( r ) is also spherically symmetrical .
This suggests that we may solve Schrödinger ’ s equation more easily if we express it in terms of the spherical coordinates instead of rectangular coordinates .
A spherical coordinate system is shown in .
In spherical coordinates , the variable r is the radial coordinate , is the polar angle ( relative to the vertical z -axis ) , and is the azimuthal angle ( relative to the x -axis ) .
The relationship between spherical and rectangular coordinates is The factor is the magnitude of a vector formed by the projection of the polar vector onto the xy -plane .
Also , the coordinates of x and y are obtained by projecting this vector onto the x and y -axes , respectively .
The inverse transformation gives Schrödinger ’ s wave equation for the hydrogen atom in spherical coordinates is discussed in more advanced courses in modern physics , so we do not consider it in detail here .
Valid solutions to Schrödinger ’ s equation are labeled by the quantum numbers n , l , and m .
( The reasons for these names will be explained in the next section . )
The radial function R depends only on n and l ; the polar function depends only on l and m ; and the phi function depends only on m .
The dependence of each function on quantum numbers is indicated with subscripts : Not all sets of quantum numbers ( n , l , m ) are possible .
For example , the orbital angular quantum number l can never be greater or equal to the principal quantum number .
Specifically , we have Notice that for the ground state , , , and .
In other words , there is only one quantum state with the wave function for , and it is .
However , for , we have Therefore , the allowed states for the state are , , and .
Example wave functions for the hydrogen atom are given in .
Note that some of these expressions contain the letter i , which represents .
When probabilities are calculated , these complex numbers do not appear in the final answer .
Each of the three quantum numbers of the hydrogen atom ( n , l , m ) is associated with a different physical quantity .
The principal quantum number n is associated with the total energy of the electron , .
According to Schrödinger ’ s equation : where Notice that this expression is identical to that of Bohr ’ s model .
As in the Bohr model , the electron in a particular state of energy does not radiate .
For the hydrogen atom , how many possible quantum states correspond to the principal number ?
What are the energies of these states ?
For a hydrogen atom of a given energy , the number of allowed states depends on its orbital angular momentum .
We can count these states for each value of the principal quantum number , However , the total energy depends on the principal quantum number only , which means that we can use and the number of states counted .
If , the allowed values of l are 0 , 1 , and 2 .
If , ( 1 state ) .
If , ( 3 states ) ; and if , ( 5 states ) .
In total , there are allowed states .
Because the total energy depends only on the principal quantum number , , the energy of each of these states is An electron in a hydrogen atom can occupy many different angular momentum states with the very same energy .
As the orbital angular momentum increases , the number of the allowed states with the same energy increases .
The angular momentum orbital quantum number l is associated with the orbital angular momentum of the electron in a hydrogen atom .
The designations s , p , d , and f result from early historical attempts to classify atomic spectral lines .
( The letters stand for sharp , principal , diffuse , and fundamental , respectively . )
After f , the letters continue alphabetically .
The ground state of hydrogen is designated as the 1 s state , where “ 1 ” indicates the energy level and “ s ” indicates the orbital angular momentum state .
When , l can be either 0 or 1 .
The , state is designated “ 2 s . ” The , state is designated “ 2 p . ” When , l can be 0 , 1 , or 2 , and the states are 3 s , 3 p , and 3 d , respectively .
Notation for other quantum states is given in .
The angular momentum projection quantum number m is associated with the azimuthal angle ( see ) and is related to the z -component of orbital angular momentum of an electron in a hydrogen atom .
This component is given by where The z -component of angular momentum is related to the magnitude of angular momentum by where is the angle between the angular momentum vector and the z -axis .
Note that the direction of the z -axis is determined by experiment—that is , along any direction , the experimenter decides to measure the angular momentum .
For example , the z -direction might correspond to the direction of an external magnetic field .
The relationship between is given in .
The quantization of is equivalent to the quantization of .
Substituting equation , we find for L and m for into this Thus , the angle is quantized with the particular values Notice that both the polar angle and the projection of the angular momentum vector onto an arbitrary z -axis are quantized .
The quantization of the polar angle for the state is shown in .
The orbital angular momentum vector lies somewhere on the surface of a cone with an opening angle relative to the z -axis ( unless in which case and the vector points are perpendicular to the z -axis ) .
A detailed study of angular momentum reveals that we can not know all three components simultaneously .
In the previous section , the z -component of orbital angular momentum has definite values that depend on the quantum number m .
This implies that we can not know both xand y -components of angular momentum , and , with certainty .
As a result , the precise direction of the orbital angular momentum vector is unknown .
Calculate the angles that the angular momentum vector can make with the z -axis for , as shown in .
The vectors and ( in the z -direction ) form a right triangle , where is the hypotenuse and the adjacent side .
The ratio of to | | is the cosine of the angle of interest .
The magnitudes and is are given by We are given , so ml can be Thus , L has the value given by The quantity can have three values , given by .
As you can see in , so for , we have Thus , Similarly , for , we find this gives Then for : so that The angles are consistent with the figure .
Only the angle relative to the z -axis is quantized .
L can point in any direction as long as it makes the proper angle with the z -axis .
Thus , the angular momentum vectors lie on cones , as illustrated .
To see how the correspondence principle holds here , consider that the smallest angle ( in the example ) is for the maximum value of namely For that smallest angle , which approaches 1 as l becomes very large .
If , then .
Furthermore , for large l , there are many values of , so that all angles become possible as l gets very large .
Check Your Understanding Can the magnitude of ever be equal to L ?
As we saw earlier , we can use quantum mechanics to make predictions about physical events by the use of probability statements .
If this integral is computed for all space , the result is 1 , because the probability of the particle to be located somewhere is 100 % ( the normalization condition ) .
In a more advanced course on modern is the complex conjugate .
This eliminates the occurrences physics , you will find that where of in the above calculation .
Consider an electron in a state of zero angular momentum .
In this case , the electron ’ s wave function depends only on the radial coordinate r .
( Refer to the states and in . )
For an electron in the ground state of hydrogen , the probability of finding an electron in the region r to is where angstroms .
The radial probability density function P ( r ) is plotted in .
The area under the curve between any two radial positions , say and , gives the probability of finding the electron in that radial range .
To find the most probable radial position , we set the first derivative of this function to zero and solve for r .
The most probable radial position is not equal to the average or expectation value of the radial position because is not symmetrical about its peak value .
If the electron has orbital angular momentum , then the wave functions representing the electron depend on the angles and that is , ( r , , ) .
Atomic orbitals for three states with and are shown in .
An atomic orbital is a region in space that encloses a certain percentage ( usually 90 % ) of the electron probability .
( Sometimes atomic orbitals are referred to as “ clouds ” of probability . )
Notice that these distributions are pronounced in certain directions .
This directionality is important to chemists when they analyze how atoms are bound together to form molecules .
A slightly different representation of the wave function is given in .
In this case , light and dark regions indicate locations of relatively high and low probability , respectively .
In contrast to the Bohr model of the hydrogen atom , the electron does not move around the proton nucleus in a well-defined path .
Indeed , the uncertainty principle makes it impossible to know how the electron gets from one place to another .
In Bohr ’ s model of the hydrogen atom , the electron moves in a circular orbit around the proton .
The electron passes by a particular point on the loop in a certain time , so we can calculate a current .
An electron that orbits a proton in a hydrogen atom is therefore analogous to current flowing through a circular wire .
In the study of magnetism , we saw that a current-carrying wire produces magnetic fields .
It is therefore reasonable to conclude that the hydrogen atom produces a magnetic field and interacts with other magnetic fields .
The orbital magnetic dipole moment is a measure of the strength of the magnetic field produced by the orbital angular momentum of an electron .
From , the magnitude of the orbital magnetic dipole moment for a current loop is where I is the current and A is the area of the loop .
( For brevity , we refer to this as the magnetic moment . )
The current I associated with an electron in orbit about a proton in a hydrogen atom is where e is the magnitude of the electron charge and T is its orbital period .
If we assume that the electron travels in a perfectly circular orbit , the orbital period is where r is the radius of the orbit and v is the speed of the electron in its orbit .
Given that the area of a circle is , the absolute magnetic moment is It is helpful to express the magnetic momentum in terms of the orbital angular momentum Because and the momentum vector form a right angle .
Thus , the the electron orbits in a circle , the position vector magnitude of the orbital angular momentum is Combining these two equations , we have In full vector form , this expression is written as The negative sign appears because the electron has a negative charge .
Notice that the direction of the magnetic moment of the electron is antiparallel to the orbital angular momentum , as shown in ( b ) .
In the Bohr model of the atom , the relationship between and in is independent of the radius of the orbit .
The magnetic moment can also be expressed in terms of the orbital angular quantum number l .
As we will see in the next section , the total magnetic dipole moment of the hydrogen atom is due to both the orbital motion of the electron and its intrinsic spin .
For now , we ignore the effect of electron spin .
What is the magnitude of the orbital dipole magnetic moment of an electron in the hydrogen atom in the ( a ) s state , ( b ) p state , and ( c ) d state ?
( Assume that the spin of the electron is zero . )
The magnetic momentum of the electron is related to its orbital angular momentum L .
For the hydrogen atom , this quantity is related to the orbital angular quantum number l .
The states are given in spectroscopic notation , which relates a letter ( s , p , d , etc . )
to a quantum number .
This does not mean that the electron is at rest , just that the overall motion of the electron does not produce a magnetic field .
In the p state , the electron has a magnetic moment with three possible values for the z -component of this magnetic moment ; this means that magnetic moment can point in three different polar directions—each antiparallel to the orbital angular momentum vector .
In the d state , the electron has a magnetic moment with five possible values for the z -component of this magnetic moment .
In this case , the magnetic moment can point in five different polar directions .
A hydrogen atom has a magnetic field , so we expect the hydrogen atom to interact with an external magnetic field—such as the push and pull between two bar magnets .
From , we know that when a current loop interacts with an external magnetic field , it experiences a torque given by where I is the current , is the area of the loop , is the magnetic moment , and is the external magnetic field .
This torque acts to rotate the magnetic moment vector of the hydrogen atom to align with the external magnetic field .
Because mechanical work is done by the external magnetic field on the hydrogen atom , we can talk about energy transformations in the atom .
Work done on the hydrogen atom to rotate the atom ’ s magnetic moment vector in the direction of the external magnetic field is therefore associated with a drop in potential energy .
The energy of the system is conserved , however , because a drop in potential energy produces radiation ( the emission of a photon ) .
These energy transitions are quantized because the magnetic moment can point in only certain directions .
Ignoring the effects of electron spin , transitions from the state to a common lower energy state produce three closely spaced spectral lines ( , left column ) .
Likewise , transitions from the state produce five closely spaced spectral lines ( right column ) .
The separation of these lines is proportional to the strength of the external magnetic field .
This effect has many applications .
For example , the splitting of lines in the hydrogen spectrum of the Sun is used to determine the strength of the Sun ’ s magnetic field .
Many such magnetic field measurements can be used to make a map of the magnetic activity at the Sun ’ s surface called a magnetogram .
In this section , we consider the effects of electron spin .
Spin introduces two additional quantum numbers to our model of the hydrogen atom .
Both were discovered by looking at the fine structure of atomic spectra .
Spin is a fundamental characteristic of all particles , not just electrons , and is analogous to the intrinsic spin of extended bodies about their own axes , such as the daily rotation of Earth .
Spin is quantized in the same manner as orbital angular momentum .
It has been found that the magnitude of the intrinsic spin angular momentum S of an electron is given by where s is defined to be the spin quantum number .
The state is called the “ spin-down ” state and has a z -component of spin , ; state is called the “ spin-up ” state and has a z -component of spin , These states are shown in .
The intrinsic magnetic dipole moment of an electron can also be expressed in terms of the spin quantum number .
In analogy to the orbital angular momentum , the magnitude of the electron magnetic moment is According to the special theory of relativity , this value is low by a factor of 2 .
Thus , in vector form , the spin magnetic moment is The z -component of the magnetic moment is The spin projection quantum number has just two values has just two values : so the zcomponent of the magnetic moment also where is one Bohr magneton .
An electron is magnetic , so we expect the electron to interact with other magnetic fields .
We consider two special cases : the interaction of a free electron with an external ( nonuniform ) magnetic field , and an electron in a hydrogen atom with a magnetic field produced by the orbital angular momentum of the electron .
A hydrogen atom in the ground state is placed in an external uniform magnetic field .
Determine the frequency of radiation produced in a transition between the spin-up and spin-down states of the electron .
The spin projection quantum number is , so the zcomponent of the magnetic moment is The potential energy associated with the interaction between the electron magnetic moment and the external magnetic field is The frequency of light emitted is proportional to the energy difference between these two states .
The energy difference between these states is , so the frequency of radiation produced is The electron magnetic moment couples with the external magnetic field .
The energy of this system is different whether the electron is aligned or not with the proton .
The frequency of radiation produced by a transition between these states is proportional to the energy difference .
If we double the strength of the magnetic field , holding all other things constant , the frequency of the radiation doubles and its wavelength is cut in half .
In a hydrogen atom , the electron magnetic moment can interact with the magnetic field produced by the orbital angular momentum of the electron , a phenomenon called spin-orbit coupling .
The orbital angular momentum , orbital magnetic moment , spin angular momentum , and spin magnetic moment vectors are shown together in .
Just as the energy levels of a hydrogen atom can be split by an external magnetic field , so too are the energy levels of a hydrogen atom split by internal magnetic fields of the atom .
If the magnetic moment of the electron and orbital magnetic moment of the electron are antiparallel , the potential energy from the magnetic interaction is relatively high , but when these moments are parallel , the potential energy is relatively small .
Transition from each of these two states to a lower-energy level results in the emission of a photon of slightly different frequency .
That is , the spin-orbit coupling “ splits ” the spectral line expected from a spin-less electron .
The fine structure of the hydrogen spectrum is explained by spin-orbit coupling .
The Stern-Gerlach experiment provides experimental evidence that electrons have spin angular momentum .
The experiment passes a stream of silver ( Ag ) atoms through an external , nonuniform magnetic field .
The Ag atom has an orbital angular momentum of zero and contains a single unpaired electron in the outer shell .
Therefore , the total angular momentum of the Ag atom is due entirely to the spin of the outer electron ( .
Due to electron spin , the Ag atoms act as tiny magnets as they pass through the magnetic field .
These “ magnets ” have two possible orientations , which correspond to the spin-up and -down states of the electron .
The magnetic field diverts the spin up atoms in one direction and the spin-down atoms in another direction .
This produces two distinct bands on a screen .
According to classical predictions , the angular momentum ( and , therefore , the magnetic moment ) of the Ag atom can point in any direction , so one expects , instead , a continuous smudge on the screen .
The resulting two bands of the Stern-Gerlach experiment provide startling support for the ideas of quantum mechanics .
Visit to learn more about the Stern-Gerlach experiment .
Check Your Understanding If the Stern-Gerlach experiment yielded four distinct bands instead of two , what might be concluded about the spin quantum number of the charged particle ?
Just like an electron , a proton is spin 1/2 and has a magnetic moment .
( According to nuclear theory , this moment is due to the orbital motion of quarks within the proton . )
The hyperfine structure of the hydrogen spectrum is explained by the interaction between the magnetic moment of the proton and the magnetic moment of the electron , an interaction known as spin-spin coupling .
The energy of the electron-proton system is different depending on whether or not the moments are aligned .
Transitions between these states ( spin-flip transitions ) result in the emission of a photon with a wavelength of ( in the radio range ) .
The 21-cm line in atomic spectroscopy is a “ fingerprint ” of hydrogen gas .
Astronomers exploit this spectral line to map the spiral arms of galaxies , which are composed mostly of hydrogen .
A complete specification of the state of an electron in a hydrogen atom requires five quantum numbers : n , l , m , s , and .
The names , symbols , and allowed values of these quantum numbers are summarized in .
Note that the intrinsic quantum numbers introduced in this section ( s and m ) are valid for many particles , not just electrons .
For example , quarks within an atomic nucleus are also spin-half particles .
As we will see later , quantum numbers help to classify subatomic particles and enter into scientific models that attempt to explain how the universe works .
So far , we have studied only hydrogen , the simplest chemical element .
Assume that each electron moves in a spherically symmetrical electric field produced by the nucleus and all other electrons of the atom .
The assumption is valid because the electrons are distributed randomly around the nucleus and produce an average electric field ( and potential ) that is spherically symmetrical .
The electric potential U ( r ) for each electron does not follow the simple form because of interactions between electrons , but it turns out that we can still label each individual electron state by quantum numbers , .
( The spin quantum number s is the same for all electrons , so it will not be used in this section . )
Consistent with Pauli ’ s exclusion principle , no two rows of the table have the exact same set of quantum numbers .
Electrons with the same principal quantum number n are said to be in the same shell , and those that have the same value of l are said to occupy the same subshell .
An electron in the state of a hydrogen atom is denoted 1 s , where the first digit indicates the shell and the letter indicates the subshell Two electrons in the state are denoted as where the superscript indicates the number of electrons .
An electron in the state with is denoted 2 p .
The combination of two electrons in the and state , and three electrons in the and state is written as and so on .
This representation of the electron state is called the electron configuration of the atom .
The electron configurations for several atoms are given in .
Electrons in the outer shell of an atom are called valence electrons .
Chemical bonding between atoms in a molecule are explained by the transfer and sharing of valence electrons .
The maximum number of electrons in a subshell depends on the value of the angular momentum quantum number , l .
For a given a value l , there are orbital angular momentum states .
However , each of these states can be filled by two electrons ( spin up and down , ) .
Thus , the maximum number of electrons in a subshell is In the 2 s subshell , the maximum number of electrons is 2 .
In the 2 p subshell , the maximum number of electrons is 6 .
Therefore , the total maximum number of electrons in the shell ( including both the and 1 subshells ) is or 8 .
In general , the maximum number of electrons in the n th shell is How many subshells are in the shell ?
Identify each subshell and calculate the maximum number of electrons that will fill each .
Show that the maximum number of electrons that fill an atom is .
Subshells are determined by the value of l ; thus , we first determine which values of l are allowed , and then we apply the equation “ maximum number of electrons that can be in a subshell ” to find the number of electrons in each subshell .
Because we know that l can be 0 , 1 , or 2 ; thus , there are three possible subshells .
In standard notation , they are labeled the 3 s , 3 p , and 3 d subshells .
In standard ( spectroscopic ) notation , a filled shell is denoted as .
Shells do not fill in a simple manner .
Before the shell is completely filled , for example , we begin to find electrons in the shell .
The structure of the periodic table can be understood in terms of shells and subshells , and , ultimately , the total energy , orbital angular momentum , and spin of the electrons in the atom .
A detailed discussion of the periodic table is left to a chemistry course—we sketch only its basic features here .
In this discussion , we assume that the atoms are electrically neutral ; that is , they have the same number of electrons and protons .
( Recall that the total number of protons in an atomic nucleus is called the atomic number , Z . )
First , the periodic table is arranged into columns and rows .
The table is read left to right and top to bottom in the order of increasing atomic number Z .
Atoms that belong to the same column or chemical group share many of the same chemical properties .
For example , the Li and Na atoms ( in the first column ) bond to other atoms in a similar way .
The first row of the table corresponds to the 1 s shell of an atom .
Consider the hypothetical procedure of adding electrons , one by one , to an atom .
For hydrogen ( H ) ( upper left ) , the 1 s shell is filled with either a spin up or down electron .
This lone electron is easily shared with other atoms , so hydrogen is chemically active .
For helium ( He ) ( upper right ) , the 1 s shell is filled with both a spin up and a spin down electron .
This “ fills ” the 1 s shell , so a helium atom tends not to share electrons with other atoms .
The helium atom is said to be chemically inactive , inert , or noble ; likewise , helium gas is said to be an inert gas or noble gas .
Build an atom by adding and subtracting protons , neutrons , and electrons .
How does the element , charge , and mass change ?
Visit to explore the answers to these questions .
The second row corresponds to the 2 s and 2 p subshells .
For lithium ( Li ) ( upper left ) , the 1 s shell is filled with a spin-up and spin-down electron and the 2 s shell is filled with either a spin-up or -down electron .
Its electron configuration is therefore or [ He ] 2 s , where [ He ] indicates a helium core .
Like hydrogen , the lone electron in the outermost shell is easily shared with other atoms .
For beryllium ( Be ) , the 2 s shell is filled with a spin-up and -down electron , and has the electron configuration [ He ] .
Next , we look at the right side of the table .
For boron ( B ) , the 1 s and 2 s shells are filled and the 2 p shell contains either a spin up or down electron .
From carbon ( C ) to neon ( N ) , we the fill the 2 p shell .
The maximum number of electrons in the 2 p shells is .
For neon ( Ne ) , the 1 s shell is filled with a spin-up and spin-down electron , and the 2 p shell is filled with six electrons ( .
This “ fills ” the 1 s , 2 s , and 2 p subshells , so like helium , the neon atom tends not to share electrons with other atoms .
The process of electron filling repeats in the third row .
However , beginning in the fourth row , the pattern is broken .
The transition metals are elements in the gap between the first two columns and the last six columns that contain electrons that fill the d subshell .
As expected , these atoms are arranged in columns .
The structure of the periodic table can be understood in terms of the quantization of the total energy ( n ) , orbital angular momentum ( l ) , and spin ( s ) .
The first two columns correspond to the s ) subshell , the next six columns correspond to the p subshell , and the gap between these columns corresponds to the d subshell .
The periodic table also gives information on molecular bonding .
To see this , consider atoms in the left-most column ( the so-called alkali metals including : Li , Na , and K ) .
These atoms contain a single electron in the 2 s subshell , which is easily donated to other atoms .
In contrast , atoms in the second-to-right column ( the halogens : for example , Cl , F , and Br ) are relatively stingy in sharing electrons .
These atoms would much rather accept an electron , because they are just one electron shy of a filled shell ( “ of being noble ” ) .
Therefore , if a Na atom is placed in close proximity to a Cl atom , the Na atom freely donates its 2 s electron and the Cl atom eagerly accepts it .
In the process , the Na atom ( originally a neutral charge ) becomes positively charged and the Cl ( originally a neutral charge ) becomes negatively charged .
Charged atoms are called ions .
In this case , the ions are and , where the superscript indicates charge of the ion .
The electric ( Coulomb ) attraction between these atoms forms a NaCl ( salt ) molecule .
A chemical bond between two ions is called an ionic bond .
There are many kinds of chemical bonds .
For example , in an oxygen molecule electrons are equally shared between the atoms .
The bonding of oxygen atoms is an example of a covalent bond .
The study of atomic spectra provides most of our knowledge about atoms .
In modern science , atomic spectra are used to identify species of atoms in a range of objects , from distant galaxies to blood samples at a crime scene .
The theoretical basis of atomic spectroscopy is the transition of electrons between energy levels in atoms .
For example , if an electron in a hydrogen atom makes a transition from the to the shell , the atom emits a photon with a wavelength where is energy carried away by the photon and .
After this radiation passes through a spectrometer , it appears as a sharp spectral line on a screen .
The Bohr model of this process is shown in .
If the electron later absorbs a photon with energy , the electron returns to the shell .
( We examined the Bohr model earlier , in . )
To understand atomic transitions in multi-electron atoms , it is necessary to consider many effects , including the Coulomb repulsion between electrons and internal magnetic interactions ( spin-orbit and spin-spin couplings ) .
Fortunately , many properties of these systems can be understood by neglecting interactions between electrons and representing each electron by its own single-particle wave function .
Atomic transitions must obey selection rules .
These rules follow from principles of quantum mechanics and symmetry .
Selection rules classify transitions as either allowed or forbidden .
( Forbidden transitions do occur , but the probability of the typical forbidden transition is very small . )
For a hydrogen-like atom , atomic transitions that involve electromagnetic interactions ( the emission and absorption of photons ) obey the following selection rule : where l is associated with the magnitude of orbital angular momentum , For multi-electron atoms , similar rules apply .
To illustrate this rule , consider the observed atomic transitions in hydrogen ( H ) , sodium ( Na ) , and mercury ( Hg ) .
The horizontal lines in this diagram correspond to atomic energy levels , and the transitions allowed by this selection rule are shown by lines drawn between these levels .
The energies of these states are on the order of a few electron volts , and photons emitted in transitions are in the visible range .
Technically , atomic transitions can violate the selection rule , but such transitions are uncommon .
The hydrogen atom has the simplest energy-level diagram .
If we neglect electron spin , all states with the same value of n have the same total energy .
However , spin-orbit coupling splits the states into two angular momentum states ( s and p ) of slightly different energies .
( These levels are not vertically displaced , because the energy splitting is too small to show up in this diagram . )
Likewise , spin-orbit coupling splits the states into three angular momentum states ( s , p , and d ) .
The energy-level diagram for hydrogen is similar to sodium , because both atoms have one electron in the outer shell .
The valence electron of sodium moves in the electric field of a nucleus shielded by electrons in the inner shells , so it does not experience a simple 1/ r Coulomb potential and its total energy depends on both n and l .
Interestingly , mercury has two separate energy-level diagrams ; these diagrams correspond to two net spin states of its 6 s ( valence ) electrons .
The spectrum of sodium is analyzed with a spectrometer .
Two closely spaced lines with wavelengths 589.00 nm and 589.59 nm are observed .
( a ) If the doublet corresponds to the excited ( valence ) electron that transitions from some excited state down to the 3 s state , what was the original electron angular momentum ?
( b ) What is the energy difference between these two excited states ?
Sodium and hydrogen belong to the same column or chemical group of the periodic table , so sodium is “ hydrogen-like. ” The outermost electron in sodium is in the 3 s subshell and can be excited to higher energy levels .
As for hydrogen , subsequent transitions to lower energy levels must obey the selection rule : We must first determine the quantum number of the initial state that satisfies the selection rule .
Then , we can use this number to determine the magnitude of orbital angular momentum of the initial state .
Allowed transitions must obey the selection rule .
If the quantum number of the initial state is , the transition is forbidden because .
If the quantum number of the initial state is , …the transition is forbidden because Therefore , the quantum of the initial state must be .
The orbital angular momentum of the initial state is Because the final state for both transitions is the same ( 3 s ) , the difference in energies of the photons is equal to the difference in energies of the two excited states .
Using the equation we have To understand the difficulty of measuring this energy difference , we compare this difference with the average energy of the two photons emitted in the transition .
Given an average wavelength of 589.30 nm , the average energy of the photons is The energy difference is about 0.1 % ( 1 part in 1000 ) of this average energy .
However , a sensitive spectrometer can measure the difference .
Fluorescence occurs when an electron in an atom is excited several steps above the ground state by the absorption of a high-energy ultraviolet ( UV ) photon .
Once excited , the electron “ de-excites ” in two ways .
The electron can drop back to the ground state , emitting a photon of the same energy that excited it , or it can drop in a series of smaller steps , emitting several low-energy photons .
Some of these photons may be in the visible range .
Fluorescent dye in clothes can make colors seem brighter in sunlight by converting UV radiation into visible light .
Fluorescent lights are more efficient in converting electrical energy into visible light than incandescent filaments ( about four times as efficient ) .
shows a scorpion illuminated by a UV lamp .
Proteins near the surface of the skin emit a characteristic blue light .
The study of atomic energy transitions enables us to understand X-rays and X-ray technology .
Like all electromagnetic radiation , X-rays are made of photons .
X-ray photons are produced when electrons in the outermost shells of an atom drop to the inner shells .
( Hydrogen atoms do not emit X-rays , because the electron energy levels are too closely spaced together to permit the emission of high-frequency radiation . )
Transitions of this kind are normally forbidden because the lower states are already filled .
However , if an inner shell has a vacancy ( an inner electron is missing , perhaps from being knocked away by a high-speed electron ) , an electron from one of the outer shells can drop in energy to fill the vacancy .
The energy gap for such a transition is relatively large , so wavelength of the radiated X-ray photon is relatively short .
X-rays can also be produced by bombarding a metal target with high-energy electrons , as shown in .
In the figure , electrons are boiled off a filament and accelerated by an electric field into a tungsten target .
According to the classical theory of electromagnetism , any charged particle that accelerates emits radiation .
Thus , when the electron strikes the tungsten target , and suddenly slows down , the electron emits braking radiation .
( Braking radiation refers to radiation produced by any charged particle that is slowed by a medium . )
In this case , braking radiation contains a continuous range of frequencies , because the electrons will collide with the target atoms in slightly different ways .
Braking radiation is not the only type of radiation produced in this interaction .
In some cases , an electron collides with another inner-shell electron of a target atom , and knocks the electron out of the atom—billiard ball style .
The empty state is filled when an electron in a higher shell drops into the state ( drop in energy level ) and emits an X-ray photon .
Historically , X-ray spectral lines were labeled with letters ( K , L , M , N , … ) .
These letters correspond to the atomic shells .
X-rays produced by a transition from any higher shell to the K shell are labeled as K X-rays .
X-rays produced in a transition from the L shell are called X-rays ; X-rays produced in a transition from the M shell are called X-rays ; X-rays produced in a transition from the N shell are called X-rays ; and so forth .
Transitions from higher shells to L and M shells are labeled similarly .
These transitions are represented by an energy-level diagram in .
The distribution of X-ray wavelengths produced by striking metal with a beam of electrons is given in .
X-ray transitions in the target metal appear as peaks on top of the braking radiation curve .
Photon frequencies corresponding to the spikes in the X-ray distribution are called characteristic frequencies , because they can be used to identify the target metal .
The sharp cutoff wavelength ( just below the peak ) corresponds to an electron that loses all of its energy to a single photon .
Radiation of shorter wavelengths is forbidden by the conservation of energy .
Estimate the characteristic energy and frequency of the X-ray for aluminum .
A X-ray is produced by the transition of an electron in the L shell to the K shell .
An electron in the L shell “ sees ” a charge because one electron in the K shell shields the nuclear charge .
( Recall , two electrons are not in the K shell because the other electron state is vacant . )
The frequency of the emitted photon can be estimated from the energy difference between the L and K shells .
The energy difference between the L and K shells in a hydrogen atom is 10.2 eV .
In this case , the wavelength is : Hence , the transition L K in aluminum produces X-ray radiation .
X-ray production provides an important test of quantum mechanics .
According to the Bohr model , the energy of a X-ray depends on the nuclear charge or atomic number , Z .
If Z is large , Coulomb forces in the atom are large , energy differences are large , and , therefore , the energy of radiated photons is large .
To illustrate , consider a single electron in a multielectron atom .
Neglecting interactions between the electrons , the allowed energy levels are where n = 1 , 2 , …and Z is the atomic number of the nucleus .
However , an electron in the L shell “ sees ” a charge , because one electron in the K shell shields the nuclear charge .
In general , the X-ray photon energy for a transition from an outer shell to the K shell is or where f is the frequency of a X-ray .
This equation is Moseley ’ s law .
For large values of Z , we have approximately This prediction can be checked by measuring f for a variety of metal targets .
This model is supported if a plot of Z versus data ( called a Moseley plot ) is linear .
Comparison of model predictions and experimental results , for both the K and L series , is shown in .
The data support the model that X-rays are produced when an outer shell electron drops in energy to fill a vacancy in an inner shell .
Check Your Understanding X-rays are produced by bombarding a metal target with high-energy electrons .
If the target is replaced by another with two times the atomic number , what happens to the frequency of X-rays ?
Calculate the approximate energy of a X-ray from a tungsten anode in an X-ray tube .
Two electrons occupy a filled K shell .
A vacancy in this shell would leave one electron , so the effective charge for an electron in the L shell would be Z − 1 rather than Z .
For tungsten , so the effective charge is 73 .
X-ray energies become progressively larger for heavier elements because their energy increases approximately as .
An acceleration voltage of more than 50,000 volts is needed to “ knock out ” an inner electron from a tungsten atom .
X-rays have many applications , such as in medical diagnostics , inspection of luggage at airports , and even detection of cracks in crucial aircraft components .
The most common X-ray images are due to shadows .
Because X-ray photons have high energy , they penetrate materials that are opaque to visible light .
The more energy an Xray photon has , the more material it penetrates .
The depth of penetration is related to the density of the material , as well as to the energy of the photon .
The denser the material , the fewer X-ray photons get through and the darker the shadow .
X-rays are effective at identifying bone breaks and tumors ; however , overexposure to X-rays can damage cells in biological organisms .
A standard X-ray image provides a two-dimensional view of the object .
However , in medical applications , this view does not often provide enough information to draw firm conclusions .
For example , in a two-dimensional X-ray image of the body , bones can easily hide soft tissues or organs .
The CAT ( computed axial tomography ) scanner addresses this problem by collecting numerous X-ray images in “ slices ” throughout the body .
Complex computer-image processing of the relative absorption of the X-rays , in different directions , can produce a highly detailed three-dimensional X-ray image of the body .
X-rays can also be used to probe the structures of atoms and molecules .
Consider X-rays incident on the surface of a crystalline solid .
Some X-ray photons reflect at the surface , and others reflect off the “ plane ” of atoms just below the surface .
Interference between these photons , for different angles of incidence , produces a beautiful image on a screen .
The interaction of X-rays with a solid is called X-ray diffraction .
The most famous example using X-ray diffraction is the discovery of the double-helix structure of DNA .
A laser is device that emits coherent and monochromatic light .
The light is coherent if photons that compose the light are in-phase , and monochromatic if the photons have a single frequency ( color ) .
When a gas in the laser absorbs radiation , electrons are elevated to different energy levels .
Most electrons return immediately to the ground state , but others linger in what is called a metastable state .
It is possible to place a majority of these atoms in a metastable state , a condition called a population inversion .
When a photon of energy disturbs an electron in a metastable state , the electron drops to the lower-energy level and emits an addition photon , and the two photons proceed off together .
This process is called stimulated emission .
It occurs with relatively high probability when the energy of the incoming photon is equal to the energy difference between the excited and “ de-excited ” energy levels of the electron .
Hence , the incoming photon and the photon produced by de-excitation have the same energy , hf .
These photons encounter more electrons in the metastable state , and the process repeats .
The result is a cascade or chain reaction of similar de-excitations .
Laser light is coherent because all light waves in laser light share the same frequency ( color ) and the same phase ( any two points of along a line perpendicular to the direction of motion are on the “ same part ” of the wave ” ) .
A schematic diagram of coherent and incoherent light wave pattern is given in .
Lasers can also be produced by a large range of materials , including solids ( for example , the ruby crystal ) , gases ( helium-gas mixture ) , and liquids ( organic dyes ) .
Recently , a laser was even created using gelatin—an edible laser !
Below we discuss two practical applications in detail : CD players and Blu-Ray Players .
A CD player reads digital information stored on a compact disc ( CD ) .
A CD is 6-inch diameter disc made of plastic that contains small “ bumps ” and “ pits ” nears its surface to encode digital or binary data .
The bumps and pits appear along a very thin track that spirals outwards from the center of the disc .
The width of the track is smaller than 1/20th the width of a human hair , and the heights of the bumps are even smaller yet .
A CD player uses a laser to read this digital information .
Laser light is suited to this purpose , because coherent light can be focused onto an incredibly small spot and therefore distinguish between bumps and pits in the CD .
After processing by player components ( including a diffraction grating , polarizer , and collimator ) , laser light is focused by a lens onto the CD surface .
Light that strikes a bump ( “ land ” ) is merely reflected , but light that strikes a “ pit ” destructively interferes , so no light returns ( the details of this process are not important to this discussion ) .
The laser system of a CD player is shown in .
Like a CD player , a Blu-Ray player reads digital information ( video or audio ) stored on a disc , and a laser is used to record this information .
The pits on a Blu-Ray disc are much smaller and more closely packed together than for a CD , so much more information can be stored .
As a result , the resolving power of the laser must be greater .
This is achieved using short wavelength blue laser light—hence , the name “ Blu- ” Ray .
( CDs and DVDs use red laser light . )
The different pit sizes and player-hardware configurations of a CD , DVD , and Blu-Ray player are shown in .
The pit sizes of a Blu-Ray disk are more than twice as small as the pits on a DVD or CD .
Unlike a CD , a Blu-Ray disc store data on a polycarbonate layer , which places the data closer to the lens and avoids readability problems .
A hard coating is used to protect the data since it is so close to the surface .
In this chapter , we examine applications of quantum mechanics to more complex systems , such as molecules , metals , semiconductors , and superconductors .
We review and develop concepts of the previous chapters , including wave functions , orbitals , and quantum states .
We also introduce many new concepts , including covalent bonding , rotational energy levels , Fermi energy , energy bands , doping , and Cooper pairs .
The main topic in this chapter is the crystal structure of solids .
For centuries , crystalline solids have been prized for their beauty , including gems like diamonds and emeralds , as well as geological crystals of quartz and metallic ores .
But the crystalline structures of semiconductors such as silicon have also made possible the electronics industry of today .
In this chapter , we study how the structures of solids give them properties from strength and transparency to electrical conductivity .
Quantum mechanics has been extraordinarily successful at explaining the structure and bonding in molecules , and is therefore the foundation for all of chemistry .
Quantum chemistry , as it is sometimes called , explains such basic questions as why molecules exist , why the bonding angle between hydrogen atoms in this molecule is precisely , and why these molecules bind together to form liquid water at room temperature .
Applying quantum mechanics to molecules can be very difficult mathematically , so our discussion will be qualitative only .
As we study molecules and then solids , we will use many different scientific models .
In some cases , we look at a molecule or crystal as a set of point nuclei with electrons whizzing around the outside in well-defined trajectories , as in the Bohr model .
In other cases , we employ our full knowledge of quantum mechanics to study these systems using wave functions and the concept of electron spin .
It is important to remember that we study modern physics with models , and that different models are useful for different purposes .
We do not always use the most powerful model , when a less-powerful , easier-touse model will do the job .
Chemical units form by many different kinds of chemical bonds .
An ionic bond forms when an electron transfers from one atom to another .
A covalent bond occurs when two or more atoms share electrons .
A van der Waals bond occurs due to the attraction of charge-polarized molecules and is considerably weaker than ionic or covalent bonds .
Many other types of bonding exist as well .
Often , bonding occurs via more than one mechanism .
The focus of this section is ionic and covalent bonding .
The ionic bond is perhaps the easiest type of bonding to understand .
It explains the formation of salt compounds , such as sodium chloride , NaCl .
The sodium atom ( symbol Na ) has the same electron arrangement as a neon atom plus one 3 s electron .
Only 5.14 eV of energy is required to remove this one electron from the sodium atom .
Therefore , Na can easily give up or donate this electron to an adjacent ( nearby ) atom , attaining a more stable arrangement of electrons .
Chlorine ( symbol Cl ) requires just one electron to complete its valence shell , so it readily accepts this electron if it is near the sodium atom .
We therefore say that chlorine has a large electron affinity , which is the energy associated with an accepted electron .
The energy given up by the chlorine atom in this process is 3.62 eV .
After the electron transfers from the sodium atom to the chlorine atom , the sodium atom becomes a positive ion and the chlorine atom becomes a negative ion .
The total energy required for this transfer is given by The positive sodium ion and negative chloride ion experience an attractive Coulomb force .
The potential energy associated with this force is given by where and is the distance between the ions .
As the sodium and chloride ions move together ( “ descend the potential energy hill ” ) , the force of attraction between the ions becomes stronger .
However , if the ions become too close , core-electron wave functions in the two ions begin to overlap .
Due to the exclusion principle , this action promotes the core electrons—and therefore the entire molecule—into a higher energy state .
The equilibrium separation distance ( or bond length ) between the ions occurs when the molecule is in its lowest energy state .
For diatomic NaCl , this distance is 0.236 nm .
shows the total energy of NaCl as a function of the distance of separation between ions .
The total energy required to form a single salt unit is where is the energy associated with the repulsion between core electrons due to Pauli ’ s exclusion principle .
The value of must be negative for the bond to form spontaneously .
The dissociation energy is defined as the energy required to separate the unit into its constituent ions , written Every diatomic formula unit has its own characteristic dissociation energy and equilibrium separation length .
Sample values are given in .
What is the dissociation energy of a salt formula unit ( NaCl ) ?
Sodium chloride ( NaCl ) is a salt formed by ionic bonds .
The energy change associated with this bond depends on three main processes : the ionization of Na ; the acceptance of the electron from a Na atom by a Cl atom ; and Coulomb attraction of the resulting ions .
If the ions get too close , they repel due to the exclusion principle ( 0.32 eV ) .
The equilibrium separation distance is The energy change associated with the transfer of an electron from Na to Cl is 1.52 eV , as discussed earlier in this section .
At equilibrium separation , the atoms are apart .
The electrostatic potential energy of the atoms is The total energy difference associated with the formation of a NaCl formula unit is Therefore , the dissociated energy of NaCl is 4.26 eV .
The formation of a NaCl formula unit by ionic bonding is energetically favorable .
The dissociation energy , or energy required to separate the NaCl unit into ions is 4.26 eV , consistent with .
Check Your Understanding Why is the potential energy associated with the exclusion principle positive in ?
For a sodium ion in an ionic NaCl crystal , the expression for Coulomb potential energy must be modified by a factor known as the Madelung constant .
This factor takes into account the interaction of the sodium ion with all nearby chloride and sodium ions .
The Madelung constant for a NaCl crystal is about 1.75 .
This value implies an equilibrium separation distance between ions of 0.280 nm—slightly larger than for diatomic NaCl .
We will return to this point again later .
In an ionic bond , an electron transfers from one atom to another .
However , in a covalent bond , an electron is shared between two atoms .
The ionic bonding mechanism can not explain the existence of such molecules as and CO , since no separation distance exists for which the negative potential energy of attraction is greater in magnitude than the energy needed to create ions .
Understanding precisely how such molecules are covalently bonded relies on a deeper understanding of quantum mechanics that goes beyond the coverage of this book , but we will qualitatively describe the mechanisms in the following section .
molecule , which consists of one electron in the Covalent bonds can be understood using the simple example of a electric field of two protons .
This system can be modeled by an electron in a double square well .
The electron is equally likely to be found in each well , so the wave function is either symmetric or antisymmetric about a point midway between the wells .
Now imagine that the two wells are separated by a large distance .
These states have the same energy .
However , when the wells are brought together , the symmetric wave function becomes the ground state and the antisymmetric state becomes the first excited state—in other words , the energy level of the electron is split .
Notice , the space-symmetric state becomes the energetically favorable ( lower energy ) state .
The same analysis is appropriate for an electron bound to two hydrogen atoms .
Here , the shapes of the ground-state wave functions have the form or in one dimension .
The energetically favorable , space-symmetric state implies a high charge density midway between the protons where the electrons are likely to pull the positively charged protons together .
If a second electron is added to this system to form a molecule , the wave function must describe both particles , including their spatial relationship and relative spins .
This wave function must also respect the indistinguishability of electrons .
( “ If you ’ ve seen one electron , you ’ ve seen them all. ” ) In particular , switching or exchanging the electrons should not produce an observable effect , a property called exchange symmetry .
Exchange symmetry can be symmetric , producing no change in the wave function , or antisymmetric , producing an overall change in the sign of the wave function—neither of which is observable .
As we discuss later , the total wave function of two electrons must be antisymmetric on exchange .
For example , two electrons bound to a hydrogen molecule can be in a space-symmetric state with antiparallel spins or spaceantisymmetric state with parallel spins .
The state with antiparallel spins is energetically favorable and therefore used in covalent bonding .
If the protons are drawn too closely together , however , repulsion between the protons becomes important .
( In other molecules , this effect is supplied by the exclusion principle . )
As a result , reaches an equilibrium separation of about 0.074 nm with a binding energy is 4.52 eV .
Visit this to explore the attractive and repulsive forces that act on atomic particles and covalent bonding in a molecule .
Quantum mechanics excludes many types of molecules .
For example , the molecule does not form , because if a third H atom approaches diatomic hydrogen , the wave function of the electron in this atom overlaps the electrons in the other two atoms .
If all three electrons are in the ground states of their respective atoms , one pair of electrons shares all the same quantum numbers , which is forbidden by the exclusion principle .
Instead , one of the electrons is forced into a higher energy state .
No separation between three protons exists for which the total energy change of this process is negative—that is , where bonding occurs spontaneously .
Similarly , is not covalently bonded under normal conditions , because these atoms have no valence electrons to share .
As the atoms are brought together , the wave functions of the core electrons overlap , and due to the exclusion principle , the electrons are forced into a higher energy state .
No separation exists for which such a molecule is energetically favorable .
A polyatomic molecule is a molecule made of more than two atoms .
Examples range from a simple water molecule to a complex protein molecule .
The structures of these molecules can often be understood in terms of covalent bonding and hybridization .
Hybridization is a change in the energy structure of an atom in which mixed states ( states that can be written as a linear superposition of others ) participate in bonding .
To illustrate hybridization , consider the bonding in a simple water molecule , The electron configuration of oxygen is The 1 s and 2 s electrons are in “ closed shells ” and do not participate in bonding .
The remaining four electrons are the valence electrons .
These electrons can fill six possible states ( , , , plus spin up and down ) .
The energies of these states are the same , so the oxygen atom can exploit any linear combination of these states in bonding with the hydrogen atoms .
These linear combinations ( which you learned about in the chapter on atomic structure ) are called atomic orbitals , and they are denoted by and The electron charge distributions for these orbitals are given in .
The transformation of the electron wave functions of oxygen to and orbitals in the presence of the hydrogen atoms is an example of hybridization .
Two electrons are found in the orbital with paired spins .
One electron is found in each of the and orbitals , with unpaired spins .
The latter orbitals participate in bonding with the hydrogen atoms .
Based on , we expect the bonding angle for to be .
However , if we include the effects of repulsion between atoms , the bond angle is .
The same arguments can be used to understand the tetrahedral shape of methane and other molecules .
Molecular energy levels are more complicated than atomic energy levels because molecules can also vibrate and rotate .
The energies associated with such motions lie in different ranges and can therefore be studied separately .
Electronic transitions and rotational transitions are of order For are of order 1 eV , vibrational transitions are of order complex molecules , these energy changes are difficult to characterize , so we begin with the simple case of a diatomic molecule .
According to classical mechanics , the energy of rotation of a diatomic molecule is given by where I is the moment of inertia and L is the angular momentum .
According to quantum mechanics , the rotational angular momentum is quantized : where l is the orbital angular quantum number .
The allowed rotational energy level of a diatomic molecule is therefore where the characteristic rotational energy of a molecule is defined as For a diatomic molecule , the moment of inertia with reduced mass is where is the total distance between the atoms .
is the selection rule for rotational energy transitions .
It applies only to diatomic molecules that have an electric dipole moment .
For this reason , symmetric molecules such as and do not experience rotational energy transitions due to the absorption or emission of electromagnetic radiation .
Determine the lowest three rotational energy levels of a hydrogen chloride ( HCl ) molecule .
Hydrogen chloride ( HCl ) is a diatomic molecule with an equilibrium separation distance of 0.127 nm .
Rotational energy levels depend only on the momentum of inertia I and the orbital angular momentum quantum number l ( in this case , , 1 , and 2 ) .
The momentum of inertia depends , in turn , on the equilibrium separation distance ( which is given ) and the reduced mass , which depends on the masses of the H and Cl atoms .
First , we compute the reduced mass .
If Particle 1 is hydrogen and Particle 2 is chloride , we have The corresponding rest mass energy is therefore This allows us to calculate the characteristic energy : ( Notice how this expression is written in terms of the rest mass energy .
This technique is common in modern physics calculations . )
The rotational energy levels are given by where l is the orbital quantum number .
The three lowest rotational energy levels of an HCl molecule are therefore The rotational spectrum is associated with weak transitions ( 1/1000 to 1/100 of an eV ) .
By comparison , the energy of an electron in the ground state of hydrogen is .
Check Your Understanding What does the energy separation between absorption lines in a rotational spectrum of a diatomic molecule tell you ?
The vibrational energy level , which is the energy level associated with the vibrational energy of a molecule , is more difficult to estimate than the rotational energy level .
However , we can estimate these levels by assuming that the two atoms in the diatomic molecule are connected by an ideal spring of spring constant k .
The potential energy of this spring system is Where is a change in the “ natural length ” of the molecule along a line that connects the atoms .
Solving Schrödinger ’ s equation for this potential gives Where is the natural angular frequency of vibration and n is the vibrational quantum number .
The prediction that vibrational energy levels are evenly spaced turns out to be good at lower energies .
A detailed study of transitions between vibrational energy levels induced by the absorption or emission of radiation ( and the specifically so-called electric dipole transition ) requires that represents the selection rule for vibrational energy transitions .
As mentioned before , this rule applies only to diatomic molecules that have an electric dipole moment .
Symmetric molecules do not experience such transitions .
Due to the selection rules , the absorption or emission of radiation by a diatomic molecule involves a transition in vibrational and rotational states .
Specifically , if the vibrational quantum number ( n ) changes by one unit , then the rotational quantum number ( l ) changes by one unit .
An energy-level diagram of a possible transition is given in .
The absorption spectrum for such transitions in hydrogen chloride ( HCl ) is shown in .
The absorption peaks are due to transitions from the to vibrational states .
Energy differences for the band of peaks at the left and right are , respectively , and The moment of inertia can then be determined from the energy spacing between individual peaks between the left and right bands .
The frequency at the center of this gap is the frequency of vibration .
or from the gap Beginning in this section , we study crystalline solids , which consist of atoms arranged in an extended regular pattern called a lattice .
Solids that do not or are unable to form crystals are classified as amorphous solids .
Although amorphous solids ( like glass ) have a variety of interesting technological applications , the focus of this chapter will be on crystalline solids .
Atoms arrange themselves in a lattice to form a crystal because of a net attractive force between their constituent electrons and atomic nuclei .
The crystals formed by the bonding of atoms belong to one of three categories , classified by their bonding : ionic , covalent , and metallic .
Molecules can also bond together to form crystals ; these bonds , not discussed here , are classified as molecular .
Early in the twentieth century , the atomic model of a solid was speculative .
We now have direct evidence of atoms in solids .
Many solids form by ionic bonding .
A prototypical example is the sodium chloride crystal , as we discussed earlier .
Electrons transfer from sodium atoms to adjacent chlorine atoms , since the valence electrons in sodium are loosely bound and chlorine has a large electron affinity .
The positively charged sodium ions and negatively charged chlorine ( chloride ) ions organize into an extended regular array of atoms .
The charge distributions of the sodium and chloride ions are spherically symmetric , and the chloride ion is about two times the diameter of the sodium ion .
The lowest energy arrangement of these ions is called the face-centered cubic ( FCC ) structure .
In this structure , each ion is closest to six ions of the other species .
The unit cell is a cube—an atom occupies the center and corners of each “ face ” of the cube .
The attractive potential energy of the ion due to the fields of these six ions is written where the minus sign designates an attractive potential ( and we identify ) .
At a distance are its nextnearest neighbors : twelve ions of the same charge .
The total repulsive potential energy associated with these ions is Next closest are eight ions a distance from the ion .
From this analysis , we can see that this constant is the infinite converging sum Distant ions make a significant contribution to this sum , so it converges slowly , and many terms must be used to calculate accurately .
For all FCC ionic solids , is approximately 1.75 .
Other possible packing arrangements of atoms in solids include simple cubic and body-centered cubic ( BCC ) .
These three different packing structures of solids are compared in .
The first row represents the location , but not the size , of the ions ; the second row indicates the unit cells of each structure or lattice ; and the third row represents the location and size of the ions .
The BCC structure has eight nearest neighbors , with a Madelung constant of about 1.76—only slightly different from that for the FCC structure .
Determining the Madelung constant for specific solids is difficult work and the subject of current research .
The energy of the sodium ions is not entirely due to attractive forces between oppositely charged ions .
If the ions are bought too close together , the wave functions of core electrons of the ions overlap , and the electrons repel due to the exclusion principle .
The total potential energy of the ion is therefore the sum of the attractive Coulomb potential and the repulsive potential associated with the exclusion principle Calculating this repulsive potential requires powerful computers .
Fortunately , however , this energy can be described accurately by a simple formula that contains adjustable parameters : where the parameters A and n are chosen to give predictions consistent with experimental data .
For the problem at the end of this chapter , the parameter n is referred to as the repulsion constant .
The total potential energy of the ion is therefore At equilibrium , there is no net force on the ion , so the distance between neighboring and ions must be the value for which U is a minimum .
Setting , we have Thus , Inserting this expression into the expression for the total potential energy , we have Notice that the total potential energy now has only one adjustable parameter , n .
The parameter A has been replaced by a function involving , the equilibrium separation distance , which can be measured by a diffraction experiment ( you learned about diffraction in a previous chapter ) .
The total potential energy is plotted in for , the approximate value of n for NaCl .
As long as , the curve for U has the same general shape : U approaches infinity as and U approaches zero as .
The minimum value of the potential energy is given by The energy per ion pair needed to separate the crystal into ions is therefore This is the dissociation energy of the solid .
The dissociation energy can also be used to describe the total energy needed to break a mole of a solid into its constituent ions , often expressed in kJ/mole .
The dissociation energy can be determined experimentally using the latent heat of vaporization .
Sample values are given in the following table .
Thus , we can determine the Madelung constant from the crystal structure and n from the lattice energy .
For NaCl , we have , , and This dissociation energy is relatively large .
The most energetic photon from the visible spectrum , for example , has an energy of approximately Because the ions in crystals are so tightly bound , ionic crystals have the following general characteristics : They are fairly hard and stable .
They vaporize at relatively high temperatures ( 1000 to 2000 K ) .
They are transparent to visible radiation , because photons in the visible portion of the spectrum are not energetic enough to excite an electron from its ground state to an excited state .
They are poor electrical conductors , because they contain effectively no free electrons .
They are usually soluble in water , because the water molecule has a large dipole moment whose electric field is strong enough to break the electrostatic bonds between the ions .
Determine the dissociation energy of sodium chloride ( NaCl ) in kJ/mol .
( Hint : The repulsion constant n of NaCl is approximately 8 . )
A sodium chloride crystal has an equilibrium separation of 0.282 nm .
( Compare this value with 0.236 nm for a free diatomic unit of NaCl . )
The dissociation energy depends on the separation distance , repulsion constant , and Madelung constant for an FCC structure .
The separation distance depends in turn on the molar mass and measured density .
We can determine the separation distance , and then use this value to determine the dissociation energy for one mole of the solid .
The atomic masses of Na and Cl are 23.0 u and 58.4 u , so the molar mass of NaCl is 58.4 g/mol .
The density of NaCl is .
The relationship between these quantities is where M is the mass of one mole of salt , is Avogadro ’ s number , and is the equilibrium separation .
NaCl is FCC , so the Madelung constant is Substituting these values , we get The dissociation energy of one mole of sodium chloride is therefore This theoretical value of the dissociation energy of 766 kJ/mol is close to the accepted experimental value of 787 kJ/mol .
Notice that for larger density , the equilibrium separation distance between ion pairs is smaller , as expected .
This small separation distance drives up the force between ions and therefore the dissociation energy .
The conversion at the end of the equation took advantage of the conversion factor Check Your Understanding If the dissociation energy were larger , would that make it easier or more difficult to break the solid apart ?
Crystals can also be formed by covalent bonding .
For example , covalent bonds are responsible for holding carbon atoms together in diamond crystals .
The electron configuration of the carbon atom is —a He core plus four valence electrons .
This electron configuration is four electrons short of a full shell , so by sharing these four electrons with other carbon atoms in a covalent bond , the shells of all carbon atoms are filled .
Diamond has a more complicated structure than most ionic crystals .
Each carbon atom is the center of a regular tetrahedron , and the angle between the bonds is This angle is a direct consequence of the directionality of the p orbitals of carbon atoms .
Covalently bonded crystals are not as uniform as ionic crystals but are reasonably hard , difficult to melt , and are insoluble in water .
For example , diamond has an extremely high melting temperature ( 4000 K ) and is transparent to visible light .
In comparison , covalently bonded tin ( also known as alpha-tin , which is nonmetallic ) is relatively soft , melts at 600 K , and reflects visible light .
Two other important examples of covalently bonded crystals are silicon and germanium .
Both of these solids are used extensively in the manufacture of diodes , transistors , and integrated circuits .
We will return to these materials later in our discussion of semiconductors .
As the name implies , metallic bonding is responsible for the formation of metallic crystals .
The valence electrons are essentially free of the atoms and are able to move relatively easily throughout the metallic crystal .
Bonding is due to the attractive forces between the positive ions and the conduction electrons .
Metallic bonds are weaker than ionic or covalent bonds , with dissociation energies in the range .
Metals , such as copper and aluminum , are held together by bonds that are very different from those of molecules .
Rather than sharing and exchanging electrons , a metal is essentially held together by a system of free electrons that wander throughout the solid .
The simplest model of a metal is the free electron model .
This model views electrons as a gas .
We first consider the simple one-dimensional case in which electrons move freely along a line , such as through a very thin metal rod .
The potential function U ( x ) for this case is a one-dimensional infinite square well where the walls of the well correspond to the edges of the rod .
This model ignores the interactions between the electrons but respects the exclusion principle .
For the special case of N electrons fill up the energy levels , from lowest to highest , two at a time ( spin up and spin down ) , until the highest energy level is filled .
The highest energy filled is called the Fermi energy .
The one-dimensional free electron model can be improved by considering the three-dimensional case : electrons moving freely in a three-dimensional metal block .
This system is modeled by a three-dimensional infinite square well .
Determining the allowed energy states requires us to solve the time-independent Schrödinger equation where we assume that the potential energy inside the box is zero and infinity otherwise .
is simply the product of three one-dimensional wave functions .
The allowed energies of an electron in a cube are Associated with each set of quantum numbers are two quantum states , spin up and spin down .
In a real material , the number of filled states is enormous .
For example , in a cubic centimeter of metal , this number is on the order of Counting how many particles are in which state is difficult work , which often requires the help of a powerful computer .
The effort is worthwhile , however , because this information is often an effective way to check the model .
Consider a solid metal cube of edge length 2.0 cm .
( a ) What is the lowest energy level for an electron within the metal ?
( b ) What is the spacing between this level and the next energy level ?
An electron in a metal can be modeled as a wave .
The lowest energy corresponds to the largest wavelength and smallest quantum number : supplies this “ ground state ” energy value .
Since the energy of the electron increases with the quantum number , the next highest level involves the smallest increase in the quantum numbers , or or ( 1 , 1 , 2 ) .
The lowest energy level corresponds to the quantum numbers From , the energy of this level is The next-higher energy level is reached by increasing any one of the three quantum numbers by 1 .
Hence , there are actually three quantum states with the same energy .
Suppose we increase by 1 .
Then the energy becomes The energy spacing between the lowest energy state and the next-highest energy state is therefore This is a very small energy difference .
Compare this value to the average kinetic energy of a particle , , where is Boltzmann ’ s constant and T is the temperature .
The product is about 1000 times greater than the energy spacing .
Check Your Understanding What happens to the ground state energy of an electron if the dimensions of the solid increase ?
Often , we are not interested in the total number of particles in all states , but rather the number of particles dN with energies in a narrow energy interval .
The Fermi factor is the probability that the state will be filled .
For example , if g ( E ) dE is 100 available states , but F is only , then the number of particles in this narrow energy interval is only five .
Finding g ( E ) requires solving Schrödinger ’ s equation ( in three dimensions ) for the allowed energy levels .
The calculation is involved even for a crude model , but the result is simple : where V is the volume of the solid , is the mass of the electron , and E is the energy of the state .
Notice that the density of states increases with the square root of the energy .
More states are available at high energy than at low energy .
This equation tells us how many electron states are available in a three-dimensional metallic solid .
However , it does not tell us how likely these states will be filled .
Thus , we need to determine the Fermi factor , F .
Consider the simple case of .
From classical physics , we expect that all the electrons would simply go into the ground state to achieve the lowest possible energy .
However , this violates Pauli ’ s exclusion principle , which states that no two electrons can be in the same quantum state .
Hence , when we begin filling the states with electrons , the states with lowest energy become occupied first , then states with progressively higher energies .
The last electron we put in has the highest energy .
This energy is the Fermi energy of the free electron gas .
A state with energy is occupied by a single electron , and a state with energy is unoccupied .
To describe this in terms of a probability F ( E ) that a state of energy E is occupied , we write for : The density of states , Fermi factor , and electron number density are plotted against energy in .
A few notes are in order .
First , the electron number density ( last row ) distribution drops off sharply at the Fermi energy .
According to the theory , this energy is given by Fermi energies for selected materials are listed in the following table .
Note also that only the graph in part ( c ) of the figure , which answers the question , “ How many particles are found in the energy range ? ” is checked by experiment .
The Fermi temperature or effective “ temperature ” of an electron at the Fermi energy is Metallic silver is an excellent conductor .
It has conduction electrons per cubic meter .
( a ) Calculate its Fermi energy .
( b ) Compare this energy to the thermal energy of the electrons at a room temperature of 300 K. From , the Fermi energy is This is a typical value of the Fermi energy for metals , as can be seen from .
We can associate a Fermi temperature with the Fermi energy by writing We then find for the Fermi temperature which is much higher than room temperature and also the typical melting point of a metal .
The ratio of the Fermi energy of silver to the room-temperature thermal energy is To visualize how the quantum states are filled , we might imagine pouring water slowly into a glass , such as that of .
The first drops of water ( the electrons ) occupy the bottom of the glass ( the states with lowest energy ) .
As the level rises , states of higher and higher energy are occupied .
Furthermore , since the glass has a wide opening and a narrow stem , more water occupies the top of the glass than the bottom .
This reflects the fact that the density of states g ( E ) is proportional to , so there is a relatively large number of higher energy electrons in a free electron gas .
Finally , the level to which the glass is filled corresponds to the Fermi energy .
Suppose that at , the number of conduction electrons per unit volume in our sample is .
Since each field state has one electron , the number of filled states per unit volume is the same as the number of electrons per unit volume .
The free electron model explains many important properties of conductors but is weak in at least two areas .
First , it assumes a constant potential energy within the solid .
( Recall that a constant potential energy is associated with no forces . )
compares the assumption of a constant potential energy ( dotted line ) with the periodic Coulomb potential , which drops as at each lattice point , where r is the distance from the ion core ( solid line ) .
Second , the free electron model assumes an impenetrable barrier at the surface .
This assumption is not valid , because under certain conditions , electrons can escape the surface—such as in the photoelectric effect .
In addition to these assumptions , the free electron model does not explain the dramatic differences in electronic properties of conductors , semiconductors , and insulators .
Therefore , a more complete model is needed .
We can produce an improved model by solving Schrödinger ’ s equation for the periodic potential shown in .
However , the solution requires technical mathematics far beyond our scope .
We again seek a qualitative argument based on quantum mechanics to find a way forward .
We first review the argument used to explain the energy structure of a covalent bond .
Consider two identical hydrogen atoms so far apart that there is no interaction whatsoever between them .
Further suppose that the electron in each atom is in the same ground state : a 1 s electron with an energy of ( ignore spin ) .
When the hydrogen atoms are brought closer together , the individual wave functions of the electrons overlap and , by the exclusion principle , can no longer be in the same quantum state , which splits the original equivalent energy levels into two different energy levels .
The energies of these levels depend on the interatomic distance , .
If four hydrogen atoms are brought together , four levels are formed from the four possible symmetries—a single sine wave “ hump ” in each well , alternating up and down , and so on .
In the limit of a very large number N of atoms , we expect a spread of nearly continuous bands of electronic energy levels in a solid ( see ( c ) ) .
Each of these bands is known as an energy band .
In the 1 s and 2 s energy bands , each energy level holds up to two electrons ( spin up and spin down ) , so this band has a maximum occupancy of 2 N electrons .
In the 2 p energy band , each energy level holds up to six electrons , so this band has a maximum occupancy of 6 N electrons .
Each energy band is separated from the other by an energy gap .
The electrical properties of conductors and insulators can be understood in terms of energy bands and gaps .
The highest energy band that is filled is known as a valence band .
The next available band in the energy structure is known as a conduction band .
In a conductor , the highest energy band that contains electrons is partially filled , whereas in an insulator , the highest energy band containing electrons is completely filled .
The difference between a conductor and insulator is illustrated in .
A conductor differs from an insulator in how its electrons respond to an applied electric field .
If a significant number of electrons are set into motion by the field , the material is a conductor .
In terms of the band model , electrons in the partially filled conduction band gain kinetic energy from the electric field by filling higher energy states in the conduction band .
By contrast , in an insulator , electrons belong to completely filled bands .
When the field is applied , the electrons can not make such transitions ( acquire kinetic energy from the electric field ) due to the exclusion principle .
As a result , the material does not conduct electricity .
Visit this to learn about the origin of energy bands in crystals of atoms and how the structure of bands determines how a material conducts electricity .
Explore how band structure creates a lattice of many wells .
A semiconductor has a similar energy structure to an insulator except it has a relatively small energy gap between the lowest completely filled band and the next available unfilled band .
This type of material forms the basis of modern electronics .
At , the semiconductor and insulator both have completely filled bands .
The only difference is in the size of the energy gap ( or band gap ) E between the highest energy band that is filled ( the valence band ) and the next-higher empty band ( the conduction band ) .
In a semiconductor , this gap is small enough that a substantial number of electrons from the valence band are thermally excited into the conduction band at room temperature .
These electrons are then in a nearly empty band and can respond to an applied field .
As a general rule of thumb , the band gap of a semiconductor is about 1 eV .
( See for silicon . )
A band gap of greater than approximately 1 eV is considered an insulator .
For comparison , the energy gap of diamond ( an insulator ) is several electron-volts .
In the preceding section , we considered only the contribution to the electric current due to electrons occupying states in the conduction band .
However , moving an electron from the valence band to the conduction band leaves an unoccupied state or hole in the energy structure of the valence band , which a nearby electron can move into .
As these holes are filled by other electrons , new holes are created .
The electric current associated with this filling can be viewed as the collective motion of many negatively charged electrons or the motion of the positively charged electron holes .
To illustrate , consider the one-dimensional lattice in .
Assume that each lattice atom contributes one valence electron to the current .
As the hole on the right is filled , this hole moves to the left .
The current can be interpreted as the flow of positive charge to the left .
The density of holes , or the number of holes per unit volume , is represented by p .
Each electron that transitions into the conduction band leaves behind a hole .
If the conduction band is originally empty , the conduction electron density p is equal to the hole density , that is , .
As mentioned , a semiconductor is a material with a filled valence band , an unfilled conduction band , and a relatively small energy gap between the bands .
Excess electrons or holes can be introduced into the material by the substitution into the crystal lattice of an impurity atom , which is an atom of a slightly different valence number .
This process is known as doping .
For example , suppose we add an arsenic atom to a crystal of silicon ( ( a ) ) .
Arsenic has five valence electrons , whereas silicon has only four .
This extra electron must therefore go into the conduction band , since there is no room in the valence band .
The arsenic ion left behind has a net positive charge that weakly binds the delocalized electron .
The binding is weak because the surrounding atomic lattice shields the ion ’ s electric field .
As a result , the binding energy of the extra electron is only about 0.02 eV .
In other words , the energy level of the impurity electron is in the band gap below the conduction band by 0.02 eV , a much smaller value than the energy of the gap , 1.14 eV .
At room temperature , this impurity electron is easily excited into the conduction band and therefore contributes to the conductivity ( ( a ) ) .
An impurity with an extra electron is known as a donor impurity , and the doped semiconductor is called an n -type semiconductor because the primary carriers of charge ( electrons ) are negative .
By adding more donor impurities , we can create an impurity band , a new energy band created by semiconductor doping , as shown in ( b ) .
The Fermi level is now between this band and the conduction band .
At room temperature , many impurity electrons are thermally excited into the conduction band and contribute to the conductivity .
Conduction can then also occur in the impurity band as vacancies are created there .
Note that changes in the energy of an electron correspond to a change in the motion ( velocities or kinetic energy ) of these charge carriers with the semiconductor , but not the bulk motion of the semiconductor itself .
typically have one fewer valence electron than the Doping can also be accomplished using impurity atoms that semiconductor atoms .
For example , Al , which has three valence electrons , can be substituted for Si , as shown in ( b ) .
Such an impurity is known as an acceptor impurity , and the doped semiconductor is called a p -type semiconductor , because the primary carriers of charge ( holes ) are positive .
If a hole is treated as a positive particle weakly bound to the impurity site , then an empty electron state is created in the band gap just above the valence band .
When this state is filled by an electron thermally excited from the valence band ( ( a ) ) , a mobile hole is created in the valence band .
By adding more acceptor impurities , we can create an impurity band , as shown in ( b ) .
In an n -type semiconductor , majority carriers are free electrons contributed by impurity atoms , and minority carriers are free electrons produced by thermal excitations from the valence to the conduction band .
In a p -type semiconductor , the majority carriers are free holes contributed by impurity atoms , and minority carriers are free holes left by the filling of states due to thermal excitation of electrons across the gap .
In general , the number of majority carriers far exceeds the minority carriers .
The concept of a majority and minority carriers will be used in the next section to explain the operation of diodes and transistors .
In studying p and n -type doping , it is natural to ask : Do “ electron holes ” really act like particles ?
The existence of holes in a doped p -type semiconductor is demonstrated by the Hall effect .
The Hall effect is the production of a potential difference due to the motion of a conductor through an external magnetic field ( see ) .
A schematic of the Hall effect is shown in ( a ) .
A semiconductor strip is bathed in a uniform magnetic field ( which points into the paper ) .
As the electron holes move from left to right through the semiconductor , a Lorentz force drives these charges toward the upper end of the strip .
( Recall that the motion of the positively charged carriers is determined by the right-hand rule . )
Positive charge continues to collect on the upper edge of the strip until the force associated with the downward electric field between the upper and lower edges of the strip just balances the upward magnetic force .
Setting these forces equal to each other , we have .
Note that the Hall voltage is transverse to the voltage that initially produces current through the material .
A measurement of the sign of this voltage ( or potential difference ) confirms the collection of holes on the top side of the strip .
The magnitude of the Hall voltage yields the drift velocity ( v ) of the majority carriers .
Additional information can also be extracted from the Hall voltage .
Note that the electron current density ( the amount of current per unit cross-sectional area of the semiconductor strip ) is where q is the magnitude of the charge , n is the number of charge carriers per unit volume , and v is the drift velocity .
The current density is easily determined by dividing the total current by the cross-sectional area of the strip , q is charge of the hole ( the magnitude of the charge of a single electron ) , and u is determined by the Hall effect .
Hence , the above expression for the electron current density gives the number of charge carriers per unit volume , n .
A similar analysis can be conducted for negatively charged carriers in an n -type material ( see ) .
Semiconductors have many applications in modern electronics .
We describe some basic semiconductor devices in this section .
A great advantage of using semiconductors for circuit elements is the fact that many thousands or millions of semiconductor devices can be combined on the same tiny piece of silicon and connected by conducting paths .
The resulting structure is called an integrated circuit ( ic ) , and ic chips are the basis of many modern devices , from computers and smartphones to the internet and global communications networks .
Perhaps the simplest device that can be created with a semiconductor is a diode .
A diode is a circuit element that allows electric current to flow in only one direction , like a one-way valve ( see ) .
A diode is created by joining a p -type semiconductor to an n -type semiconductor .
The junction between these materials is called a p-n junction .
A comparison of the energy bands of a silicon-based diode is shown in ( b ) .
The positions of the valence and conduction bands are the same , but the impurity levels are quite different .
When a p-n junction is formed , electrons from the conduction band of the n -type material diffuse to the p -side , where they combine with holes in the valence band .
This migration of charge leaves positive ionized donor ions on the n -side and negative ionized acceptor ions on the p -side , producing a narrow double layer of charge at the p n junction called the depletion layer .
The electric field associated with the depletion layer prevents further diffusion .
The potential energy for electrons across the p-n junction is given by .
The behavior of a semiconductor diode can now be understood .
If the positive side of the battery is connected to the n -type material , the depletion layer is widened , and the potential energy difference across the p-n junction is increased .
Few or none of the electrons ( holes ) have enough energy to climb the potential barrier , and current is significantly reduced .
This is called the reverse bias configuration .
On the other hand , if the positive side of a battery is connected to the p -type material , the depletion layer is narrowed , the potential energy difference across the p-n junction is reduced , and electrons ( holes ) flow easily .
This is called the forward bias configuration of the diode .
In sum , the diode allows current to flow freely in one direction but prevents current flow in the opposite direction .
In this sense , the semiconductor diode is a one-way valve .
We can estimate the mathematical relationship between the current and voltage for a diode using the electric potential concept .
Consider N negatively charged majority carriers ( electrons donated by impurity atoms ) in the n -type material and a potential barrier V across the p-n junction .
According to the Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution , the fraction of electrons that have enough energy to diffuse across the potential barrier is .
However , if a battery of voltage is applied in the forward-bias configuration , this fraction improves to .
The electric current due to the majority carriers from the n -side to the p -side is therefore where is the current with no applied voltage and T is the temperature .
Current due to the minority carriers ( thermal excitation of electrons from the valence band to the conduction band on the pside and subsequent attraction to the n -side ) is , independent of the bias voltage .
The net current is therefore A sample graph of the current versus bias voltage is given in .
In the forward bias configuration , small changes in the bias voltage lead to large changes in the current .
In the reverse bias configuration , the current is .
For extreme values of reverse bias , the atoms in the material are ionized which triggers an avalanche of current .
This case occurs at the breakdown voltage .
The battery voltage is 0.12 V. What is the diode temperature ?
The first arrangement is a forward bias configuration , and the second is the reverse bias configuration .
In either case , gives the current .
Taking the natural log of both sides gives The temperature is therefore The current moving through a diode in the forward and reverse bias configuration is sensitive to the temperature of the diode .
If the potential energy supplied by the battery is large compared to the thermal energy of the diode ’ s surroundings , then the forward bias current is very large compared to the reverse saturation current .
Check Your Understanding How does the magnitude of the forward bias current compare with the reverse bias current ?
Create a p n junction and observe the behavior of a simple circuit for forward and reverse bias voltages .
Visit this to learn more about semiconductor diodes .
If diodes are one-way valves , transistors are one-way valves that can be carefully opened and closed to control current .
A special kind of transistor is a junction transistor .
A junction transistor has three parts , including an n -type semiconductor , also called the emitter ; a thin p -type semiconductor , which is the base ; and another n -type semiconductor , called the collector .
When a positive terminal is connected to the p -type layer ( the base ) , a small current of electrons , called the base current flows to the terminal .
This causes a large collector current to flow through the collector .
The base current can be adjusted to control the large collector current .
The current gain is therefore A junction transistor can be used to amplify the voltage from a microphone to drive a loudspeaker .
In this application , sound waves cause a diaphragm inside the microphone to move in and out rapidly .
When the diaphragm is in the “ in ” position , a tiny positive voltage is applied to the base of the transistor .
This opens the transistor “ valve ” and allows a large electrical current flow to the loudspeaker .
When the diaphragm is in the “ out ” position , a tiny negative voltage is applied to the base of the transistor , which shuts off the transistor valve so that no current flows to the loudspeaker .
This shuts the transistor “ valve ” off so no current flows to the loudspeaker .
In this way , current to the speaker is controlled by the sound waves , and the sound is amplified .
Any electric device that amplifies a signal is called an amplifier .
In modern electronic devices , digital signals are used with diodes and transistors to perform tasks such as data manipulation .
Electric circuits carry two types of electrical signals : analog and digital .
An analog signal varies continuously , whereas a digital signal switches between two fixed voltage values , such as plus 1 volt and zero volts .
In digital circuits like those found in computers , a transistor behaves like an on-off switch .
The transistor is either on , meaning the valve is completely open , or it is off , meaning the valve is completely closed .
Integrated circuits contain vast collections of transistors on a single piece of silicon .
They are designed to handle digital signals that represent ones and zeroes , which is also known as binary code .
The invention of the ic helped to launch the modern computer revolution .
Electrical resistance can be considered as a measure of the frictional force in electrical current flow .
Thus , electrical resistance is a primary source of energy dissipation in electrical systems such as electromagnets , electric motors , and transmission lines .
Copper wire is commonly used in electrical wiring because it has one of the lowest room-temperature electrical resistivities among common conductors .
( Actually , silver has a lower resistivity than copper , but the high cost and limited availability of silver outweigh its savings in energy over copper . )
Although our discussion of conductivity seems to imply that all materials must have electrical resistance , we know that this is not the case .
When the temperature decreases below a critical value for many materials , their electrical resistivity drops to zero , and the materials become superconductors ( see ) .
Watch this excerpt , Making Stuff Colder , as an introduction to the topic of superconductivity and its many applications .
In addition to zero electrical resistance , superconductors also have perfect diamagnetism .
In other words , in the presence of an applied magnetic field , the net magnetic field within a superconductor is always zero .
Therefore , any magnetic field lines that pass through a superconducting sample when it is in its normal state are expelled once the sample becomes superconducting .
These are manifestations of the Meissner effect , which you learned about in the chapter on current and resistance .
Interestingly , the Meissner effect is not a consequence of the resistance being zero .
To see why , suppose that a sample placed in a magnetic field undergoes a transition in which its resistance drops to zero .
From Ohm ’ s law , the current density , j , in the sample is related to the net internal electric field , E , and the resistivity by .
If is zero , E must also be zero so that j can remain finite .
Now E and the magnetic flux through the sample are related by Faraday ’ s law as If E is zero , is also zero , that is , the magnetic flux through the sample can not change .
The magnetic field lines within the sample should therefore not be expelled when the transition occurs .
Hence , it does not follow that a material whose resistance goes to zero has to exhibit the Meissner effect .
Rather , the Meissner effect is a special property of superconductors .
Another important property of a superconducting material is its critical temperature , , the temperature below which the material is superconducting .
The known range of critical temperatures is from a fraction of 1 K to slightly above 100 K. Superconductors with critical temperatures near this higher limit are commonly known as “ high-temperature ” superconductors .
From a practical standpoint , superconductors for which are very important .
At present , applications involving superconductors often still require that superconducting materials be immersed in liquid helium ( 4.2 K ) in order to keep them below their critical temperature .
The liquid helium baths must be continually replenished because of evaporation , and cooling costs can easily outweigh the savings in using a superconductor .
However , 77 K is the temperature of liquid nitrogen , which is far more abundant and inexpensive than liquid helium .
It would be much more cost-effective if we could easily fabricate and use high-temperature superconductor components that only need to be kept in liquid nitrogen baths to maintain their superconductivity .
High-temperature superconducting materials are presently in use in various applications .
An example is the production of magnetic fields in some particle accelerators .
The ultimate goal is to discover materials that are superconducting at room temperature .
Without any cooling requirements , the bulk of electronic components and transmission lines could be superconducting , resulting in dramatic and unprecedented increases in efficiency and performance .
Another important property of a superconducting material is its critical magnetic field which is the maximum applied magnetic field at a temperature T that will allow a material to remain superconducting .
An applied field that is greater than the critical field will destroy the superconductivity .
The critical field is zero at the critical temperature and increases as the temperature decreases .
Plots of the critical field versus temperature for several superconducting materials are shown in .
The temperature dependence of the critical field can be described approximately by where is the critical field at absolute zero temperature .
lists the critical temperatures and fields for two classes of superconductors : type I superconductor and type II superconductor .
In general , type I superconductors are elements , such as aluminum and mercury .
They are perfectly diamagnetic below a critical field B ( T ) , and enter the normal non-superconducting state once that field is exceeded .
The critical fields of type I superconductors are generally quite low ( well below one tesla ) .
For this reason , they can not be used in applications requiring the production of high magnetic fields , which would destroy their superconducting state .
Type II superconductors are generally compounds or alloys involving transition metals or actinide series elements .
Almost all superconductors with relatively high critical temperatures are type II .
They have two critical fields , represented by and .
When the field is below type II superconductors are perfectly diamagnetic , and no magnetic flux penetration into the material can occur .
For a field exceeding they are driven into their normal state .
When the field is greater than but less than type II superconductors are said to be in a mixed state .
Although there is some magnetic flux penetration in the mixed state , the resistance of the material is zero .
Within the superconductor , filament-like regions exist that have normal electrical and magnetic properties interspersed between regions that are superconducting with perfect diamagnetism .
A representation of this state is given in .
The magnetic field is expelled from the superconducting regions but exists in the normal regions .
In general , is very large compared with the critical fields of type I superconductors , so wire made of type II superconducting material is suitable for the windings of high-field magnets .
In an experiment , a niobium ( Nb ) wire of radius 0.25 mm is immersed in liquid helium and required to carry a current of 300 A .
Does the wire remain superconducting ?
The applied magnetic field can be determined from the radius of the wire and current .
The critical magnetic field can be determined from , the properties of the superconductor , and the temperature .
If the applied magnetic field is greater than the critical field , then superconductivity in the Nb wire is destroyed .
At the critical field for Nb is , from and , In an earlier chapter , we learned the magnetic field inside a current-carrying wire of radius a is given by where r is the distance from the central axis of the wire .
Thus , the field at the surface of the wire is the niobium wire , this field is For Since this exceeds the critical 0.16 T , the wire does not remain superconducting .
Superconductivity requires low temperatures and low magnetic fields .
These simultaneous conditions are met less easily for Nb than for many other metals .
For example , aluminum superconducts at temperatures 7 times lower and magnetic fields 18 times lower .
Check Your Understanding What conditions are necessary for superconductivity ?
A successful theory of superconductivity was developed in the 1950s by John Bardeen , Leon Cooper , and J. Robert Schrieffer , for which they received the Nobel Prize in 1972 .
This theory is known as the BCS theory .
BCS theory is complex , so we summarize it qualitatively below .
In a normal conductor , the electrical properties of the material are due to the most energetic electrons near the Fermi energy .
In 1956 , Cooper showed that if there is any attractive interaction between two electrons at the Fermi level , then the electrons can form a bound state in which their total energy is less than .
Two such electrons are known as a Cooper pair .
It is hard to imagine two electrons attracting each other , since they have like charge and should repel .
However , the proposed interaction occurs only in the context of an atomic lattice .
A depiction of the attraction is shown in .
Electron 1 slightly displaces the positively charged atomic nuclei toward itself as it travels past because of the Coulomb attraction .
Electron 2 “ sees ” a region with a higher density of positive charge relative to the surroundings and is therefore attracted into this region and , therefore indirectly , to electron 1 .
Because of the exclusion principle , the two electrons of a Cooper pair must have opposite spin .
The BCS theory extends Cooper ’ s ideas , which are for a single pair of electrons , to the entire free electron gas .
When the transition to the superconducting state occurs , all the electrons pair up to form Cooper pairs .
On an atomic scale , the distance between the two electrons making up a Cooper pair is quite large .
Between these electrons are typically about other electrons , each also pairs with a distant electron .
Hence , there is considerable overlap between the wave functions of the individual Cooper pairs , resulting in a strong correlation among the motions of the pairs .
They all move together “ in step , ” like the members of a marching band .
In the superconducting transition , the density of states becomes drastically changed near the Fermi level .
As shown in , an energy gap appears around because the collection of Cooper pairs has lower ground state energy than the Fermi gas of noninteracting electrons .
The appearance of this gap characterizes the superconducting state .
If this state is destroyed , then the gap disappears , and the density of states reverts to that of the free electron gas .
The BCS theory is able to predict many of the properties observed in superconductors .
Examples include the Meissner effect , the critical temperature , the critical field , and , perhaps most importantly , the resistivity becoming zero at a critical temperature .
We can think about this last phenomenon qualitatively as follows .
In a normal conductor , resistivity results from the interaction of the conduction electrons with the lattice .
In this interaction , the energy exchanged is on the order of the thermal energy .
In a superconductor , electric current is carried by the Cooper pairs .
The only way for a lattice to scatter a Cooper pair is to break it up .
The destruction of one pair then destroys the collective motion of all the pairs .
This destruction requires energy on the order of , which is the size of the energy gap .
Below the critical temperature , there is not enough thermal energy available for this process , so the Cooper pairs travel unimpeded throughout the superconductor .
Finally , it is interesting to note that no evidence of superconductivity has been found in the best normal conductors , such as copper and silver .
This is not unexpected , given the BCS theory .
The basis for the formation of the superconducting state is an interaction between the electrons and the lattice .
In the best conductors , the electron-lattice interaction is weakest , as evident from their minimal resistivity .
We might expect then that in these materials , the interaction is so weak that Cooper pairs can not be formed , and superconductivity is therefore precluded .
The nucleus lies at the center of an atom , and consists of protons and neutrons .
A deep understanding of the nucleus leads to numerous valuable technologies , including devices to date ancient rocks , map the galactic arms of the Milky Way , and generate electrical power .
The Sun is the main source of energy in the solar system .
The Sun is 109 Earth diameters across , and accounts for more than of the total mass of the solar system .
The Sun shines by fusing hydrogen nuclei—protons—deep inside its interior .
Once this fuel is spent , the Sun will burn helium and , later , other nuclei .
Nuclear fusion in the Sun is discussed toward the end of this chapter .
In the meantime , we will investigate nuclear properties that govern all nuclear processes , including fusion .
The atomic nucleus is composed of protons and neutrons .
Protons and neutrons have approximately the same mass , but protons carry one unit of positive charge and neutrons carry no charge .
These particles are packed together into an extremely small space at the center of an atom .
According to scattering experiments , the nucleus is spherical or ellipsoidal in shape , and about 1/100,000th the size of a hydrogen atom .
If an atom were the size of a major league baseball stadium , the nucleus would be roughly the size of the baseball .
Protons and neutrons within the nucleus are called nucleons .
The number of protons in the nucleus is given by the atomic number , Z .
The number of neutrons in the nucleus is the neutron number , N .
The total number of nucleons is the mass number , A .
These numbers are related by A nucleus is represented symbolically by where X represents the chemical element , A is the mass number , and Z is the atomic number .
For example , the carbon nucleus with six protons and six neutrons ( or 12 nucleons ) .
A graph of the number N of neutrons versus the number Z of protons for a range of stable nuclei ( nuclides ) is shown in .
For a given value of Z , multiple values of N ( blue points ) are possible .
For small values of Z , the number of neutrons equals the number of protons and the data fall on the red line .
For large values of Z , the number of neutrons is greater than the number of protons and the data points fall above the red line .
The number of neutrons is generally greater than the number of protons for represents A chart based on this graph that provides more detailed information about each nucleus is given in .
This chart is called a chart of the nuclides .
Each cell or tile represents a separate nucleus .
The nuclei are arranged in order of ascending Z ( along the horizontal direction ) and ascending N ( along the vertical direction ) .
Atoms that contain nuclei with the same number of protons ( Z ) and different numbers of neutrons ( N ) are called isotopes .
For example , hydrogen has three isotopes : normal hydrogen ( 1 proton , no neutrons ) , deuterium ( one proton and one neutron ) , and tritium ( one proton and two neutrons ) .
Isotopes of a given atom share the same chemical properties , since these properties are determined by interactions between the outer electrons of the atom , and not the nucleons .
For example , water that contains deuterium rather than hydrogen ( “ heavy water ” ) looks and tastes like normal water .
The following table shows a list of common isotopes .
Why do neutrons outnumber protons in heavier nuclei ?
The answer to this question requires an understanding of forces inside the nucleus .
Two types of forces exist : ( 1 ) the long-range electrostatic ( Coulomb ) force that makes the positively charged protons repel one another ; and ( 2 ) the short-range strong nuclear force that makes all nucleons in the nucleus attract one another .
You may also have heard of a “ weak ” nuclear force .
This force is responsible for some nuclear decays , but as the name implies , it does not play a role in stabilizing the nucleus against the strong Coulomb repulsion it experiences .
We discuss strong nuclear force in more detail in the next chapter when we cover particle physics .
Nuclear stability occurs when the attractive forces between nucleons compensate for the repulsive , long-range electrostatic forces between all protons in the nucleus .
For heavy nuclei excess neutrons are necessary to keep the electrostatic interactions from breaking the nucleus apart , as shown in .
Because of the existence of stable isotopes , we must take special care when quoting the mass of an element .
For example , Copper ( Cu ) has two stable isotopes : Given these two “ versions ” of Cu , what is the mass of this element ?
The atomic mass of an element is defined as is isotopes .
Thus , the weighted atomic mass the masses of Cu average the its of of The mass of an individual nucleus is often expressed in atomic mass units ( u ) , where .
( An atomic mass unit is defined as 1/12th the mass of a nucleus . )
In atomic mass units , the mass of a helium nucleus ( A = 4 ) is approximately 4 u .
A helium nucleus is also called an alpha ( α ) particle .
The simplest model of the nucleus is a densely packed sphere of nucleons .
The volume V of the nucleus is therefore proportional to the number of nucleons A , expressed by where r is the radius of a nucleus and k is a constant with units of volume .
Solving for r , we have where is a constant .
For hydrogen , corresponds to the radius of a single proton .
Scattering experiments support this general relationship for a wide range of nuclei , and they imply that neutrons have approximately the same radius as protons .
The experimentally measured value for is approximately 1.2 femtometer ( recall that ) .
Find the radius ( r ) and approximate density of a Fe-56 nucleus .
Assume the mass of the Fe-56 nucleus is approximately 56 u .
( a ) Finding the radius of is a straightforward application of , given ( b ) To find the approximate density of this nucleus , assume the nucleus is spherical .
Therefore , the result shown for a mid-sized nucleus is reasonable .
The density found here may seem incredible .
However , it is consistent with earlier comments about the nucleus containing nearly all of the mass of the atom in a tiny region of space .
One cubic meter of nuclear matter has the same mass as a cube of water 61 km on each side .
Check Your Understanding Nucleus X is two times larger than nucleus Y .
What is the ratio of their atomic masses ?
The forces that bind nucleons together in an atomic nucleus are much greater than those that bind an electron to an atom through electrostatic attraction .
This is evident by the relative sizes of the atomic nucleus and the atom respectively ) .
The energy required to pry a nucleon from the nucleus is therefore much larger than that required to remove ( or ionize ) an electron in an atom .
In general , all nuclear changes involve large amounts of energy per particle undergoing the reaction .
This has numerous practical applications .
According to nuclear particle experiments , the total mass of a nucleus is less than the sum of the masses of its constituent nucleons ( protons and neutrons ) .
The mass difference , or mass defect , is given by where is the total mass of the protons , is the total mass of the neutrons , and is the mass of the nucleus .
According to Einstein ’ s special theory of relativity , mass is a measure of the total energy of a system .
Thus , the total energy of a nucleus is less than the sum of the energies of its constituent nucleons .
The formation of a nucleus from a system of isolated protons and neutrons is therefore an exothermic reaction—meaning that it releases energy .
The energy emitted , or radiated , in this process is Now imagine this process occurs in reverse .
Instead of forming a nucleus , energy is put into the system to break apart the nucleus .
The binding energy of a magnesium nucleus , for example , is approximately two times greater than for the carbon nucleus .
Calculate the mass defect and the binding energy of or From , the mass defect for the deuteron is the deuteron .
The mass of the deuteron is The binding energy of the deuteron is then Over two million electron volts are needed to break apart a deuteron into a proton and a neutron .
This very large value indicates the great strength of the nuclear force .
By comparison , the greatest amount of energy required to liberate an electron bound to a hydrogen atom by an attractive Coulomb force ( an electromagnetic force ) is about 10 eV .
If the BEN is relatively large , the nucleus is relatively stable .
BEN values are estimated from nuclear scattering experiments .
A graph of binding energy per nucleon versus atomic number A is given in .
This graph is considered by many physicists to be one of the most important graphs in physics .
Two notes are in order .
First , typical BEN values range from 6–10 MeV , with an average value of about 8 MeV .
In other words , it takes several million electron volts to pry a nucleon from a typical nucleus , as compared to just 13.6 eV to ionize an electron in the ground state of hydrogen .
This is why nuclear force is referred to as the “ strong ” nuclear force .
Second , the graph rises at low A , peaks very near iron and then tapers off at high A .
The peak value suggests that the iron nucleus is the most stable nucleus in nature ( it is also why nuclear fusion in the cores of stars ends with Fe ) .
The reason the graph rises and tapers off has to do with competing forces in the nucleus .
At low values of A , attractive nuclear forces between nucleons dominate over repulsive electrostatic forces between protons .
But at high values of A , repulsive electrostatic forces between forces begin to dominate , and these forces tend to break apart the nucleus rather than hold it together .
As we will see , the BEN-versusA graph implies that nuclei divided or combined release an enormous amount of energy .
This is the basis for a wide range of phenomena , from the production of electricity at a nuclear power plant to sunlight .
Calculate the binding energy per nucleon of an Determine the total binding energy ( BE ) using the equation where is the mass defect .
The binding energy per nucleon ( BEN ) is BE divided by A .
For , we have The total binding energy is These masses are and Thus we have , Noting that we find Since the total binding energy per nucleon is Notice that put into the system .
In 1896 , Antoine Becquerel discovered that a uranium-rich rock emits invisible rays that can darken a photographic plate in an enclosed container .
Scientists offer three arguments for the nuclear origin of these rays .
First , the effects of the radiation do not vary with chemical state ; that is , whether the emitting material is in the form of an element or compound .
Second , the radiation does not vary with changes in temperature or pressure—both factors that in sufficient degree can affect electrons in an atom .
Third , the very large energy of the invisible rays ( up to hundreds of eV ) is not consistent with atomic electron transitions ( only a few eV ) .
Today , this radiation is explained by the conversion of mass into energy deep within the nucleus of an atom .
The spontaneous emission of radiation from nuclei is called nuclear radioactivity .
When an individual nucleus transforms into another with the emission of radiation , the nucleus is said to decay .
Radioactive decay occurs for all nuclei with and also for some unstable isotopes with The decay rate is proportional to the number of original ( undecayed ) nuclei N in a substance .
The number of nuclei lost to decay , in time interval dt , is written where is called the decay constant .
( The minus sign indicates the number of original nuclei decreases over time . )
In other words , the more nuclei available to decay , the more that do decay ( in time dt ) .
The total number N of radioactive nuclei remaining after time t is where is the decay constant for the particular nucleus .
The total number of nuclei drops very rapidly at first , and then more slowly .
The half-life of a radioactive substance is defined as the time for half of the original nuclei to decay ( or the time at which half of the original nuclei remain ) .
The half-lives of unstable isotopes are shown in the chart of nuclides in .
The number of radioactive nuclei remaining after an integer ( n ) number of half-lives is therefore If the decay constant is large , the half-life is small , and vice versa .
To determine the relationship between these quantities , note that when , then .
Thus , can be rewritten as Dividing both sides by and taking the natural logarithm yields which reduces to Thus , if we know the half-life T of a radioactive substance , we can find its decay constant .
The lifetime of a radioactive substance is defined as the average amount of time that a nucleus exists before decaying .
Defining the initial activity as , we have Thus , the activity A of a radioactive substance decreases exponentially with time .
, is 28.8 y .
Find ( a ) its decay constant and ( b ) the initial activity of 1.00 g of The half-life of strontium-90 , the material .
We can find the decay constant directly from .
To determine the activity , we first need to find the number of nuclei present .
We can determine the decay constant by measuring the activity as a function of time .
Taking the natural logarithm of the left and right sides of , we get This equation follows the linear form .
If we plot ln A versus t , we expect a straight line with slope ( ( b ) ) .
Activity A is expressed in units of becquerels ( Bq ) , where one and y -intercept .
This quantity can also be expressed in decays per minute or decays per year .
One of the most common units for activity is the curie ( Ci ) , defined to be the activity of 1 g of .
The relationship between the Bq and Ci is Approximately of the human body by mass is carbon .
Calculate the activity due to in 1.00 kg of carbon found in a living organism .
Express the activity in units of Bq and Ci .
The activity of is determined using the equation , where λ is the decay constant and is the number of radioactive nuclei .
The number of nuclei in a 1.00-kg sample is determined in two steps .
First , we determine the number of nuclei using the concept of a mole .
Second , we multiply this value by ( the known abundance of in a carbon sample from a living organism ) to determine the number of nuclei in a living organism .
The decay constant is determined from the known half-life of ( available from ) .
One mole of carbon has a mass of 12.0 g , since it is nearly pure .
Thus , the number of carbon nuclei in a kilogram is The number of nuclei in 1 kg of carbon is therefore Now we can find the activity A by using the equation Entering known values gives us or decays per year .
To convert this to the unit Bq , we simply convert years to seconds .
Thus , or 250 decays per second .
To express A in curies , we use the definition of a curie , Thus , Approximately of the human body by weight is carbon .
Hundreds of decays take place in the human body every second .
Carbon-14 and other naturally occurring radioactive substances in the body compose a person ’ s background exposure to nuclear radiation .
As we will see later in this chapter , this activity level is well below the maximum recommended dosages .
Radioactive dating is a technique that uses naturally occurring radioactivity to determine the age of a material , such as a rock or an ancient artifact .
An important method of radioactive dating is carbon-14 dating .
Carbon-14 nuclei are produced when high-energy solar radiation strikes nuclei in the upper atmosphere and subsequently decay with a half-life of 5730 years .
Radioactive carbon has the same chemistry as stable carbon , so it combines with the ecosphere and eventually becomes part of every living organism .
Carbon-14 has an abundance of 1.3 parts per trillion of normal carbon .
Therefore , if you know the number of carbon nuclei in an object , you multiply that number by to find the number of nuclei in that object .
When an organism dies , carbon exchange with the environment ceases , and is not replenished as it decays .
By comparing the abundance of in an artifact , such as mummy wrappings , with the normal abundance in living tissue , it is possible to determine the mummy ’ s age ( or the time since the person ’ s death ) .
Carbon-14 dating can be used for biological tissues as old as 50,000 years , but is generally most accurate for younger samples , since the abundance of nuclei in them is greater .
Very old biological materials contain no at all .
The validity of carbon dating can be checked by other means , such as by historical knowledge or by tree-ring counting .
In an ancient burial cave , your team of archaeologists discovers ancient wood furniture .
Only of the original remains in the wood .
How old is the furniture ?
The problem statement implies that Therefore , the equation can be used to find the product , .
We know the half-life of is 5730 y , so we also know the decay constant , and therefore the total decay time t .
Solving the equation for gives us Thus , Taking the natural logarithm of both sides of the equation yields so that Rearranging the equation to isolate t gives us where Combining this information yields The furniture is almost 2000 years old—an impressive discovery .
The typical uncertainty on carbon-14 dating is about , so the furniture is anywhere between 1750 and 1950 years old .
This date range must be confirmed by other evidence , such as historical records .
Check Your Understanding A radioactive nuclide has a high decay rate .
What does this mean for its half-life and activity ?
Visit the to learn about the types of radiometric dating and try your hand at dating some ancient objects .
Early experiments revealed three types of nuclear “ rays ” or radiation : alpha rays , beta rays , and gamma rays .
These three types of radiation are differentiated by their ability to penetrate matter .
Alpha radiation is barely able to pass through a thin sheet of paper .
Beta radiation can penetrate aluminum to a depth of about 3 mm , and gamma radiation can penetrate lead to a depth of 2 or more centimeters .
The electrical properties of these three types of radiation are investigated by passing them through a uniform magnetic field , as shown in .
According to the magnetic force equation positively charged particles are deflected upward , negatively charged particles are deflected downward , and particles with no charge pass through the magnetic field undeflected .
Eventually , rays were identified with helium nuclei rays with electrons and positrons ( positively charged electrons or antielectrons ) , and rays with high-energy photons .
We discuss alpha , beta , and gamma radiation in detail in the remainder of this section .
Heavy unstable nuclei emit radiation .
In -particle decay ( or alpha decay ) , the nucleus loses two protons and two neutrons , so the atomic number decreases by two , whereas its mass number decreases by four .
Before the decay , the nucleus is called the parent nucleus .
The nucleus or nuclei produced in the decay are referred to as the daughter nucleus or daughter nuclei .
We represent an decay symbolically by is the parent nucleus , is the particle .
In decay , a nucleus of where atomic number Z decays into a nucleus of atomic number and atomic mass Interestingly , the dream of the ancient alchemists to turn other metals into gold is scientifically feasible through the alpha-decay process .
The efforts of the alchemists failed because they relied on chemical interactions rather than nuclear interactions .
is the daughter nucleus , and Watch alpha particles escape from a polonium nucleus , causing radioactive alpha decay .
See how random decay visit times half-life .
To simulation decay , relate alpha the try of to a An example of alpha decay is uranium-238 : The atomic number has dropped from 92 to 90 .
The chemical element with is thorium .
Hence , Uranium-238 has decayed to Thorium-234 by the emission of an particle , written decays by emission with a half-life of 24 days .
The energy released in this alpha decay takes the Subsequently , form of kinetic energies of the thorium and helium nuclei , although the kinetic energy of thorium is smaller than helium due to its heavier mass and smaller velocity .
Find the energy emitted in the decay of .
The energy emitted in the decay of can be found using the equation We must first find The decay equation is the difference in mass between the parent nucleus and the products of the decay .
Thus , the pertinent masses are those of , , and the particle or , all of which are known .
The initial mass was The final mass is the sum Thus , Now we can find E by entering into the equation : We know so we have The energy released in this decay is in the MeV range , many times greater than chemical reaction energies .
Most of this energy becomes kinetic energy of the particle ( or nucleus ) , which moves away at high speed .
The energy carried away by the recoil of the nucleus is much smaller due to its relatively large mass .
The nucleus can be left in an excited state to later emit photons ( rays ) .
In most particle decays ( or beta decay ) , either an electron or positron is emitted by a nucleus .
A positron has the same mass as the electron , but its charge is .
For this reason , a positron is sometimes called an antielectron .
How does decay occur ?
A possible explanation is the electron ( positron ) is confined to the nucleus prior to the decay and somehow escapes .
To obtain a rough estimate of the escape energy , consider a simplified model of an electron trapped in a box ( or in the terminology of quantum mechanics , a one-dimensional square well ) that has the width of a typical nucleus .
We therefore conclude that the electron is somehow produced in the decay rather than escaping the nucleus .
Particle production ( annihilation ) is described by theories that combine quantum mechanics and relativity , a subject of a more advanced course in physics .
Nuclear beta decay involves the conversion of one nucleon into another .
For example , a neutron can decay to a proton by the emission of an electron and a nearly massless particle called an antineutrino : The notation is to signify that it has a charge of .
The proton is represented by are 1 .
When this occurs within an atomic nucleus , we have the following equation for beta decay : is used to designate the electron .
Its mass number is 0 because it is not a nucleon , and its atomic number because its mass number and atomic number As discussed in another chapter , this process occurs due to the weak nuclear force .
Watch occur for a collection of nuclei or for an individual nucleus .
As an example , the isotope represented as is unstable and decays by emission with a half-life of 24 days .
This reaction is written as is emitted with the neutrino v , and the neutron remains in the nucleus .
( Like decay , the positron does The positron not precede the decay but is produced in the decay . )
For an isolated proton , this process is impossible because the neutron is heavier than the proton .
However , this process is possible within the nucleus because the proton can receive energy from decays by emission with a half-life other nucleons for the transition .
As an example , the isotope of aluminum of The decay is written as The atomic number 12 corresponds to magnesium .
Hence , As a nuclear reaction , positron emission can be written as The neutrino was not detected in the early experiments on decay .
However , the laws of energy and momentum seemed to require such a particle .
Later , neutrinos were detected through their interactions with nuclei .
The nucleus undergoes both and decay .
For each case , what is the daughter nucleus ?
We can use the processes described by and , as well as the Periodic Table , to identify the resulting elements .
The atomic number and the mass number for the particle are 2 and 4 , respectively .
Thus , when a bismuth-211 nucleus emits an particle , the daughter nucleus has an atomic number of 81 and a mass number of 207 .
The element with an atomic number of 81 is thallium , so the decay is given by In decay , the atomic number increases by 1 , while the mass number stays the same .
The element with an atomic number of 84 is polonium , so the decay is given by Check Your Understanding In radioactive beta decay , does the atomic mass number , A , increase or decrease ?
A nucleus in an excited state can decay to a lower-level state by the emission of a “ gamma-ray ” photon , and this is known as gamma decay .
This is analogous to de-excitation of an atomic electron .
Gamma decay is represented symbolically by where the asterisk ( * ) on the nucleus indicates an excited state .
In decay , neither the atomic number nor the mass number changes , so the type of nucleus does not change .
Nuclei with are unstable and decay naturally .
Many of these nuclei have very short lifetimes , so they are not found ( or U-238 ) with in nature .
Notable exceptions include a half-life of years .
When a heavy nucleus decays to a lighter one , the lighter daughter nucleus can become the ( or Th-232 ) with a half-life of years , and parent nucleus for the next decay , and so on .
This process can produce a long series of nuclear decays called a decay series .
The series ends with a stable nucleus .
To illustrate the concept of a decay series , consider the decay of Th-232 series .
The neutron number , N , is plotted on the vertical y -axis , and the atomic number , Z , is plotted on the horizontal x -axis , so Th-232 is found at the coordinates Th-232 decays by emission with a half-life of years .
The atomic number increases by 1 , the mass number remains the same , and the neutron number decreases by 1 .
Notice that in the graph , emission appears as a line sloping downward to the left , with both N and Z decreasing by 2 .
Beta emission , on the other hand , appears as a line sloping downward to the right with N decreasing by 1 , and Z increasing by 1 .
After several additional alpha and beta decays , the series ends with the stable nucleus Pb-208 .
The relative frequency of different types of radioactive decays ( alpha , beta , and gamma ) depends on many factors , including the strength of the forces involved and the number of ways a given reaction can occur without violating the conservation of energy and momentum .
How often a radioactive decay occurs often depends on a sensitive balance of the strong and electromagnetic forces .
These forces are discussed in .
As another example , consider the U-238 decay series shown in .
After numerous alpha and beta decays , the series ends with the stable nucleus Pb-206 .
An example of a decay whose parent nucleus no longer exists naturally is shown in .
It starts with Neptunium-237 and ends in the stable nucleus Bismuth-209 .
Neptunium is called a transuranic element because it lies beyond uranium in the periodic table .
Uranium has the highest atomic number of any element found in nature .
Elements with can be produced only in the laboratory .
They most probably also existed in nature at the time of the formation of Earth , but because of their relatively short lifetimes , they have completely decayed .
There is nothing fundamentally different between naturally occurring and artificial elements .
Notice that for Bi ( 21 ) , the decay may proceed through either alpha or beta decay .
According to geologists , if there were no heat source , Earth should have cooled to its present temperature in no more than 1 billion years .
Yet , Earth is more than 4 billion years old .
Why is Earth cooling so slowly ?
The answer is nuclear radioactivity , that is , high-energy particles produced in radioactive decays heat Earth from the inside .
Candidate nuclei for this heating model are , which possess half-lives similar to or longer than the age of Earth .
The energy produced by these decays ( per second per cubic meter ) is small , but the energy can not escape easily , so Earth ’ s core is very hot .
Thermal energy in Earth ’ s core is transferred to Earth ’ s surface and away from it through the processes of convection , conduction , and radiation .
In 1934 , Enrico Fermi bombarded chemical elements with neutrons in order to create isotopes of other elements .
He assumed that bombarding uranium with neutrons would make it unstable and produce a new element .
Unfortunately , Fermi could not determine the products of the reaction .
Several years later , Otto Hahn and Fritz Strassman reproduced these experiments and discovered that the products of these reactions were smaller nuclei .
From this , they concluded that the uranium nucleus had split into two smaller nuclei .
The splitting of a nucleus is called fission .
Interestingly , U-235 fission does not always produce the same fragments .
The energy carried away by the reaction takes the form of particles with kinetic energy .
The percent yield of fragments from a U-235 fission is given in .
Energy changes in a nuclear fission reaction can be understood in terms of the binding energy per nucleon curve .
The BEN value for uranium is slightly lower than its daughter nuclei , which lie closer to the iron ( Fe ) peak .
This means that nucleons in the nuclear fragments are more tightly bound than those in the U-235 nucleus .
Therefore , a fission reaction results in a drop in the average energy of a nucleon .
This energy is carried away by high-energy neutrons .
Niels Bohr and John Wheeler developed the liquid drop model to understand the fission process .
According to this model , firing a neutron at a nucleus is analogous to disturbing a droplet of water .
The analogy works because short-range forces between nucleons in a nucleus are similar to the attractive forces between water molecules in a water droplet .
In particular , forces between nucleons at the surface of the nucleus result in a surface tension similar to that of a water droplet .
A neutron fired into a uranium nucleus can set the nucleus into vibration .
If this vibration is violent enough , the nucleus divides into smaller nuclei and also emits two or three individual neutrons .
U-235 fission can produce a chain reaction .
In a compound consisting of many U-235 nuclei , neutrons in the decay of one U-235 nucleus can initiate the fission of additional U-235 nuclei .
This chain reaction can proceed in a controlled manner , as in a nuclear reactor at a power plant , or proceed uncontrollably , as in an explosion .
View a simulation on to start a chain reaction , or introduce nonradioactive isotopes to prevent one .
Control energy production in a nuclear reactor .
The possibility of a chain reaction in uranium , with its extremely large energy release , led nuclear scientists to conceive of making a bomb—an atomic bomb .
( These discoveries were taking place in the years just prior to the Second World War and many of the European physicists involved in these discoveries came from countries that were being overrun . )
Natural uranium contains U-238 and only U-235 , and does not produce a chain reaction .
To produce a controlled , sustainable chain reaction , the percentage of U-235 must be increased to about .
In addition , the uranium sample must be massive enough so a typical neutron is more likely to induce fission than it is to escape .
The minimum mass needed for the chain reaction to occur is called the critical mass .
When the critical mass reaches a point at which the chain reaction becomes self-sustaining , this is a condition known as criticality .
The original design required two pieces of U-235 below the critical mass .
When one piece in the form of a bullet is fired into the second piece , the critical mass is exceeded and a chain reaction is produced .
An important obstacle to the U-235 bomb is the production of a critical mass of fissionable material .
Therefore , scientists developed a plutonium-239 bomb because Pu-239 is more fissionable than U-235 and thus requires a smaller critical mass .
The bomb was made in the form of a sphere with pieces of plutonium , each below the critical mass , at the edge of the sphere .
A series of chemical explosions fired the plutonium pieces toward the center of the sphere simultaneously .
When all these pieces of plutonium came together , the combination exceeded the critical mass and produced a chain reaction .
Both the U-235 and Pu-239 bombs were used in World War II .
Whether to develop and use atomic weapons remain two of the most important questions faced by human civilization .
Calculate the energy released in the following spontaneous fission reaction : The atomic masses are and As always , the energy released is equal to the mass destroyed times , so we must find the difference in mass between the parent and the fission products .
The products have a total mass of The mass lost is the mass of or Therefore , the energy released is Several important things arise in this example .
The energy release is large but less than it would be if the nucleus split into two equal parts , since energy is carried away by neutrons .
However , this fission reaction produces neutrons and does not split the nucleus into two equal parts .
Fission of a given nuclide , such as , does not always produce the same products .
Fission is a statistical process in which an entire range of products are produced with various probabilities .
Most fission produces neutrons , although the number varies .
This is an extremely important aspect of fission , because neutrons can induce more fission , enabling self-sustaining chain reactions .
The first nuclear reactor was built by Enrico Fermi on a squash court on the campus of the University of Chicago on December 2 , 1942 .
The reactor itself contained U-238 enriched with U-235 .
Neutrons produced by the chain reaction move too fast to initiate fission reactions .
One way to slow them down is to enclose the entire reactor in a water bath under high pressure .
The neutrons collide with the water molecules and are slowed enough to be used in the fission process .
The slowed neutrons split more U-235 nuclei and a chain reaction occurs .
The rate at which the chain reaction proceeds is controlled by a series of “ control ” rods made of cadmium inserted into the reactor .
Cadmium is capable of absorbing a large number of neutrons without becoming unstable .
A nuclear reactor design , called a pressurized water reactor , can also be used to generate electricity .
A pressurized water reactor ( on the left in the figure ) is designed to control the fission of large amounts of .
The energy released in this process is absorbed by water flowing through pipes in the system ( the “ primary loop ” ) and steam is produced .
Cadmium control rods adjust the neutron flux ( the rate of flow of neutrons passing through the system ) and therefore control the reaction .
In case the reactor overheats and the water boils away , the chain reaction terminates , because water is used to thermalize the neutrons .
( This safety feature can be overwhelmed in extreme circumstances . )
The hot , highpressure water then passes through a pipe to a second tank of water at normal pressure in the steam generator .
The steam produced at one end of the steam generator fills a chamber that contains a turbine .
This steam is at a very high pressure .
Meanwhile , a steam condenser connected to the other side of the turbine chamber maintains steam at low pressure .
The pressure differences force steam through the chamber , which turns the turbine .
The turbine , in turn , powers an electric generator .
The major drawback to a fission reactor is nuclear waste .
U-235 fission produces nuclei with long half-lives such as that must be stored .
These products can not be dumped into oceans or left in any place where they will contaminate the environment , such as through the soil , air , or water .
Many scientists believe that the best place to store nuclear waste is the bottom of old salt mines or inside of stable mountains .
Many people are fearful that a nuclear reactor may explode like an atomic bomb .
However , a nuclear reactor does not contain enough U-235 to do this .
Also , a nuclear reactor is designed so that failure of any mechanism of the reactor causes the cadmium control rods to fall fully into the reactor , stopping the fission process .
As evidenced by the Fukushima and Chernobyl disasters , such systems can fail .
Systems and procedures to avoid such disasters is an important priority for advocates of nuclear energy .
If all electrical power were produced by nuclear fission of U-235 , Earth ’ s known reserves of uranium would be depleted in less than a century .
However , Earth ’ s supply of fissionable material can be expanded considerably using a breeder reactor .
A breeder reactor operates for the first time using the fission of U-235 as just described for the pressurized water reactor .
Since of naturally occurring uranium is the U-238 isotope , the use of breeder reactors should increase our supply of nuclear fuel by roughly a factor of 100 .
Breeder reactors are now in operation in Great Britain , France , and Russia .
Breeder reactors also have drawbacks .
First , breeder reactors produce plutonium , which can , if leaked into the environment , produce serious public health problems .
Second , plutonium can be used to build bombs , thus increasing significantly the risk of nuclear proliferation .
Calculate the amount of energy produced by the fission of 1.00 kg of given that the average fission reaction of produces 200 MeV .
The total energy produced is the number of atoms times the given energy per fission .
We should therefore find the number of atoms in 1.00 kg .
The number of atoms in 1.00 kg is Avogadro ’ s number times the number of moles .
However , it is only one-fourth the energy produced by the fusion of a kilogram mixture of deuterium and tritium .
Even though each fission reaction yields about 10 times the energy of a fusion reaction , the energy per kilogram of fission fuel is less , because there are far fewer moles per kilogram of the heavy nuclides .
Fission fuel is also much scarcer than fusion fuel , and less than of uranium ( the ) is readily usable .
Check Your Understanding Which has a larger energy yield per fission reaction , a large or small sample of pure The process of combining lighter nuclei to make heavier nuclei is called nuclear fusion .
As with fission reactions , fusion reactions are exothermic—they release energy .
Suppose that we fuse a carbon and helium nuclei to produce oxygen : The energy changes in this reaction can be understood using a graph of binding energy per nucleon .
Comparing the binding energy per nucleon for oxygen , carbon , and helium , the oxygen nucleus is much more tightly bound than the carbon and helium nuclei , indicating that the reaction produces a drop in the energy of the system .
This energy is released in the form of gamma radiation .
Fusion reactions are said to be exothermic when the amount of energy released ( known as the Q value ) in each reaction is greater than zero An important example of nuclear fusion in nature is the production of energy in the Sun .
In 1938 , Hans Bethe proposed that the Sun produces energy when hydrogen nuclei fuse into stable helium nuclei in the Sun ’ s core .
This process , called the proton-proton chain , is summarized by three reactions : Thus , a stable helium nucleus is formed from the fusion of the nuclei of the hydrogen atom .
These three reactions can be summarized by The net Q value is about 26 MeV .
The release of this energy produces an outward thermal gas pressure that prevents the Sun from gravitational collapse .
Astrophysicists find that hydrogen fusion supplies the energy stars require to maintain energy balance over most of a star 's life span .
Scientist now believe that many heavy elements found on Earth and throughout the universe were originally synthesized by fusion within the hot cores of the stars .
This process is known as nucleosynthesis .
For example , in lighter stars , hydrogen combines to form helium through the proton-proton chain .
Once the hydrogen fuel is exhausted , the star enters the next stage of its life and fuses helium .
An example of a nuclear reaction chain that can occur is : Carbon and oxygen nuclei produced in such processes eventually reach the star ’ s surface by convection .
Near the end of its lifetime , the star loses its outer layers into space , thus enriching the interstellar medium with the nuclei of heavier elements .
Stars similar in mass to the Sun do not become hot enough to fuse nuclei as heavy ( or heavier ) than oxygen nuclei .
However , in massive stars whose cores become much hotter even more complex nuclei are produced .
Some representative reactions are Nucleosynthesis continues until the core is primarily iron-nickel metal .
Now , iron has the peculiar property that any fusion or fission reaction involving the iron nucleus is endothermic , meaning that energy is absorbed rather than produced .
Hence , nuclear energy can not be generated in an iron-rich core .
Lacking an outward pressure from fusion reactions , the star begins to contract due to gravity .
This process heats the core to a temperature on the order of Expanding shock waves generated within the star due to the collapse cause the star to quickly explode .
The luminosity of the star can increase temporarily to nearly that of an entire galaxy .
During this event , the flood of energetic neutrons reacts with iron and the other nuclei to produce elements heavier than iron .
These elements , along with much of the star , are ejected into space by the explosion .
Supernovae and the formation of planetary nebulas together play a major role in the dispersal of chemical elements into space .
Eventually , much of the material lost by stars is pulled together through the gravitational force , and it condenses into a new generation of stars and accompanying planets .
Recent images from the Hubble Space Telescope provide a glimpse of this magnificent process taking place in the constellation Serpens .
The new generation of stars begins the nucleosynthesis process anew , with a higher percentage of heavier elements .
Thus , stars are “ factories ” for the chemical elements , and many of the atoms in our bodies were once a part of stars .
The power output of the Sun is approximately Most of this energy is produced in the Sun ’ s core by the proton-proton chain .
This energy is transmitted outward by the processes of convection and radiation .
( a ) How many of these fusion reactions per second must occur to supply the power radiated by the Sun ?
( b ) What is the rate at which the mass of the Sun decreases ?
( c ) In about five billion years , the central core of the Sun will be depleted of hydrogen .
By what percentage will the mass of the Sun have decreased from its present value when the core is depleted of hydrogen ?
The total energy output per second is given in the problem statement .
If we know the energy released in each fusion reaction , we can determine the rate of the fusion reactions .
If the mass loss per fusion reaction is known , the mass loss rate is known .
Multiplying this rate by five billion years gives the total mass lost by the Sun .
This value is divided by the original mass of the Sun to determine the percentage of the Sun ’ s mass that has been lost when the hydrogen fuel is depleted .
Hydrogen burning does very little to change the mass of the Sun .
This calculation assumes that only the proton-proton decay change is responsible for the power output of the Sun .
Check Your Understanding Where does the energy from the Sun originate ?
In 1942 , Robert Oppenheimer suggested that the extremely high temperature of an atomic bomb could be used to trigger a fusion reaction between deuterium and tritium , thus producing a fusion ( or hydrogen ) bomb .
The reaction between deuterium and tritium , both isotopes of hydrogen , is given by Deuterium is relatively abundant in ocean water but tritium is scarce .
However , tritium can be generated in a nuclear reactor through a reaction involving lithium .
The neutrons from the reactor cause the reaction to produce the desired tritium .
The first hydrogen bomb was detonated in 1952 on the remote island of Eniwetok in the Marshall Islands .
A hydrogen bomb has never been used in war .
Modern hydrogen bombs are approximately 1000 times more powerful than the fission bombs dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki in World War II .
The fusion chain believed to be the most practical for use in a nuclear fusion reactor is the following two-step process : This chain , like the proton-proton chain , produces energy without any radioactive by-product .
However , there is a very difficult problem that must be overcome before fusion can be used to produce significant amounts of energy : Extremely high temperatures are needed to drive the fusion process .
To meet this challenge , test fusion reactors are being developed to withstand temperatures 20 times greater than the Sun ’ s core temperature .
An example is the Joint European Torus ( JET ) shown in .
A great deal of work still has to be done on fusion reactor technology , but many scientists predict that fusion energy will power the world ’ s cities by the end of the twentieth century .
Nuclear physics is an integral part of our everyday lives .
Radioactive compounds are used in to identify cancer , study ancient artifacts , and power our cities .
Nuclear fusion also powers the Sun , the primary source of energy on Earth .
The focus of this chapter is nuclear radiation .
In this section , we ask such questions as : How is nuclear radiation used to benefit society ?
What are its health risks ?
How much nuclear radiation is the average person exposed to in a lifetime ?
Medical use of nuclear radiation is quite common in today ’ s hospitals and clinics .
One of the most important uses of nuclear radiation is the location and study of diseased tissue .
This application requires a special drug called a radiopharmaceutical .
A radiopharmaceutical contains an unstable radioactive isotope .
When the drug enters the body , it tends to concentrate in inflamed regions of the body .
( Recall that the interaction of the drug with the body does not depend on whether a given nucleus is replaced by one of its isotopes , since this interaction is determined by chemical interactions . )
Radiation detectors used outside the body use nuclear radiation from the radioisotopes to locate the diseased tissue .
Radiopharmaceuticals are called radioactive tags because they allow doctors to track the movement of drugs in the body .
Radioactive tags are for many purposes , including the identification of cancer cells in the bones , brain tumors , and Alzheimer ’ s disease .
Radioactive tags are also used to monitor the function of body organs , such as blood flow , heart muscle activity , and iodine uptake in the thyroid gland .
lists some medical diagnostic uses of radiopharmaceuticals , including isotopes and typical activity ( A ) levels .
One common diagnostic test uses iodine to image the thyroid , since iodine is concentrated in that organ .
Another common nuclear diagnostic is the thallium scan for the cardiovascular system , which reveals blockages in the coronary arteries and examines heart activity .
The salt TlCl can be used because it acts like NaCl and follows the blood .
Note that lists many diagnostic uses for , where “ m ” stands for a metastable state of the technetium nucleus .
This isotope is used in many compounds to image the skeleton , heart , lungs , and kidneys .
About of all radiopharmaceuticals employ because it produces a single , easily identified , 0.142-MeV ray and has a short 6.0-h half-life , which reduces radiation exposure .
The first radiation detectors produced two-dimensional images , like a photo taken from a camera .
However , a circular array of detectors that can be rotated can be used to produce three-dimensional images .
This technique is similar to that used in X-ray computed tomography ( CT ) scans .
One application of this technique is called single-photon-emission CT ( SPECT ) .
The spatial resolution of this technique is about 1 cm .
Improved image resolution is achieved by a technique known as positron emission tomography ( PET ) .
This technique use radioisotopes that decay by radiation .
When a positron encounters an electron , these particle annihilate to produce two gamma-ray photons .
This reaction is represented by These -ray photons have identical 0.511-MeV energies and move directly away from one another .
This easily identified decay signature can be used to identify the location of the radioactive isotope .
Examples of -emitting isotopes used in PET include .
The nuclei have the advantage of being able to function as tags for natural body compounds .
Its resolution of 0.5 cm is better than that of SPECT .
PET scans are especially useful to examine the brain ’ s anatomy and function .
View an of simplified magnetic resonance imaging ( MRI ) to see if you can tell .
Your head is full of tiny radio transmitters ( the nuclear spins of the hydrogen nuclei of your water molecules ) .
In an MRI unit , these little radios can be made to broadcast their positions , giving a detailed picture of the inside of your head .
Nuclear radiation can have both positive and negative effects on biological systems .
However , it can also be used to treat and even cure cancer .
How do we understand these effects ?
To answer this question , consider molecules within cells , particularly DNA molecules .
Cells have long , double-helical DNA molecules containing chemical codes that govern the function and processes of the cell .
Nuclear radiation can alter the structural features of the DNA chain , leading to changes in the genetic code .
In human cells , we can have as many as a million individual instances of damage to DNA per cell per day .
DNA contains codes that check whether the DNA is damaged and can repair itself .
This repair ability of DNA is vital for maintaining the integrity of the genetic code and for the normal functioning of the entire organism .
It should be constantly active and needs to respond rapidly .
The rate of DNA repair depends on various factors such as the type and age of the cell .
Nuclear radiation can harm the human body is many other ways as well .
For example , high doses of nuclear radiation can cause burns and even hair loss .
Biological effects of nuclear radiation are expressed by many different physical quantities and in many different units .
A common unit to express the biological effects of nuclear radiation is the rad or radiation dose unit .
The effects of ionizing radiation depend on the dose in rads , but also on the type of radiation ( alpha , beta , gamma , or X-ray ) and the type of tissue .
For example , if the range of the radiation is small , as it is for rays , then the ionization and the damage created is more concentrated and harder for the organism to repair .
To account for such affects , we define the relative biological effectiveness ( RBE ) .
Sample RBE values for several types of ionizing nuclear radiation are given in .
A dose unit more closely related to effects in biological tissue is called the roentgen equivalent man ( rem ) and is defined to be the dose ( in rads ) multiplied by the relative biological effectiveness ( RBE ) .
Thus , if a person had a whole-body dose of 2.00 rad of radiation , the dose in rem would be rem for the whole body .
If the person had a whole-body dose of 2.00 rad of radiation , then the dose in rem would be rem for the whole body .
The rays would have 20 times the effect on the person than the rays for the same deposited energy .
The SI equivalent of the rem , and the more standard term , is the sievert ( Sv ) is The RBEs given in are approximate but reflect an understanding of nuclear radiation and its interaction with living tissue .
For example , neutrons are known to cause more damage than rays , although both are neutral and have large ranges , due to secondary radiation .
Any dose less than 100 mSv ( 10 rem ) is called a low dose , 0.1 Sv to 1 Sv ( 10 to 100 rem ) is called a moderate dose , and anything greater than 1 Sv ( 100 rem ) is called a high dose .
It is difficult to determine if a person has been exposed to less than 10 mSv .
Biological effects of different levels of nuclear radiation on the human body are given in .
The first clue that a person has been exposed to radiation is a change in blood count , which is not surprising since blood cells are the most rapidly reproducing cells in the body .
At higher doses , nausea and hair loss are observed , which may be due to interference with cell reproduction .
Cells in the lining of the digestive system also rapidly reproduce , and their destruction causes nausea .
When the growth of hair cells slows , the hair follicles become thin and break off .
High doses cause significant cell death in all systems , but the lowest doses that cause fatalities do so by weakening the immune system through the loss of white blood cells .
Human are also exposed to many sources of nuclear radiation .
A summary of average radiation doses for different sources by country is given in .
Earth emits radiation due to the isotopes of uranium , thorium , and potassium .
Radiation levels from these sources depend on location and can vary by a factor of 10 .
Fertilizers contain isotopes of potassium and uranium , which we digest in the food we eat .
Fertilizers have more than 3000 Bq/kg radioactivity , compared to just 66 Bq/ kg for Carbon-14 .
Medical visits are also a source of nuclear radiation .
A sample of common nuclear radiation doses is given in .
These doses are generally low and can be lowered further with improved techniques and more sensitive detectors .
With the possible exception of routine dental X-rays , medical use of nuclear radiation is used only when the risk-benefit is favorable .
Chest X-rays give the lowest doses—about 0.1 mSv to the tissue affected , with less than scattering into tissues that are not directly imaged .
Other X-ray procedures range upward to about 10 mSv in a CT scan , and about 5 mSv ( 0.5 rem ) per dental X-ray , again both only affecting the tissue imaged .
Medical images with radiopharmaceuticals give doses ranging from 1 to 5 mSv , usually localized .
The Chernobyl accident in Ukraine ( formerly in the Soviet Union ) exposed the surrounding population to a large amount of radiation through the decay of .
The initial radioactivity level was approximately Calculate the total mass of involved in this accident .
The total number of nuclei , N , can be determined from the known half-life and activity of ( 30.2 y ) .
The mass can be calculated from N using the concept of a mole .
Thus the mass of released was The mass of involved in the Chernobyl accident is a small material compared to the typical amount of fuel used in a nuclear reactor .
However , approximately 250 people were admitted to local hospitals immediately after the accident , and diagnosed as suffering acute radiation syndrome .
They received external radiation dosages between 1 and 16 Sv .
Referring to biological effects in , these dosages are extremely hazardous .
The eventual death toll is estimated to be around 4000 people , primarily due to radiation-induced cancer .
Check Your Understanding Radiation propagates in all directions from its source , much as electromagnetic radiation from a light bulb .
Is activity concept more analogous to power , intensity , or brightness ?
At the very beginning of this text we discussed the wide range of scales that physics encompasses , from the very smallest particles to the largest scale possible—the universe itself .
In this final chapter we examine some of the frontiers of research at these extreme scales .
Particle physics deals with the most basic building blocks of matter and the forces that hold them together .
Cosmology is the study of the stars , galaxies , and galactic structures that populate our universe , as well as their past history and future evolution .
These two areas of physics are not as disconnected as you might think .
The study of elementary particles requires enormous energies to produce isolated particles , involving some of the largest machines humans have ever built .
But such high energies were present in the earliest stages of the universe and the universe we see around us today was shaped in part by the nature and interactions of the elementary particles created then .
Bear in mind that particle physics and cosmology are both areas of intense current research , subject to much speculation on the part of physicists ( as well science-fiction writers ) .
In this chapter we try to emphasize what is known on the basis of deductions from observational evidence , and identify ideas that are conjectured but still unproven .
Elementary particle physics is the study of fundamental particles and their interactions in nature .
Those who study elementary particle physics—the particle physicists—differ from other physicists in the scale of the systems that they study .
A particle physicist is not content to study the microscopic world of cells , molecules , atoms , or even atomic nuclei .
They are interested in physical processes that occur at scales even smaller than atomic nuclei .
At the same time , they engage the most profound mysteries in nature : How did the universe begin ?
What explains the pattern of masses in the universe ?
Why is there more matter than antimatter in the universe ?
Why are energy and momentum conserved ?
How will the universe evolve ?
An important step to answering these questions is to understand particles and their interactions .
Particle interactions are expressed in terms of four fundamental forces .
In order of decreasing strength , these forces are the strong nuclear force , the electromagnetic force , the weak nuclear force , and the gravitational force .
Strong nuclear force .
The strong nuclear force is a very strong attractive force that acts only over very short distances ( about ) .
The strong nuclear force is responsible for binding protons and neutrons together in atomic nuclei .
Not all particles participate in the strong nuclear force ; for instance , electrons and neutrinos are not affected by it .
As the name suggests , this force is much stronger than the other forces .
The electromagnetic force can act over very large distances ( it has an infinite range ) but is only 1/100 the strength of the strong nuclear force .
In contrast to the strong force , the electromagnetic force can be attractive or repulsive ( opposite charges attract and like charges repel ) .
The magnetic force depends in a more complicated way on the charges and their motions .
The unification of the electric and magnetic force into a single electromagnetic force ( an achievement of James Clerk Maxwell ) stands as one of the greatest intellectual achievements of the nineteenth century .
This force is central to scientific models of atomic structure and molecular bonding .
Weak nuclear force .
The weak nuclear force acts over very short distances and , as its name suggest , is very weak .
It is roughly the strength of the strong nuclear force .
This force is manifested most notably in decays of elementary particles and neutrino interactions .
For example , the neutron can decay to a proton , electron , and electron neutrino through the weak force .
The weak force is vitally important because it is essential for understanding stellar nucleosynthesis—the process that creates new atomic nuclei in the cores of stars .
Like the electromagnetic force , the gravitational force can act over infinitely large distances ; however , it is only as strong as the strong nuclear force .
In Newton ’ s classical theory of gravity , the force of gravity varies as the product of the masses of the interacting particles and as the inverse square of the distance between them .
This force is an attractive force that acts between all particles with mass .
In modern theories of gravity , this force behavior is considered a special case for low-energy macroscopic interactions .
Compared with the other forces of nature , gravity is by far the weakest .
The fundamental forces may not be truly “ fundamental ” but may actually be different aspects of the same force .
Just as the electric and magnetic forces were unified into an electromagnetic force , physicists in the 1970s unified the electromagnetic force with the weak nuclear force into an electroweak force .
Any scientific theory that attempts to unify the electroweak force and strong nuclear force is called a grand unified theory , and any theory that attempts to unify all four forces is called a theory of everything .
We will return to the concept of unification later in this chapter .
A large number of subatomic particles exist in nature .
These particles can be classified in two ways : the property of spin and participation in the four fundamental forces .
Recall that the spin of a particle is analogous to the rotation of a macroscopic object about its own axis .
These types of classification are described separately below .
Particles of matter can be divided into fermions and bosons .
Fermions have half-integral spin and bosons have integral spin Familiar examples of fermions are electrons , protons , and neutrons .
A familiar example of a boson is a photon .
Fermions and bosons behave very differently in groups .
For example , when electrons are confined to a small region of space , Pauli ’ s exclusion principle states that no two electrons can occupy the same quantummechanical state .
However , when photons are confined to a small region of space , there is no such limitation .
The behavior of fermions and bosons in groups can be understood in terms of the property of indistinguishability .
Particles are said to be “ indistinguishable ” if they are identical to one another .
If this were not the case , we could tell whether or not the particles had been switched and the particle would not be truly indistinguishable .
The electronic structure of atoms is predicated on Pauli ’ s exclusion principle and is therefore directly related to the indistinguishability of electrons .
Fermions can be further divided into quarks and leptons .
The primary difference between these two types of particles is that quarks interact via the strong force and leptons do not .
Quarks and leptons ( as well as bosons to be discussed later ) are organized in .
The upper two rows ( first three columns in purple ) contain six quarks .
These quarks are arranged into two particle families : up , charm , and top ( u , c , t ) , and down , strange , and bottom ( d , s , b ) .
Members of the same particle family share the same properties but differ in mass ( given in ) .
For example , the mass of the top quark is much greater than the charm quark , and the mass of the charm quark is much greater than the up quark .
All quarks interact with one another through the strong nuclear force .
Ordinary matter consists of two types of quarks : the up quark ( elementary charge , ) and the down quark Heavier quarks are unstable and quickly decay to lighter ones via the weak force .
Quarks bind together in groups of twos and threes called hadrons via the strong force .
Hadrons that consist of two quarks are called mesons , and those that consist of three quarks are called baryons .
Examples of mesons include the pion and kaon , and examples of baryons include the familiar proton and neutron .
A proton is two up quarks and a down quark and a neutron is one up quark and two down quarks ( , ) .
Properties of sample mesons and baryons are given in .
Quarks participate in all four fundamental forces : strong , weak , electromagnetic , and gravitational .
The lower two rows in the figure ( in green ) contain six leptons arranged into two particle families : electron , muon , and tau , and electron neutrino , muon neutrino , and tau neutrino .
The muon is over 200 times heavier than an electron , but is otherwise similar to the electron .
The tau is about 3500 times heavier than the electron , but is otherwise similar to the muon and electron .
Once created , the muon and tau quickly decay to lighter particles via the weak force .
Leptons do not participate in the strong force .
Quarks and leptons will be discussed later in this chapter .
Leptons participate in the weak , electromagnetic , and gravitational forces , but do not participate in the strong force .
Bosons ( shown in red ) are the force carriers of the fermions .
In this model , leptons and quarks interact with each other by sending and receiving bosons .
For example , Coulombic interaction occurs when two positively charged particles send and receive ( exchange ) photons .
The photons are said to “ carry ” the force between charged particles .
Likewise , attraction between two quarks in an atomic nucleus occurs when two quarks send and receive gluons .
Additional examples include W and Z bosons ( which carry weak nuclear force ) and gravitons ( which carry gravitational force ) .
The Higgs boson is a special particle : When it interacts with other particles , it endows them not with force but with mass .
In other words , the Higgs boson helps to explains why particles have mass .
These assertions are part of a tentative but very productive scientific model ( the Standard Model ) discussed later .
In the late 1920s , the special theory of relativity and quantum mechanics were combined into a relativistic quantum theory of the electron .
A surprising result of this theory was the prediction of two energy states for each electron : One is associated with the electron , and the other is associated with another particle with the same mass of an electron but with a charge of .
This particle is called the antielectron or positron .
The positron was discovered experimentally in the 1930s .
Soon it was discovered that for every particle in nature , there is a corresponding antiparticle .
An antiparticle has the same mass and lifetime as its associated particle , and the opposite sign of electric charge .
These particles are produced in highenergy reactions .
Examples of high-energy particles include the antimuon , anti-up quark , and anti-down quark ( Note that antiparticles for quarks are designated with an over-bar . )
Many mesons and baryons contain antiparticles .
For example , the antiproton is .
Some neutral particles , such as the photon and the meson , are their own antiparticles .
Sample particles , antiparticles , and their properties are listed in .
and the positively charged pion is The same forces that hold ordinary matter together also hold antimatter together .
Under the right conditions , it is possible to create antiatoms such as antihydrogen , antioxygen , and even antiwater .
In antiatoms , positrons orbit a negatively charged nucleus of antiprotons and antineutrons .
compares atoms and antiatoms .
Antimatter can not exist for long in nature because particles and antiparticles annihilate each other to produce high-energy radiation .
A common example is electron-positron annihilation .
This process proceeds by the reaction The electron and positron vanish completely and two photons are produced in their place .
( It turns out that the production of a single photon would violate conservation of energy and momentum . )
This reaction can also proceed in the reverse direction : Two photons can annihilate each other to produce an electron and positron pair .
Or , a single photon can produce an electron-positron pair in the field of a nucleus , a process called pair production .
Reactions of this kind are measured routinely in modern particle detectors .
The existence of antiparticles in nature is not science fiction .
Watch this to learn more about matter and antimatter particles .
Conservation laws are critical to an understanding of particle physics .
Strong evidence exists that energy , momentum , and angular momentum are all conserved in all particle interactions .
The annihilation of an electron and positron at rest , for example , can not produce just one photon because this violates the conservation of linear momentum .
As discussed in , the special theory of relativity modifies definitions of momentum , energy , and other familiar quantities .
In particular , the relativistic momentum of a particle differs from its classical momentum by a factor that varies from 1 to depending on the speed of the particle .
In previous chapters , we encountered other conservation laws as well .
For example , charge is conserved in all electrostatic phenomena .
Charge lost in one place is gained in another because charge is carried by particles .
No known physical processes violate charge conservation .
In the next section , we describe three less-familiar conservation laws : baryon number , lepton number , and strangeness .
These are by no means the only conservation laws in particle physics .
No conservation law considered thus far prevents a neutron from decaying via a reaction such as This process conserves charge , energy , and momentum .
However , it does not occur because it violates the law of baryon number conservation .
This law requires that the total baryon number of a reaction is the same before and after the reaction occurs .
To determine the total baryon number , every elementary particle is assigned a baryon number B .
The baryon number has the value for baryons , –1 for antibaryons , and 0 for all other particles .
Returning to the above case ( the decay of the neutron into an electron-positron pair ) , the neutron has a value whereas the electron and the positron each has a value of 0 .
Thus , the decay does not occur because the total baryon number changes from 1 to 0 .
However , the proton-antiproton collision process does satisfy the law of conservation of baryon number because the baryon number is zero before and after the interaction .
The baryon number for several common particles is given in .
Based on the law of conservation of baryon number , which of the following reactions can occur ?
Determine the total baryon number for the reactants and products , and require that this value does not change in the reaction .
For reaction ( b ) , the net baryon number of the reactants is and the net baryon number of the proposed products is Since the net baryon numbers of the reactants and proposed products are not equal , this reaction can not occur .
Baryon number is conserved in the first reaction , but not in the second .
Baryon number conservation constrains what reactions can and can not occur in nature .
Check Your Understanding What is the baryon number of a hydrogen nucleus ?
Lepton number conservation states that the sum of lepton numbers before and after the interaction must be the same .
There are three different lepton numbers : the electron-lepton number and the taulepton number In any interaction , each of these quantities must be conserved separately .
For electrons and electron neutrinos , for their antiparticles , all other particles have Similarly , for muons and muon neutrinos , for their antiparticles , and for all other particles .
Finally , , or 0 , depending on whether we have a tau or tau neutrino , their antiparticles , or any other particle , respectively .
Lepton number conservation the muon-lepton number guarantees that the number of electrons and positrons in the universe stays relatively constant .
( Note : The total lepton number is , as far as we know , conserved in nature .
However , observations have shown variations of family lepton number ( for example , in a phenomenon called neutrino oscillations . )
To illustrate the lepton number conservation law , consider the following known two-step decay process : In the first decay , all of the lepton numbers for are 0 .
For the products of this decay , for and for Therefore , muon-lepton number is conserved .
Neither electrons nor tau are involved in this decay , so and for the initial particle and all decay products .
Thus , electron-lepton and tau-lepton numbers are also conserved .
In the second decay , has a muon-lepton number whereas the net muon-lepton number of the decay products is .
Thus , the muon-lepton number is conserved .
Electron-lepton number is also conserved , as for , whereas the net electron-lepton number of the decay products is .
Finally , since no taus or tauneutrons are involved in this decay , the tau-lepton number is also conserved .
Based on the law of conservation of lepton number , which of the following decays can occur ?
Determine the total lepton number for the reactants and products , and require that this value does not change in the reaction .
For decay ( a ) , the electron-lepton number of the neutron is 0 , and the net electron-lepton number of the decay products is .
Since the net electron-lepton numbers before and after the decay are the same , the decay is possible on the basis of the law of conservation of electron-lepton number .
Also , since there are no muons or taus involved in this decay , the muon-lepton and tauon-lepton numbers are conserved .
For decay ( b ) , the muon-lepton number of the is 0 , and the net muon-lepton number of the proposed decay products is .
Thus , on the basis of the law of conservation of muon-lepton number , this decay can not occur .
Lepton number is conserved in the first reaction , but not in the second .
Lepton number conservation constrains what reactions can and can not occur in nature .
Check Your Understanding What is the lepton number of an electron-positron pair ?
In the late 1940s and early 1950s , cosmic-ray experiments revealed the existence of particles that had never been observed on Earth .
These particles were produced in collisions of pions with protons or neutrons in the atmosphere .
Their production and decay were unusual .
They were produced in the strong nuclear interactions of pions and nucleons , and were therefore inferred to be hadrons ; however , their decay was mediated by the much more slowly acting weak nuclear interaction .
Their lifetimes were on the order of to whereas a typical lifetime for a particle that decays via the strong nuclear reaction is These particles were also unusual because they were always produced in pairs in the pion-nucleon collisions .
For these reasons , these newly discovered particles were described as strange .
This property is called strangeness and , as the name suggests , is associated with the presence of a strange quark .
The strangeness of a particle is equal to the number of strange quarks of the particle .
Strangeness conservation requires the total strangeness of a reaction or decay ( summing the strangeness of all the particles ) is the same before and after the interaction .
Strangeness conservation is not absolute : It is conserved in strong interactions and electromagnetic interactions but not in weak interactions .
The strangeness number for several common particles is given in .
( a ) Based on the conservation of strangeness , can the following reaction occur ?
( b ) The following decay is mediated by the weak nuclear force : Does the decay conserve strangeness ?
If not , can the decay occur ?
Determine the strangeness of the reactants and products and require that this value does not change in the reaction .
The net strangeness of the reactants is and the net strangeness of the products is Thus , the strong nuclear interaction between a pion and a proton is not forbidden by the law of conservation of strangeness .
Notice that baryon number is also conserved in the reaction .
The net strangeness before and after this decay is 1 and 0 , so the decay does not conserve strangeness .
However , the decay may still be possible , because the law of conservation of strangeness does not apply to weak decays .
Strangeness is conserved in the first reaction , but not in the second .
Strangeness conservation constrains what reactions can and can not occur in nature .
Check Your Understanding What is the strangeness number of a muon ?
In the 1960s , particle physicists began to realize that hadrons are not elementary particles but are made of particles called quarks .
( The name ‘ quark ’ was coined by the physicist Murray Gell-Mann , from a phrase in the James Joyce novel Finnegans Wake . )
Initially , it was believed there were only three types of quarks , called up ( u ) , down ( d ) , and strange ( s ) .
However , this number soon grew to six—interestingly , the same as the number of leptons—to include charmed ( c ) , bottom ( b ) , and top ( t ) .
All quarks are spin-half fermions have a fractional charge , and have baryon number Each quark has an antiquark with the same mass but opposite charge and baryon number .
The names and properties of the six quarks are listed in .
As mentioned earlier , quarks bind together in groups of two or three to form hadrons .
Baryons are formed from three quarks .
Sample baryons , including quark content and properties , are given in .
Interestingly , the delta plus baryon is formed from the same three quarks as the proton , but the total spin of the particle is 3/2 rather than 1/2 .
Similarly , the mass of with spin 3/2 is 1.3 times the mass of the proton , and the delta zero baryon with a spin 3/2 is 1.3 times the neutron mass .
Evidently , the energy associated with the spin ( or angular momentum ) of the particle contributes to its mass energy .
It is also interesting that no baryons are believed to exist with top quarks , because top quarks decay too quickly to bind to the other quarks in their production .
Mesons are formed by two quarks—a quark-antiquark pair .
Sample mesons , including quark content and properties , are given in .
Consider the formation of the pion .
Based on its quark content , the charge of the pion is Both quarks are spin-half , so the resultant spin is either 0 or 1 .
The spin of the meson is 0 .
The same quarkantiquark combination gives the rho meson with spin 1 .
This meson has a mass approximately 5.5 times that of the meson .
Show that the quark composition given in for is consistent with the known charge , spin , and strangeness of this baryon .
is composed of two strange quarks and an up quark ( s u s ) .
We can add together the properties of quarks to predict the resulting properties of the baryon .
The charge of the s quark is and the charge of the u quark is 2 e /3 .
Thus , the combination ( s u s ) has no net charge , in agreement with the known charge of .
Since three spin quarks can combine to produce a particle with spin of either 1/2 or 3/2 , the quark composition is consistent with the known spin of .
Finally , the net strangeness of the ( s u s ) combination is which also agrees with experiment .
The charge , spin , and strangeness of the particle can be determined from the properties of its constituent quarks .
The great diversity of baryons and mesons can be traced to the properties of just six quarks : up , down , charge , strange , top , and bottom .
Check Your Understanding What is the baryon number of a pion ?
Quarks are fermions that obey Pauli ’ s exclusion principle , so it might be surprising to learn that three quarks can bind together within a nucleus .
For example , how can two up quarks exist in the same small region of space within a proton ?
The solution is to invent a third new property to distinguish them .
This property is called color , and it plays the same role in the strong nuclear interaction as charge does in electromagnetic interactions .
For this reason , quark color is sometimes called “ strong charge. ” Quarks come in three colors : red , green , and blue .
( These are just labels—quarks are not actually colored . )
Each type of quark can possess any other colors .
For example , three strange quarks exist : a red strange quark , a green strange quark , and a blue strange quark .
Antiquarks have anticolor .
Quarks that bind together to form hadrons ( baryons and mesons ) must be color neutral , colorless , or “ white. ” Thus , a baryon must contain a red , blue , and green quark .
Likewise , a meson contains either a red-antired , blue-antiblue , or green-antigreen quark pair .
Thus , two quarks can be found in the same spin state in a hadron , without violating Pauli ’ s exclusion principle , because their colors are different .
The first strong evidence for the existence of quarks came from a series of experiments performed at the Stanford Linear Accelerator Center ( SLAC ) and at CERN around 1970 .
This experiment was designed to probe the structure of the proton , much like Rutherford studied structure inside the atom with his -particle scattering experiments .
Electrons were collided with protons with energy in excess of 20 GeV .
The SLAC experiments found that some electrons were deflected at very large angles , indicating small scattering centers within the proton .
The scattering distribution was consistent with electrons being scattered from sites with spin 1/2 , the spin of quarks .
The experiments at CERN used neutrinos instead of electrons .
This experiment also found evidence for the tiny scattering centers .
In both experiments , the results suggested that the charges of the scattering particles were either or , in agreement with the quark model .
Watch this to learn more about quarks .
The quark model has been extremely successful in organizing the complex world of subatomic particles .
Interestingly , however , no experiment has ever produced an isolated quark .
All quarks have fractional charge and should therefore be easily distinguishable from the known elementary particles , whose charges are all an integer multiple of e .
Why are isolated quarks not observed ?
In current models of particle interactions , the answer is expressed in terms of quark confinement .
Quark confinement refers to the confinement of quarks in groups of two or three in a small region of space .
The quarks are completely free to move about in this space , and send and receive gluons ( the carriers of the strong force ) .
However , if these quarks stray too far from one another , the strong force pulls them back it .
This action is likened to a bola , a weapon used for hunting .
The stones are tied to a central point by a string , so none of the rocks can move too far from the others .
The bola corresponds to a baryon , the stones correspond to quarks , and the string corresponds to the gluons that hold the system together .
The goal of experimental particle physics is to accurately measure elementary particles .
The primary method used to achieve this end is to produce these particles in high-energy collisions and then measure the products of using highly sensitive particle detectors .
These experiments are used to test and revise scientific models of particle interactions .
The purpose of this section is to describe particle accelerators and detectors .
Modern machines are based on earlier ones , so it is helpful to present a brief history of accelerators and detectors .
A particle accelerator is a machine designed to accelerate charged particles .
This acceleration is usually achieved with strong electric fields , magnetic fields , or both .
A simple example of a particle accelerator is the Van de Graaff accelerator ( see ) .
This type of accelerator collects charges on a hollow metal sphere using a moving belt .
When the electrostatic potential difference of the sphere is sufficiently large , the field is used to accelerate particles through an evacuated tube .
Energies produced by a Van de Graaff accelerator are not large enough to create new particles , but the machine was important for early exploration of the atomic nucleus .
Larger energies can be produced by a linear accelerator ( called a “ linac ” ) .
Charged particles produced at the beginning of the linac are accelerated by a continuous line of charged hollow tubes .
The voltage between a given pair of tubes is set to draw the charged particle in , and once the particle arrives , the voltage between the next pair of tubes is set to push the charged particle out .
In other words , voltages are applied in such a way that the tubes deliver a series of carefully synchronized electric kicks .
Modern linacs employ radio frequency ( RF ) cavities that set up oscillating electromagnetic fields , which propel the particle forward like a surfer on an ocean wave .
Linacs can accelerate electrons to over 100 MeV .
( Electrons with kinetic energies greater than 2 MeV are moving very close to the speed of light . )
In modern particle research , linear accelerators are often used in the first stage of acceleration .
the potential difference A linear accelerator designed to produce a beam of 800-MeV protons has 2000 accelerating tubes separated by gaps .
What average voltage must be applied between tubes to achieve the desired energy ?
( Hint : The energy given to the proton in each gap between tubes is where q is the proton ’ s charge and and V is the proton gains 1 eV in energy for each volt across the gap that it passes through .
The ac voltage applied to the tubes is timed so that it adds to the energy in each gap .
The effective voltage is the sum of the gap voltages and equals 800 MV to give each proton an energy of 800 MeV .
There are 2000 gaps and the sum of the voltages across them is 800 MV .
Therefore , the average voltage applied is 0.4 MV or 400 kV .
A voltage of this magnitude is not difficult to achieve in a vacuum .
Much larger gap voltages would be required for higher energy , such as those at the 50-GeV SLAC facility .
Synchrotrons are aided by the circular path of the gap .
Since ( voltage ) across the accelerated particles , which can orbit many times , effectively multiplying the number of accelerations by the number of orbits .
This makes it possible to reach energies greater than 1 TeV .
Check Your Understanding How much energy does an electron receive in accelerating through a 1-V potential difference ?
The next-generation accelerator after the linac is the cyclotron .
A cyclotron uses alternating electric fields and fixed magnets to accelerate particles in a circular spiral path .
A particle at the center of the cyclotron is first accelerated by an electric field in a gap between two D-shaped magnets ( Dees ) .
As the particle crosses over the D-shaped magnet , the particle is bent into a circular path by a Lorentz force .
( The Lorentz force was discussed in . )
Assuming no energy losses , the momentum of the particle is related to its radius of curvature by where p is the momentum in GeV/ c , B is in teslas , and r is the radius of the trajectory ( “ orbit ” ) in meters .
This expression is valid to classical and relativistic velocities .
The circular trajectory returns the particle to the electric field gap , the electric field is reversed , and the process continues .
As the particle is accelerated , the radius of curvature gets larger and larger—spirally outward—until the electrons leave the device .
Watch this to learn more about cyclotrons .
A synchrotron is a circular accelerator that uses alternating voltage and increasing magnetic field strength to accelerate particles to higher energies .
Charged particles are accelerated by RF cavities , and steered and focused by magnets .
RF cavities are synchronized to deliver “ kicks ” to the particles as they pass by , hence the name .
Steering high-energy particles requires strong magnetic fields , so superconducting magnets are often used to reduce heat losses .
As the charged particles move in a circle , they radiate energy : According to classical theory , any charged particle that accelerates ( and circular motion is an accelerated motion ) also radiates .
In a synchrotron , such radiation is called synchrotron radiation .
This radiation is useful for many other purposes , such as medical and materials research .
An electron is accelerated using a cyclotron .
If the magnetic field is 1.5 T and the radius of the “ Dees ” is 1.2 m , what is the kinetic energy of the outgoing particle ?
If the radius of orbit of the electron exceeds the radius of the “ Dees , ” the electron exits the device .
So , the radius of the “ Dees ” places an upper limit on the radius and , therefore , the momentum and energy of the accelerated particle .
The exit momentum of the particle is determined using the radius of orbit and strength of the magnetic field .
The exit energy of the particle can be determined the particle momentum .
Assuming no energy losses , the momentum of the particle in the cyclotron is The momentum energy is much larger than the rest mass energy of the electron , so relativistic expression for the energy of the electron must be used ( see ) .
The total energy of the electron is The total energy of the electron is much larger than its rest mass energy .
In other words , the total energy of the electron is almost all in the form of kinetic energy .
Cyclotrons can be used to conduct nuclear physics experiments or in particle therapy to treat cancer .
Check Your Understanding A charged particle of a certain momentum travels in an arc through a uniform magnetic field .
What happens if the magnetic field is doubled ?
New particles can be created by colliding particles at high energies .
According to Einstein ’ s mass-energy relation , the energies of the colliding particles are converted into mass energy of the created particle .
The most efficient way to do this is with particle-colliding beam machines .
A colliding beam machine creates two counter-rotating beams in a circular accelerator , stores the beams at constant energy , and then at the desired moment , focuses the beams on one another at the center of a sensitive detector .
The prototypical colliding beam machine is the Cornell Electron Storage Ring , located in Ithaca , New York .
Electrons and positrons are created at the beginning of the linear accelerator and are accelerated up to 150 MeV .
The particles are then injected into the inner synchrotron ring , where they are accelerated by RF cavities to 4.5 to 6 GeV .
When the beams are up to speed , they are transferred and “ stored ” in an outer storage ring at the same energy .
The two counter-rotating beams travel through the same evacuated pipe , but are kept apart until collisions are desired .
The electrons and positrons circle the machine in bunches 390,000 times every second .
When an electron and positron collide , they annihilate each other to produce a photon , which exists for too short a time to be detected .
The photon produces either a lepton pair ( e.g. , an electron and position , muon or antimuon , or tau and antitau ) or a quark pair .
If quarks are produced , mesons form , such as and These mesons are created nearly at rest since the initial total momentum of the electron-positron system is zero .
Note , mesons can not be created at just any colliding energy but only at “ resonant ” energies that correspond to the unique masses of the mesons .
The mesons created in this way are highly unstable and decay quickly into lighter particles , such as electrons , protons , and photons .
The collision “ fragments ” provide valuable information about particle interactions .
As the field of particle physics advances , colliding beam machines are becoming more powerful .
The Large Hadron Collider ( LHC ) , currently the largest accelerator in the world , collides protons at beam energies exceeding 6 TeV .
The center-ofmass energy ( W ) refers to the total energy available to create new particles in a colliding machine , or the total energy of incoming particles in the center-of-mass frame .
( The concept of a center-of-mass frame of reference is discussed in . )
Therefore , the LHC is able to produce one or more particles with a total mass exceeding 12 TeV .
The center-of-mass energy is given by : where and are the total energies of the incoming particles ( 1 and 2 ) , and are the magnitudes of their momenta , and and are their rest masses . )
is created in a symmetric electron-positron collider .
What beam energy The mass of the upsilon meson ( is required ?
has stated that the rest mass energy of this meson is approximately 10.58 GeV .
The above expression for the center-of-mass energy can Also , the rest masses of the colliding be simplified because a symmetric collider implies electrons and positrons are identical and much smaller than the mass of the energy particle created .
This meson is highly unstable and quickly decays to lighter and more stable particles .
The existence of the upsilon particle appears as a dramatic increase of such events at 5.29 GeV .
Check Your Understanding Why is a symmetric collider “ symmetric ? ” Higher beam energies require larger accelerators , so modern colliding beam machines are very large .
The LHC , for example , is 17 miles in circumference .
( In the 1940s , Enrico Fermi envisioned an accelerator that encircled all of Earth ! )
An important scientific challenge of the twenty-first century is to reduce the size of particle accelerators .
The purpose of a particle detector is to accurately measure the outcome of collisions created by a particle accelerator .
The detectors are multipurpose .
In other words , the detector is divided into many subdetectors , each designed to measure a different aspect of the collision event .
For example , one detector might be designed to measure photons and another might be designed to measure muons .
To illustrate how subdetectors contribute to an understanding of an entire collision event , we describe the subdetectors of the Compact Muon Solenoid ( CMS ) , which was used to discover the Higgs Boson at the LHC .
The beam pipe of the detector is out of ( and into ) the page at the left .
Particles produced by pp collisions ( the “ collision fragments ” ) stream out of the detector in all directions .
These particles encounter multiple layers of subdetectors .
A subdetector is a particle detector within a larger system of detectors designed to measure certain types of particles .
There are several main types of subdetectors .
Tracking devices determine the path and therefore momentum of a particle ; calorimeters measure a particle ’ s energy ; and particle-identification detectors determine a particle ’ s identity ( mass ) .
The first set of subdetectors that particles encounter is the silicon tracking system .
This system is designed to measure the momentum of charged particles ( such as electrons and protons ) .
The detector is bathed in a uniform magnetic field , so the charged particles are bent in a circular path by a Lorentz force ( as for the cyclotron ) .
If the momentum of the particle is large , the radius of the trajectory is large , and the path is almost straight .
But if the momentum is small , the radius of the trajectory is small , and the path is tightly curved .
As the particles pass through the detector , they interact with silicon microstrip detectors at multiple points .
These detectors produce small electrical signals as the charged particles pass near the detector elements .
The signals are then amplified and recorded .
A series of electrical “ hits ” is used to determine the trajectory of the particle in the tracking system .
A computer-generated “ best fit ” to this trajectory gives the track radius and therefore the particle momentum .
At the LHC , a large number of tracks are recorded for the same collision event .
Fits to the tracks are shown by the blue and green lines in .
Beyond the tracking layers is the electromagnetic calorimeter .
This detector is made of clear , lead-based crystals .
When electrons interact with the crystals , they radiate high-energy photons .
The photons interact with the crystal to produce electron-positron pairs .
Then , these particles radiate more photons .
The process repeats , producing a particle shower ( the crystal “ glows ” ) .
A crude model of this process is as follows .
An electron with energy strikes the crystal and loses half of its energy in the form of a photon .
The photon produces an electron-positron pair , and each particle proceeds away with half the energy of the photon .
Meanwhile , the original electron radiates again .
So , we are left with four particles : two electrons , one positron , and one photon , each with an energy The number of particles in the shower increases geometrically .
After n radiation events , there are particles .
Hence , the total energy per particle after n radiation events is where is the incident energy and E ( t ) is the amount of energy per particle after n events .
An incoming photon triggers a similar chain of events .
If the energy per particle drops below a particular threshold value , other types of radiative processes become important and the particle shower ceases .
Eventually , the total energy of the incoming particle is absorbed and converted into an electrical signal .
Beyond the crystal calorimeter is the hadron calorimeter .
As the name suggests , this subdetector measures hadrons such as protons and pions .
The hadron calorimeter consists of layers of brass and steel separated by plastic scintillators .
Its purpose is to absorb the particle energy and convert it into an electronic signal .
Beyond this detector is a large magnetic coil used to produce a uniform field for tracking .
The last subdetector is the muon detector , which consists of slabs of iron that only muons ( and neutrinos ) can penetrate .
Between the iron slabs are multiple types of muon-tracking elements that accurately measure the momentum of the muon .
The muon detectors are important because the Higgs boson ( discussed soon ) can be detected through its decays to four muons—hence the name of the detector .
Once data is collected from each of the particle subdetectors , the entire collision event can be assessed .
The energy of the i th particle is written where is the absolute magnitude of the momentum of the i th particle , and is its rest mass .
The total energy of all particles is therefore If all particles are detected , the total energy should be equal to the center-of-mass energy of the colliding beam machine ( W ) .
Information about these decay chains are critical to the evaluation of models of particle interactions .
The chief intellectual activity of any scientist is the development and revision of scientific models .
A particle physicist seeks to develop models of particle interactions .
This work builds directly on work done on gravity and electromagnetism in the seventeenth , eighteenth , and nineteenth centuries .
The ultimate goal of physics is a unified “ theory of everything ” that describes all particle interactions in terms of a single elegant equation and a picture .
The equation itself might be complex , but many scientists suspect the idea behind the equation will make us exclaim : “ How could we have missed it ?
It was so obvious ! ” In this section , we introduce the Standard Model , which is the best current model of particle interactions .
We describe the Standard Model in detail in terms of electromagnetic , weak nuclear , and strong forces .
At the end of this section , we review unification theories in particle physics .
The Standard Model of particle interactions contains two ideas : electroweak theory and quantum chromodynamics ( QCD ) ( the force acting between color charges ) .
Electroweak theory unifies the theory of quantum electrodynamics ( QED ) , the modern equivalent of classical electromagnetism , and the theory of weak nuclear interactions .
The Standard Model combines the theory of relativity and quantum mechanics .
In the Standard Model , particle interactions occur through the exchange of bosons , the “ force carriers. ” For example , the electrostatic force is communicated between two positively charged particles by sending and receiving massless photons .
This can occur at a theoretical infinite range .
The result of these interactions is Coulomb repulsion ( or attraction ) .
Similarly , quarks bind together through the exchange of massless gluons .
Leptons scatter off other leptons ( or decay into lighter particles ) through the exchange of massive W and Z bosons .
A summary of forces as described by the Standard Model is given in .
The gravitational force , mediated by the exchange of massless gravitations , is added in this table for completeness but is not part of the Standard Model .
The Standard Model can be expressed in terms of equations and diagrams .
The equations are complex and are usually covered in a more advanced course in modern physics .
However , the essence of the Standard Model can be captured using Feynman diagrams .
A Feynman diagram , invented by American physicist Richard Feynman ( 1918–1988 ) , is a spacetime diagram that describes how particles move and interact .
Different symbols are used for different particles .
Particle interactions in one dimension are shown as a time-position graph ( not a position-time graph ) .
As an example , consider the scattering of an electron and electron-neutrino .
The electron moves toward positive values of x ( to the right ) and collides with an electron neutrino moving to the left .
The electron exchanges a Z boson ( charge zero ) .
The electron scatters to the left and the neutrino scatters to the right .
This exchange is not instantaneous .
The Z boson travels from one particle to the other over a short period of time .
The interaction of the electron and neutrino is said to occur via the weak nuclear force .
This force can not be explained by classical electromagnetism because the charge of the neutrino is zero .
The weak nuclear force is discussed again later in this section .
According to QED , the electromagnetic force is transmitted between charged particles through the exchange of photons .
The theory is based on three basic processes : An electron travels from one place to the next , emits or absorbs a photon , and travels from one place to another again .
When two electrons interact , one electron emits the photon and the other receives it .
Photons transfer energy and momentum from one electron to the other .
The net result in this case is a repulsive force .
The photons exchanged are virtual .
A virtual particle is a particle that exists for too short a time to be observable .
Virtual photons may violate the law of conservation of energy .
To see this , consider that if the photon transit time is extremely small , then Heisenberg ’ s uncertainty principle states that the uncertainly in the photon ’ s energy , may be very large .
The electromagnetic force is therefore a long-range force .
The weak nuclear force is responsible for radioactive decay .
The range of the weak nuclear force is very short ( only about m ) and like the other forces in the Standard Model , the weak force can be described in terms of particle exchange .
( There is no simple function like the Coulomb force to describe these interactions . )
The particle exchanged is one of three bosons : and .
The Standard Model predicts the existence of these spin-1 particles and also predicts their specific masses .
In combination with previous experiments , the mass of the charged W bosons was predicted to be and that of the was predicted to be .
A CERN experiment discovered particles in the 1980s with precisely these masses—an impressive victory for the model .
The weak nuclear force is most frequently associated with scattering and decays of unstable particles to light particles .
For example , neutrons decay to protons through the weak nuclear force .
This reaction is written where n is the neutron , p is a proton , is an electron , and is a nearly massless electron neutrino .
This process , called beta decay , is important in many physical processes .
A Feynman diagram of beta decay is given in ( a ) .
The neutron emits a and becomes a proton , then the produces an electron and an antineutrino .
This process is similar to the scattering event In this process , the proton emits a and is converted into a neutron ( b ) .
The then combines with the electron , forming a neutrino .
Other electroweak interactions are considered in the exercises .
The range of the weak nuclear force can be estimated with an argument similar to the one before .
Details of these interactions are described by QCD .
According to this theory , quarks bind together by sending and receiving gluons .
Just as quarks carry electric charge [ either or that determines the strength of electromagnetic interactions between the quarks , quarks also carry “ color charge ” ( either red , blue , or green ) that determines the strength of strong nuclear interactions .
As discussed before , quarks bind together in groups in color neutral ( or “ white ” ) combinations , such as red-blue-green and red-antired .
Interestingly , the gluons themselves carry color charge .
Eight known gluons exist : six that carry a color and anticolor , and two that are color neutral ( ( a ) ) .
To illustrate the interaction between quarks through the exchange of charged gluons , consider the Feynman diagram in part ( b ) .
As time increases , a red down quark moves right and a green strange quark moves left .
( These appear at the lower edge of the graph . )
The up quark exchanges a red-antigreen gluon with the strange quark .
( Anticolors are shown as secondary colors .
For example , antired is represented by cyan because cyan mixes with red to form white light . )
According to QCD , all interactions in this process—identified with the vertices—must be color neutral .
Therefore , the down quark transforms from red to green , and the strange quark transforms from green to red .
As suggested by this example , the interaction between quarks in an atomic nucleus can be very complicated .
shows the interaction between a proton and neutron .
Notice that the proton converts into a neutron and the neutron converts into a proton during the interaction .
The presence of quark-antiquark pairs in the exchange suggest that bonding between nucleons can be modeled as an exchange of pions .
In practice , QCD predictions are difficult to produce .
This difficulty arises from the inherent strength of the force and the inability to neglect terms in the equations .
Thus , QCD calculations are often performed with the aid of supercomputers .
The existence of gluons is supported by electron-nucleon scattering experiments .
The estimated quark momenta implied by these scattering events are much smaller than we would expect without gluons because the gluons carry away some of the momentum of each collision .
Physicists have long known that the strength of an interaction between particles depends on the distance of the interaction .
For example , two positively charged particles experience a larger repulsive force at a short distance then at a long distance .
In scattering experiments , the strength of an interaction depends on the energy of the interacting particle , since larger energy implies both closer and stronger interactions .
Particle physicists now suspect that the strength of all particle interactions ( the four forces ) merge at high energies , and the details of particle interactions at these energies can be described in terms of a single force .
A unified theory describes what these interactions are like and explains why this description breaks down at low-energy scales .
A grand unified theory is a theory that attempts to describe strong and electroweak interaction in terms of just one force .
A theory of everything ( TOE ) takes the unification concept one step further .
A TOE combines all four fundamental forces ( including gravity ) into one theory .
We have been discussing elementary particles , which are some of the smallest things we can study .
Now we are going to examine what we know about the universe , which is the biggest thing we can study .
The link between these two topics is high energy : The study of particle interactions requires very high energies , and the highest energies we know about existed during the early evolution of the universe .
Some physicists think that the unified force theories we described in the preceding section may actually have governed the behavior of the universe in its earliest moments .
In 1929 , Edwin Hubble published one of the most important discoveries in modern astronomy .
Hubble discovered that ( 1 ) galaxies appear to move away from Earth and ( 2 ) the velocity of recession ( v ) is proportional to the distance ( d ) of the galaxy from Earth .
Both v and d can be determined using stellar light spectra .
A best fit to the sample illustrative data is given in .
( Hubble ’ s original plot had a considerable scatter but a general trend was still evident . )
The trend in the data suggests the simple proportional relationship : where is known as Hubble ’ s constant .
( Note : 1 Mpc is one megaparsec or one million parsecs , where one parsec is 3.26 light-years . )
This relationship , called Hubble ’ s law , states that distant stars and galaxies recede away from us at a speed of 70 km/s for every one megaparsec of distance from us .
Hubble ’ s constant corresponds to the slope of the line in .
Hubble ’ s constant is a bit of a misnomer , because it varies with time .
The value given here is only its value today .
Watch this to learn more about the history of Hubble ’ s constant .
Hubble ’ s law describes an average behavior of all but the closest galaxies .
For example , a galaxy 100 Mpc away ( as determined by its size and brightness ) typically moves away from us at a speed of This speed may vary due to interactions with neighboring galaxies .
Scientists who study the origin , evolution , and ultimate fate of the universe ( cosmology ) believe that the universe began in an explosion , called the Big Bang , approximately 13.7 billion years ago .
This explosion was not an explosion of particles through space , like fireworks , but a rapid expansion of space itself .
The distances and velocities of the outward-going stars and galaxies permit us to estimate when all matter in the universe was once together—at the beginning of time .
Scientists often explain the Big Bang expansion using an inflated-balloon model .
Dots marked on the surface of the balloon represent galaxies , and the balloon skin represents four-dimensional space-time .
As the balloon is inflated , every dot “ sees ” the other dots moving away .
This model yields two insights .
First , the expansion is observed by all observers in the universe , no matter where they are located .
The “ center of expansion ” does not exist , so Earth does not reside at the “ privileged ” center of the expansion ( see ) .
Second , as mentioned already , the Big Bang expansion is due to the expansion of space , not the increased separation of galaxies in ordinary ( static ) three-dimensional space .
This cosmological expansion affects all things : dust , stars , planets , and even light .
Thus , the wavelength of light emitted by distant galaxies is “ stretched ” out .
This makes the light appear “ redder ” ( lower energy ) to the observer—a phenomenon called cosmological redshift .
Cosmological redshift is measurable only for galaxies farther away than 50 million light-years .
A galaxy is observed to have a redshift : This value indicates a galaxy moving close to the speed of light .
Using the relativistic redshift formula ( given in ) , determine ( a ) How fast is the galaxy receding with respect to Earth ?
( b ) How far away is the galaxy ?
We need to use the relativistic Doppler formula to determine speed from redshift and then use Hubble ’ s law to find the distance from the speed .
According to the relativistic redshift formula : where Substituting the value for z and solving for , we get This value implies that the speed of the galaxy is .
Using Hubble ’ s law , we can find the distance to the galaxy if we know its recession velocity : Distant galaxies appear to move very rapidly away from Earth .
The redshift of starlight from these galaxies can be used to determine the precise speed of recession , over of the speed of light in this case .
This motion is not due to the motion of galaxy through space but by the expansion of space itself .
Check Your Understanding The light of a galaxy that moves away from us is “ redshifted. ” What occurs to the light of a galaxy that moves toward us ?
View this to learn more about expansion .
the cosmological At large scales , the universe is believed to be both isotropic and homogeneous .
The universe is believed to isotropic because it appears to be the same in all directions , and homogeneous because it appears to be the same in all places .
A universe that is isotropic and homogeneous is said to be smooth .
The assumption of a smooth universe is supported by the Automated Plate Measurement Galaxy Survey conducted in the 1980s and 1900s .
However , even before these data were collected , the assumption of a smooth universe was used by theorists to simplify models of the expansion of the universe .
This assumption of a smooth universe is sometimes called the cosmological principle .
The fate of this expanding and smooth universe is an open question .
In spherical coordinates ( , this length element can be written where k is a constant with units of inverse area that describes the curvature of space .
If we treat the universe as a gas of galaxies of density and pressure p , and assume ( a flat universe ) , than the scale factor a is given by where G is the universal gravitational constant .
( For ordinary matter , we expect the quantity to be greater than zero . )
If the scale factor is positive , the value of the scale factor “ decelerates ” , and the expansion of the universe slows down over time .
If the numerator is less than zero ( somehow , the pressure of the universe is negative ) , the value of the scale factor “ accelerates , ” and the expansion of the universe speeds up over time .
According to recent cosmological data , the universe appears to be expanding .
Many scientists explain the current state of the universe in terms of a very rapid expansion in the early universe .
This expansion is called inflation .
In the previous section , we discussed the structure and dynamics of universe .
In particular , the universe appears to be expanding and even accelerating .
But what was the universe like at the beginning of time ?
In this section , we discuss what evidence scientists have been able to gather about the early universe and its evolution to present time .
Before the short period of cosmic inflation , cosmologists believe that all matter in the universe was squeezed into a space much smaller than an atom .
Cosmologists further believe that the universe was extremely dense and hot , and interactions between particles were governed by a single force .
In other words , the four fundamental forces ( strong nuclear , electromagnetic , weak nuclear , and gravitational ) merge into one at these energies .
How and why this “ unity ” breaks down at lower energies is an important unsolved problem in physics .
Scientific models of the early universe are highly speculative .
shows a sketch of one possible timeline of events .
Big Bang The current laws of physics break down .
At the end of the initial Big Bang event , the temperature of the universe is approximately Inflationary phase other forces .
The universe cools to approximately The universe expands exponentially , and gravity separates from the Age of leptons As the universe continues to expand , the strong nuclear force separates from the electromagnetic and weak nuclear forces ( or electroweak force ) .
Soon after , the weak nuclear force separates from the electromagnetic force .
The universe is a hot soup of quarks , leptons , photons , and other particles .
The universe consists of leptons and hadrons ( such as protons , neutrons , and mesons ) in thermal equilibrium .
The numbers of protons and neutrons begin to dominate over their anti-particles , so and neutron-antineutron annihilations decline .
Deuterons ( proton-neutron pairs ) begin proton-antiproton to form .
Age of nucleosynthesis ( to 1000 years ) : As the universe continues to expand , deuterons react with protons and neutrons to form larger nuclei ; these larger nuclei react with protons and neutrons to form still larger nuclei .
At the end of this period , about 1/4 of the mass of the universe is helium .
( This explains the current amount of helium in the universe . )
Photons lack the energy to continue electron-positron production , so electrons and positrons annihilate each other to photons only .
Age of ions ( to 3000 years ) : The universe is hot enough to ionize any atoms formed .
The universe consists of electrons , positrons , protons , light nuclei , and photons .
Age of atoms ( to 300,000 years ) : The universe cools below and atoms form .
Photons do not interact strongly with neutral atoms , so they “ decouple ” ( separate ) from atoms .
These photons constitute the cosmic microwave background radiation to be discussed later .
Age of stars and galaxies ( years to present ) : The atoms and particles are pulled together by gravity and form large lumps .
The atoms and particles in stars undergo nuclear fusion reaction .
Watch this to learn more about Big Bang cosmology .
To describe the conditions of the early universe quantitatively , recall the relationship between the average thermal energy of particle ( E ) in a system of interacting particles and equilibrium temperature ( T ) of that system : where is Boltzmann ’ s constant .
In the hot conditions of the early universe , particle energies were unimaginably large .
The average thermal energy of a particle in a system of interacting particles depends on the equilibrium temperature of that system .
We are given this approximate temperature in the above timeline .
Cosmologists think the temperature of the universe just after the Big Bang was approximately Therefore , the average thermal energy of a particle would have been This energy is many orders of magnitude larger than particle energies produced by human-made particle accelerators .
Currently , these accelerators operate at energies less than Check Your Understanding Compare the abundance of helium by mass 10,000 years after the Big Bang and now .
Nucleons form at energies approximately equal to the rest mass of a proton , or 1000 MeV .
The temperature corresponding to this energy is therefore Temperatures of this value or higher existed within the first second of the early universe .
A similar analysis can be done for atoms .
Atoms form at an energy equal to the ionization energy of ground-state hydrogen ( 13 eV ) .
The effective temperature for atom formation is therefore This occurs well after the four fundamental forces have separated , including forces necessary to bind the protons and neutrons in the nucleus ( strong nuclear force ) , and bind electrons to the nucleus ( electromagnetic force ) .
The relative abundances of the light elements hydrogen , helium , lithium , and beryllium in the universe provide key evidence for the Big Bang .
The data suggest that much of the helium in the universe is primordial .
For instance , it turns out that that 25 % of the matter in the universe is helium , which is too high an abundance and can not be explained based on the production of helium in stars .
How much of the elements in the universe were created in the Big Bang ?
If you run the clock backward , the universe becomes more and more compressed , and hotter and hotter .
Eventually , temperatures are reached that permit nucleosynthesis , the period of formation of nuclei , similar to what occurs at the core of the Sun .
Big Bang nucleosynthesis is believed to have occurred within a few hundred seconds of the Big Bang .
How did Big Bang nucleosynthesis occur ?
At first , protons and neutrons combined to form deuterons , .
The deuteron captured a neutron to form triton , —the nucleus of the radioactive hydrogen called tritium .
Deuterons also captured protons to make helium .
When captures a proton or captures a neutron , helium results .
At this stage in the Big Bang , the ratio of protons to neutrons was about 7:1 .
Thus , the process of conversion to used up almost all neutrons .
The process lasted about 3 minutes and almost of all the matter turned into , along with small percentages of , , and .
Tiny amounts of and were also formed .
The expansion during this time cooled the universe enough that the nuclear reactions stopped .
The abundances of the light nuclei , , and created after the Big Bang are very dependent on the matter density .
The predicted abundances of the elements in the universe provide a stringent test of the Big Bang and the Big Bang nucleosynthesis .
Recent experimental estimates of the matter density from the Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy Probe ( WMAP ) agree with model predictions .
This agreement provides convincing evidence of the Big Bang model .
According to cosmological models , the Big Bang event should have left behind thermal radiation called the cosmic microwave background radiation ( CMBR ) .
The intensity of this radiation should follow the blackbody radiation curve .
Wien ’ s law states that the wavelength of the radiation at peak intensity is where T is temperature in kelvins .
Scientists expected the expansion of the universe to “ stretch the light , ” and the temperature to be very low , so cosmic background radiation should be long-wavelength and low energy .
In the 1960s , Arno Penzias and Robert Wilson of Bell Laboratories noticed that no matter what they did , they could not get rid of a faint background noise in their satellite communication system .
The noise was due to radiation with wavelengths in the centimeter range ( the microwave region ) .
Later , this noise was associated with the cosmic background radiation .
An intensity map of the cosmic background radiation appears in .
The thermal spectrum is modeled well by a blackbody curve that corresponds to a temperature .
The formation of atoms in the early universe makes these atoms less likely to interact with light .
Therefore , photons that belong to the cosmic background radiation must have separated from matter at a temperature T associated with 1 eV ( the approximate ionization energy of an atom ) .
The temperature of the universe at this point was According to cosmological models , the time when photons last scattered o charged particles was approximately 380,000 years after the Big Bang .
Before that time , matter in the universe was in the plasma form and the photons were “ thermalized. ” We know from direct observation that antimatter is rare .
Earth and the solar system are nearly pure matter , and most of the universe also seems dominated by matter .
This is proven by the lack of annihilation radiation coming to us from space , particularly the relative absence of 0.511-MeV rays created by the mutual annihilation of electrons and positrons .
( Antimatter in nature is created in particle collisions and in decays , but only in small amounts that quickly annihilate , leaving almost pure matter surviving . )
Despite the observed dominance of matter over antimatter in the universe , the Standard Model of particle interactions and experimental measurement suggests only small differences in the ways that matter and antimatter interact .
For example , neutral kaon decays produce only slightly more matter than antimatter .
Yet , if through such decay , slightly more matter than antimatter was produced in the early universe , the rest could annihilate pair by pair , leaving mostly ordinary matter to form the stars and galaxies .
In this way , the vast number of stars we observe may be only a tiny remnant of the original matter created in the Big Bang .
In the last two decades , new and more powerful techniques have revealed that the universe is filled with dark matter .
This type of matter is interesting and important because , currently , scientists do not know what it is !
However , we can infer its existence by the deflection of distant starlight .
For example , if light from a distant galaxy is bent by the gravitational field of a clump of dark matter between us and the galaxy , it is possible that two images of the same galaxy can be produced .
The bending of light by the gravitational field of matter is called gravitational lensing .
In some cases , the starlight travels to an observer by multiple paths around the galaxy , producing a ring .
Based on current research , scientist know only that dark matter is cold , slow moving , and interacts weakly with ordinary matter .
Dark matter candidates include neutralinos ( partners of Z bosons , photons , and Higgs bosons in “ supersymmetry theory ” ) and particles that circulate in tiny rings set up by extra spatial dimensions .
Increasingly precise astronomical measurements of the expanding universe also reveal the presence of a new form of energy called dark energy .
This energy is thought to explain larger-than-expected values for the observed galactic redshifts for distant galaxies .
These redshifts suggest that the universe is not only expanding , but expanding at an increasing rate .
Virtually nothing is known about the nature and properties of dark energy .
Together , dark energy and dark matter represent two of the most interesting and unsolved puzzles of modern physics .
Scientists attribute of the energy of the universe to dark energy , to dark matter , and just to the mass-energy of ordinary particles .
