From boiling thermal hot springs to deep beneath the Antarctic ice , microorganisms can be found almost everywhere on earth in great quantities .
Microorganisms ( or microbes , as they are also called ) are small organisms .
Most are so small that they can not be seen without a microscope .
Most microorganisms are harmless to humans and , in fact , many are helpful .
They play fundamental roles in ecosystems everywhere on earth , forming the backbone of many food webs .
People use them to make biofuels , medicines , and even foods .
Without microbes , there would be no bread , cheese , or beer .
Our bodies are filled with microbes , and our skin alone is home to trillions of them .
Some of them we can ’ t live without ; others cause diseases that can make us sick or even kill us .
Although much more is known today about microbial life than ever before , the vast majority of this invisible world remains unexplored .
Microbiologists continue to identify new ways that microbes benefit and threaten humans .
Schoolchildren learn about bacteria , viruses , and other microorganisms , and many even view specimens under a microscope .
But a few hundred years ago , before the invention of the microscope , the existence of many types of microbes was impossible to prove .
By definition , microorganisms , or microbes , are very small organisms ; many types of microbes are too small to see without a microscope , although some parasites and fungi are visible to the naked eye .
Humans have been living with—and using—microorganisms for much longer than they have been able to see them .
Historical evidence suggests that humans have had some notion of microbial life since prehistoric times and have used that knowledge to develop foods as well as prevent and treat disease .
In this section , we will explore some of the historical applications of microbiology as well as the early beginnings of microbiology as a science .
People across the world have enjoyed fermented foods and beverages like beer , wine , bread , yogurt , cheese , and pickled vegetables for all of recorded history .
Discoveries from several archeological sites suggest that even prehistoric people took advantage of fermentation to preserve and enhance the taste of food .
Archaeologists studying pottery jars from a Neolithic village in China found that people were making a fermented beverage from rice , honey , and fruit as early as 7000 BC .
Production of these foods and beverages requires microbial fermentation , a process that uses bacteria , mold , or yeast to convert sugars ( carbohydrates ) to alcohol , gases , and organic acids .
While it is likely that people first learned about fermentation by accident—perhaps by drinking old milk that had curdled or old grape juice that had fermented—they later learned to harness the power of fermentation to make products like bread , cheese , and wine .
Prehistoric humans had a very limited understanding of the causes of disease , and various cultures developed different beliefs and explanations .
While many believed that illness was punishment for angering the gods or was simply the result of fate , archaeological evidence suggests that prehistoric people attempted to treat illnesses and infections .
One example of this is Ötzi the Iceman , a 5300-year-old mummy found frozen in the ice of the Ötzal Alps on the AustrianItalian border in 1991 .
Because Ötzi was so well preserved by the ice , researchers discovered that he was infected with the eggs of the parasite Trichuris trichiura , which may have caused him to have abdominal pain and anemia .
Researchers also found evidence of Borrelia burgdorferi , a bacterium that causes Lyme disease .
Some researchers think Ötzi may have been trying to treat his infections with the woody fruit of the Piptoporus betulinus fungus , which was discovered tied to his belongings .
This fungus has both laxative and antibiotic properties .
Ötzi was also covered in tattoos that were made by cutting incisions into his skin , filling them with herbs , and then burning the herbs .
There is speculation that this may have been another attempt to treat his health ailments .
Several ancient civilizations appear to have had some understanding that disease could be transmitted by things they could not see .
This is especially evident in historical attempts to contain the spread of disease .
For example , the Bible refers to the practice of quarantining people with leprosy and other diseases , suggesting that people understood that diseases could be communicable .
Ironically , while leprosy is communicable , it is also a disease that progresses slowly .
This means that people were likely quarantined after they had already spread the disease to others .
The ancient Greeks attributed disease to bad air , mal ’ aria , which they called “ miasmatic odors. ” They developed hygiene practices that built on this idea .
The Romans also believed in the miasma hypothesis and created a complex sanitation infrastructure to deal with sewage .
In Rome , they built aqueducts , which brought fresh water into the city , and a giant sewer , the Cloaca Maxima , which carried waste away and into the river Tiber .
Some researchers believe that this infrastructure helped protect the Romans from epidemics of waterborne illnesses .
Even before the invention of the microscope , some doctors , philosophers , and scientists made great strides in understanding the invisible forces—what we now know as microbes—that can cause infection , disease , and death .
The Greek physician Hippocrates ( 460–370 BC ) is considered the “ father of Western medicine ” .
Unlike many of his ancestors and contemporaries , he dismissed the idea that disease was caused by supernatural forces .
Instead , he posited that diseases had natural causes from within patients or their environments .
Hippocrates and his heirs are believed to have written the Hippocratic Corpus , a collection of texts that make up some of the oldest surviving medical books .
Hippocrates is also often credited as the author of the Hippocratic Oath , taken by new physicians to pledge their dedication to diagnosing and treating patients without causing harm .
While Hippocrates is considered the father of Western medicine , the Greek philosopher and historian Thucydides ( 460–395 BC ) is considered the father of scientific history because he advocated for evidence-based analysis of cause-and-effect reasoning .
Among his most important contributions are his observations regarding the Athenian plague that killed one-third of the population of Athens between 430 and 410 BC .
Having survived the epidemic himself , Thucydides made the important observation that survivors did not get re-infected with the disease , even when taking care of actively sick people .
This observation shows an early understanding of the concept of immunity .
Marcus Terentius Varro ( 116–27 BC ) was a prolific Roman writer who was one of the first people to propose the concept that things we can not see ( what we now call microorganisms ) can cause disease .
In Res Rusticae ( On Farming ) , published in 36 BC , he said that “ precautions must also be taken in neighborhood swamps .
While it is unclear who exactly invented the microscope , a Dutch cloth merchant named Antonie van Leeuwenhoek ( 1632–1723 ) was the first to develop a lens powerful enough to view microbes .
In 1675 , using a simple but powerful microscope , Leeuwenhoek was able to observe single-celled organisms , which he described as “ animalcules ” or “ wee little beasties , ” swimming in a drop of rain water .
From his drawings of these little organisms , we now know he was looking at bacteria and protists .
( We will explore Leeuwenhoek ’ s contributions to microscopy further in . )
Nearly 200 years after van Leeuwenhoek got his first glimpse of microbes , the “ Golden Age of Microbiology ” spawned a host of new discoveries between 1857 and 1914 .
Two famous microbiologists , Louis Pasteur and Robert Koch , were especially active in advancing our understanding of the unseen world of microbes .
Pasteur , a French chemist , showed that individual microbial strains had unique properties and demonstrated that fermentation is caused by microorganisms .
He also invented pasteurization , a process used to kill microorganisms responsible for spoilage , and developed vaccines for the treatment of diseases , including rabies , in animals and humans .
Koch , a German physician , was the first to demonstrate the connection between a single , isolated microbe and a known human disease .
For example , he discovered the bacteria that cause anthrax ( Bacillus anthracis ) , cholera ( Vibrio cholera ) , and tuberculosis ( Mycobacterium tuberculosis ) .
We will discuss these famous microbiologists , and others , in later chapters .
As microbiology has developed , it has allowed the broader discipline of biology to grow and flourish in previously unimagined ways .
Much of what we know about human cells comes from our understanding of microbes , and many of the tools we use today to study cells and their genetics derive from work with microbes .
Describe how microorganisms are classified and distinguished as unique species Compare historical and current systems of taxonomy used to classify microorganisms Once microbes became visible to humans with the help of microscopes , scientists began to realize their enormous diversity .
Microorganisms vary in all sorts of ways , including their size , their appearance , and their rates of reproduction .
To study this incredibly diverse new array of organisms , researchers needed a way to systematically organize them .
Taxonomy is the classification , description , identification , and naming of living organisms .
Classification is the practice of organizing organisms into different groups based on their shared characteristics .
The most famous early taxonomist was a Swedish botanist , zoologist , and physician named Carolus Linnaeus ( 1701–1778 ) .
In 1735 , Linnaeus published Systema Naturae , an 11-page booklet in which he proposed the Linnaean taxonomy , a system of categorizing and naming organisms using a standard format so scientists could discuss organisms using consistent terminology .
He continued to revise and add to the book , which grew into multiple volumes .
In his taxonomy , Linnaeus divided the natural world into three kingdoms : animal , plant , and mineral ( the mineral kingdom was later abandoned ) .
Within the animal and plant kingdoms , he grouped organisms using a hierarchy of increasingly specific levels and sublevels based on their similarities .
The names of the levels in Linnaeus ’ s original taxonomy were kingdom , class , order , family , genus ( plural : genera ) , and species .
Species was , and continues to be , the most specific and basic taxonomic unit .
With advances in technology , other scientists gradually made refinements to the Linnaean system and eventually created new systems for classifying organisms .
In the 1800s , there was a growing interest in developing taxonomies that took into account the evolutionary relationships , or phylogenies , of all different species of organisms on earth .
One way to depict these relationships is via a diagram called a phylogenetic tree ( or tree of life ) .
In these diagrams , groups of organisms are arranged by how closely related they are thought to be .
In early phylogenetic trees , the relatedness of organisms was inferred by their visible similarities , such as the presence or absence of hair or the number of limbs .
Now , the analysis is more complicated .
Today , phylogenic analyses include genetic , biochemical , and embryological comparisons , as will be discussed later in this chapter .
Linnaeus ’ s tree of life contained just two main branches for all living things : the animal and plant kingdoms .
In 1866 , Ernst Haeckel , a German biologist , philosopher , and physician , proposed another kingdom , Protista , for unicellular organisms .
He later proposed a fourth kingdom , Monera , for unicellular organisms whose cells lack nuclei , like bacteria .
Nearly 100 years later , in 1969 , American ecologist Robert Whittaker ( 1920–1980 ) proposed adding another kingdom—Fungi—in his tree of life .
Whittaker ’ s tree also contained a level of categorization above the kingdom level—the empire or superkingdom level—to distinguish between organisms that have membrane-bound nuclei in their cells ( eukaryotes ) and those that do not ( prokaryotes ) .
Empire Prokaryota contained just the Kingdom Monera .
The Empire Eukaryota contained the other four kingdoms : Fungi , Protista , Plantae , and Animalia .
Whittaker ’ s fivekingdom tree was considered the standard phylogeny for many years .
shows how the tree of life has changed over time .
Note that viruses are not found in any of these trees .
That is because they are not made up of cells and thus it is difficult to determine where they would fit into a tree of life .
Haeckel ’ s and Whittaker ’ s trees presented hypotheses about the phylogeny of different organisms based on readily observable characteristics .
But the advent of molecular genetics in the late 20th century revealed other ways to organize phylogenetic trees .
Genetic methods allow for a standardized way to compare all living organisms without relying on observable characteristics that can often be subjective .
Modern taxonomy relies heavily on comparing the nucleic acids ( deoxyribonucleic acid [ DNA ] or ribonucleic acid [ RNA ] ) or proteins from different organisms .
The more similar the nucleic acids and proteins are between two organisms , the more closely related they are considered to be .
In the 1970s , American microbiologist Carl Woese discovered what appeared to be a “ living record ” of the evolution of organisms .
He and his collaborator George Fox created a genetics-based tree of life based on similarities and differences they observed in the gene sequences coding for small subunit ribosomal RNA ( rRNA ) of different organisms .
In the process , they discovered that a certain type of bacteria , called archaebacteria ( now known simply as archaea ) , were significantly different from other bacteria and eukaryotes in terms of their small subunit rRNA gene sequences .
To accommodate this difference , they created a tree with three Domains above the level of Kingdom : Archaea , Bacteria , and Eukarya .
Analysis of small subunit rRNA gene sequences suggests archaea , bacteria , and eukaryotes all evolved from a common ancestral cell type .
The tree is skewed to show a closer evolutionary relationship between Archaea and Eukarya than they have to Bacteria .
Scientists continue to use analysis of RNA , DNA , and proteins to determine how organisms are related .
One interesting , and complicating , discovery is that of horizontal gene transfer—when a gene of one species is absorbed into another organism ’ s genome .
Horizontal gene transfer is especially common in microorganisms and can make it difficult to determine how organisms are evolutionarily related .
Consequently , some scientists now think in terms of “ webs of life ” rather than “ trees of life. ” In developing his taxonomy , Linnaeus used a system of binomial nomenclature , a two-word naming system for identifying organisms by genus and species .
For example , modern humans are in the genus Homo and have the species name sapiens , so their scientific name in binomial nomenclature is Homo sapiens .
In binomial nomenclature , the genus part of the name is always capitalized ; it is followed by the species name , which is not capitalized .
Both names are italicized .
Taxonomic names in the 18th through 20th centuries were typically derived from Latin , since that was the common language used by scientists when taxonomic systems were first created .
Today , newly discovered organisms can be given names derived from Latin , Greek , or English .
Sometimes these names reflect some distinctive trait of the organism ; in other cases , microorganisms are named after the scientists who discovered them .
The archaeon Haloquadratum walsbyi is an example of both of these naming schemes .
The species , walsbyi , is named after Anthony Edward Walsby , the microbiologist who discovered Haloquadratum walsbyi in in 1980 .
While it might seem easier to give an organism a common descriptive name—like a redheaded woodpecker—we can imagine how that could become problematic .
What happens when another species of woodpecker with red head coloring is discovered ?
The systematic nomenclature scientists use eliminates this potential problem by assigning each organism a single , unique two-word name that is recognized by scientists all over the world .
In this text , we will typically abbreviate an organism ’ s genus and species after its first mention .
The abbreviated form is simply the first initial of the genus , followed by a period and the full name of the species .
For example , the bacterium Escherichia coli is shortened to E. coli in its abbreviated form .
You will encounter this same convention in other scientific texts as well .
Whether in a tree or a web , microbes can be difficult to identify and classify .
Without easily observable macroscopic features like feathers , feet , or fur , scientists must capture , grow , and devise ways to study their biochemical properties to differentiate and classify microbes .
Despite these hurdles , a group of microbiologists created and updated a set of manuals for identifying and classifying microorganisms .
First published in 1923 and since updated many times , Bergey ’ s Manual of Determinative Bacteriology and Bergey ’ s Manual of Systematic Bacteriology are the standard references for identifying and classifying different prokaryotes .
( of this textbook is partly based on Bergey ’ s manuals ; it shows how the organisms that appear in this textbook are classified . )
Because so many bacteria look identical , methods based on nonvisual characteristics must be used to identify them .
For example , biochemical tests can be used to identify chemicals unique to certain species .
Likewise , serological tests can be used to identify specific antibodies that will react against the proteins found in certain species .
Ultimately , DNA and rRNA sequencing can be used both for identifying a particular bacterial species and for classifying newly discovered species .
However , there are some unicellular microbes that are visible to the naked eye , and some multicellular organisms that are microscopic .
An object must measure about 100 micrometers ( µm ) to be visible without a microscope , but most microorganisms are many times smaller than that .
For some perspective , consider that a typical animal cell measures roughly 10 µm across but is still microscopic .
Bacterial cells are typically about 1 µm , and viruses can be 10 times smaller than bacteria .
See for units of length used in microbiology .
Microorganisms differ from each other not only in size , but also in structure , habitat , metabolism , and many other characteristics .
While we typically think of microorganisms as being unicellular , there are also many multicellular organisms that are too small to be seen without a microscope .
Some microbes , such as viruses , are even acellular ( not composed of cells ) .
Microorganisms are found in each of the three domains of life : Archaea , Bacteria , and Eukarya .
Microbes within the domains Bacteria and Archaea are all prokaryotes ( their cells lack a nucleus ) , whereas microbes in the domain Eukarya are eukaryotes ( their cells have a nucleus ) .
Some microorganisms , such as viruses , do not fall within any of the three domains of life .
In this section , we will briefly introduce each of the broad groups of microbes .
Later chapters will go into greater depth about the diverse species within each group .
Bacteria are found in nearly every habitat on earth , including within and on humans .
Most bacteria are harmless or helpful , but some are pathogens , causing disease in humans and other animals .
Bacteria are prokaryotic because their genetic material ( DNA ) is not housed within a true nucleus .
Most bacteria have cell walls that contain peptidoglycan .
Bacteria are often described in terms of their general shape .
Common shapes include spherical ( coccus ) , rod-shaped ( bacillus ) , or curved ( spirillum , spirochete , or vibrio ) .
shows examples of these shapes .
They have a wide range of metabolic capabilities and can grow in a variety of environments , using different combinations of nutrients .
Some bacteria are photosynthetic , such as oxygenic cyanobacteria and anoxygenic green sulfur and green nonsulfur bacteria ; these bacteria use energy derived from sunlight , and fix carbon dioxide for growth .
Other types of bacteria are nonphotosynthetic , obtaining their energy from organic or inorganic compounds in their environment .
Archaea are also unicellular prokaryotic organisms .
Archaea and bacteria have different evolutionary histories , as well as significant differences in genetics , metabolic pathways , and the composition of their cell walls and membranes .
Unlike most bacteria , archaeal cell walls do not contain peptidoglycan , but their cell walls are often composed of a similar substance called pseudopeptidoglycan .
Like bacteria , archaea are found in nearly every habitat on earth , even extreme environments that are very cold , very hot , very basic , or very acidic .
Some archaea live in the human body , but none have been shown to be human pathogens .
The domain Eukarya contains all eukaryotes , including unior multicellular eukaryotes such as protists , fungi , plants , and animals .
The major defining characteristic of eukaryotes is that their cells contain a nucleus .
Protists are an informal grouping of eukaryotes that are not plants , animals , or fungi .
Algae and protozoa are examples of protists .
Algae ( singular : alga ) are protists that can be either unicellular or multicellular and vary widely in size , appearance , and habitat .
Their cells are surrounded by cell walls made of cellulose , a type of carbohydrate .
Algae are photosynthetic organisms that extract energy from the sun and release oxygen and carbohydrates into their environment .
Because other organisms can use their waste products for energy , algae are important parts of many ecosystems .
Many consumer products contain ingredients derived from algae , such as carrageenan or alginic acid , which are found in some brands of ice cream , salad dressing , beverages , lipstick , and toothpaste .
A derivative of algae also plays a prominent role in the microbiology laboratory .
Agar , a gel derived from algae , can be mixed with various nutrients and used to grow microorganisms in a Petri dish .
Algae are also being developed as a possible source for biofuels .
Protozoa ( singular : protozoan ) are protists that make up the backbone of many food webs by providing nutrients for other organisms .
Protozoa are very diverse .
Some protozoa move with help from hair-like structures called cilia or whip-like structures called flagella .
Others extend part of their cell membrane and cytoplasm to propel themselves forward .
These cytoplasmic extensions are called pseudopods ( “ false feet ” ) .
Some protozoa are photosynthetic ; others feed on organic material .
Some are free-living , whereas others are parasitic , only able to survive by extracting nutrients from a host organism .
Most protozoa are harmless , but some are pathogens that can cause disease in animals or humans .
Fungi ( singular : fungus ) are also eukaryotes .
Some multicellular fungi , such as mushrooms , resemble plants , but they are actually quite different .
Fungi are not photosynthetic , and their cell walls are usually made out of chitin rather than cellulose .
Unicellular fungi—yeasts—are included within the study of microbiology .
There are more than 1000 known species .
Yeasts are found in many different environments , from the deep sea to the human navel .
Some yeasts have beneficial uses , such as causing bread to rise and beverages to ferment ; but yeasts can also cause food to spoil .
Some even cause diseases , such as vaginal yeast infections and oral thrush .
Other fungi of interest to microbiologists are multicellular organisms called molds .
Molds are made up of long filaments that form visible colonies .
Molds are found in many different environments , from soil to rotting food to dank bathroom corners .
Molds play a critical role in the decomposition of dead plants and animals .
Some molds can cause allergies , and others produce disease-causing metabolites called mycotoxins .
Molds have been used to make pharmaceuticals , including penicillin , which is one of the most commonly prescribed antibiotics , and cyclosporine , used to prevent organ rejection following a transplant .
Multicellular parasitic worms called helminths are not technically microorganisms , as most are large enough to see without a microscope .
However , these worms fall within the field of microbiology because diseases caused by helminths involve microscopic eggs and larvae .
One example of a helminth is the guinea worm , or Dracunculus medinensis , which causes dizziness , vomiting , diarrhea , and painful ulcers on the legs and feet when the worm works its way out of the skin .
Infection typically occurs after a person drinks water containing water fleas infected by guinea-worm larvae .
In the mid-1980s , there were an estimated 3.5 million cases of guinea-worm disease , but the disease has been largely eradicated .
In 2014 , there were only 126 cases reported , thanks to the coordinated efforts of the World Health Organization ( WHO ) and other groups committed to improvements in drinking water sanitation .
Viruses are acellular microorganisms , which means they are not composed of cells .
Essentially , a virus consists of proteins and genetic material—either DNA or RNA , but never both—that are inert outside of a host organism .
However , by incorporating themselves into a host cell , viruses are able to co-opt the host ’ s cellular mechanisms to multiply and infect other hosts .
Viruses can infect all types of cells , from human cells to the cells of other microorganisms .
In humans , viruses are responsible for numerous diseases , from the common cold to deadly Ebola .
However , many viruses do not cause disease .
Microbiology is a broad term that encompasses the study of all different types of microorganisms .
But in practice , microbiologists tend to specialize in one of several subfields .
For example , bacteriology is the study of bacteria ; mycology is the study of fungi ; protozoology is the study of protozoa ; parasitology is the study of helminths and other parasites ; and virology is the study of viruses .
Immunology , the study of the immune system , is often included in the study of microbiology because host–pathogen interactions are central to our understanding of infectious disease processes .
Microbiologists can also specialize in certain areas of microbiology , such as clinical microbiology , environmental microbiology , applied microbiology , or food microbiology .
In this textbook , we are primarily concerned with clinical applications of microbiology , but since the various subfields of microbiology are highly interrelated , we will often discuss applications that are not strictly clinical .
When we look at a rainbow , its colors span the full spectrum of light that the human eye can detect and differentiate .
Each hue represents a different frequency of visible light , processed by our eyes and brains and rendered as red , orange , yellow , green , or one of the many other familiar colors that have always been a part of the human experience .
But only recently have humans developed an understanding of the properties of light that allow us to see images in color .
Over the past several centuries , we have learned to manipulate light to peer into previously invisible worlds—those too small or too far away to be seen by the naked eye .
Through a microscope , we can examine microbial cells and colonies , using various techniques to manipulate color , size , and contrast in ways that help us identify species and diagnose disease .
illustrates how we can apply the properties of light to visualize and magnify images ; but these stunning micrographs are just two examples of the numerous types of images we are now able to produce with different microscopic technologies .
This chapter explores how various types of microscopes manipulate light in order to provide a window into the world of microorganisms .
By understanding how various kinds of microscopes work , we can produce highly detailed images of microbes that can be useful for both research and clinical applications .
Identify and define the characteristics of electromagnetic radiation ( EMR ) used in microscopy Explain how lenses are used in microscopy to manipulate visible and ultraviolet ( UV ) light Visible light consists of electromagnetic waves that behave like other waves .
Hence , many of the properties of light that are relevant to microscopy can be understood in terms of light ’ s behavior as a wave .
An important property of light waves is the wavelength , or the distance between one peak of a wave and the next peak .
The height of each peak ( or depth of each trough ) is called the amplitude .
In contrast , the frequency of the wave is the rate of vibration of the wave , or the number of wavelengths within a specified time period .
Light waves interact with materials by being reflected , absorbed , or transmitted .
Reflection occurs when a wave bounces off of a material .
For example , a red piece of cloth may reflect red light to our eyes while absorbing other colors of light .
Absorbance occurs when a material captures the energy of a light wave .
In the case of glow-in-thedark plastics , the energy from light can be absorbed and then later re-emitted as another form of phosphorescence .
Transmission occurs when a wave travels through a material , like light through glass ( the process of transmission is called transmittance ) .
When a material allows a large proportion of light to be transmitted , it may do so because it is thinner , or more transparent ( having more transparency and less opacity ) .
illustrates the difference between transparency and opacity .
Light waves can also interact with each other by interference , creating complex patterns of motion .
Dropping two pebbles into a puddle causes the waves on the puddle ’ s surface to interact , creating complex interference patterns .
Light waves can interact in the same way .
In addition to interfering with each other , light waves can also interact with small objects or openings by bending or scattering .
This is called diffraction .
Diffraction is larger when the object is smaller relative to the wavelength of the light ( the distance between two consecutive peaks of a light wave ) .
Often , when waves diffract in different directions around an obstacle or opening , they will interfere with each other .
In the context of microscopy , refraction is perhaps the most important behavior exhibited by light waves .
Refraction occurs when light waves change direction as they enter a new medium .
Different transparent materials transmit light at different speeds ; thus , light can change speed when passing from one material to another .
This change in speed usually also causes a change in direction ( refraction ) , with the degree of change dependent on the angle of the incoming light .
The extent to which a material slows transmission speed relative to empty space is called the refractive index of that material .
Large differences between the refractive indices of two materials will result in a large amount of refraction when light passes from one material to the other .
For example , light moves much more slowly through water than through air , so light entering water from air can change direction greatly .
We say that the water has a higher refractive index than air .
When light crosses a boundary into a material with a higher refractive index , its direction turns to be closer to perpendicular to the boundary ( i.e. , more toward a normal to that boundary ; see ) .
This is the principle behind lenses .
We can think of a lens as an object with a curved boundary ( or a collection of prisms ) that collects all of the light that strikes it and refracts it so that it all meets at a single point called the image point ( focus ) .
A convex lens can be used to magnify because it can focus at closer range than the human eye , producing a larger image .
Concave lenses and mirrors can also be used in microscopes to redirect the light path .
shows the focal point ( the image point when light entering the lens is parallel ) and the focal length ( the distance to the focal point ) for convex and concave lenses .
The human eye contains a lens that enables us to see images .
This lens focuses the light reflecting off of objects in front of the eye onto the surface of the retina , which is like a screen in the back of the eye .
Images are commonly manipulated by controlling the distances between the object , the lens , and the screen , as well as the curvature of the lens .
For example , for a given amount of curvature , when an object is closer to the lens , the focal points are farther from the lens .
As a result , it is often necessary to manipulate these distances to create a focused image on a screen .
Similarly , more curvature creates image points closer to the lens and a larger image when the image is in focus .
This property is often described in terms of the focal distance , or distance to the focal point .
Visible light is just one form of electromagnetic radiation ( EMR ) , a type of energy that is all around us .
Other forms of EMR include microwaves , X-rays , and radio waves , among others .
The different types of EMR fall on the electromagnetic spectrum , which is defined in terms of wavelength and frequency .
The spectrum of visible light occupies a relatively small range of frequencies between infrared and ultraviolet light .
Whereas wavelength represents the distance between adjacent peaks of a light wave , frequency , in a simplified definition , represents the rate of oscillation .
Waves with higher frequencies have shorter wavelengths and , therefore , have more oscillations per unit time than lower-frequency waves .
Higher-frequency waves also contain more energy than lower-frequency waves .
This energy is delivered as elementary particles called photons .
Higher-frequency waves deliver more energetic photons than lower-frequency waves .
Photons with different energies interact differently with the retina .
In the spectrum of visible light , each color corresponds to a particular frequency and wavelength .The lowest frequency of visible light appears as the color red , whereas the highest appears as the color violet .
When the retina receives visible light of many different frequencies , we perceive this as white light .
However , white light can be separated into its component colors using refraction .
If we pass white light through a prism , different colors will be refracted in different directions , creating a rainbow-like spectrum on a screen behind the prism .
This separation of colors is called dispersion , and it occurs because , for a given material , the refractive index is different for different frequencies of light .
Certain materials can refract nonvisible forms of EMR and , in effect , transform them into visible light .
Certain fluorescent dyes , for instance , absorb ultraviolet or blue light and then use the energy to emit photons of a different color , giving off light rather than simply vibrating .
This occurs because the energy absorption causes electrons to jump to higher energy states , after which they then almost immediately fall back down to their ground states , emitting specific amounts of energy as photons .
Not all of the energy is emitted in a given photon , so the emitted photons will be of lower energy and , thus , of lower frequency than the absorbed ones .
Thus , a dye such as Texas red may be excited by blue light , but emit red light ; or a dye such as fluorescein isothiocyanate ( FITC ) may absorb ( invisible ) highenergy ultraviolet light and emit green light .
In some materials , the photons may be emitted following a delay after absorption ; in this case , the process is called phosphorescence .
Glow-in-the-dark plastic works by using phosphorescent material .
Microscopes magnify images and use the properties of light to create useful images of small objects .
Magnification is defined as the ability of a lens to enlarge the image of an object when compared to the real object .
For example , a magnification of 10 means that the image appears 10 times the size of the object as viewed with the naked eye .
Greater magnification typically improves our ability to see details of small objects , but magnification alone is not sufficient to make the most useful images .
It is often useful to enhance the resolution of objects : the ability to tell that two separate points or objects are separate .
A low-resolution image appears fuzzy , whereas a high-resolution image appears sharp .
Two factors affect resolution .
The first is wavelength .
Shorter wavelengths are able to resolve smaller objects ; thus , an electron microscope has a much higher resolution than a light microscope , since it uses an electron beam with a very short wavelength , as opposed to the long-wavelength visible light used by a light microscope .
The second factor that affects resolution is numerical aperture , which is a measure of a lens ’ s ability to gather light .
The higher the numerical aperture , the better the resolution .
Even when a microscope has high resolution , it can be difficult to distinguish small structures in many specimens because microorganisms are relatively transparent .
It is often necessary to increase contrast to detect different structures in a specimen .
Various types of microscopes use different features of light or electrons to increase contrast—visible differences between the parts of a specimen ( see ) .
Additionally , dyes that bind to some structures but not others can be used to improve the contrast between images of relatively transparent objects ( see ) .
Describe historical developments and individual contributions that led to the invention and development of the microscope Compare and contrast the features of simple and compound microscopes Some of the fundamental characteristics and functions of microscopes can be understood in the context of the history of their use .
However , since the technology for seeing such tiny objects did not yet exist , the existence of the seminaria remained hypothetical for a little over a century—an invisible world waiting to be revealed .
Antonie van Leeuwenhoek , sometimes hailed as “ the Father of Microbiology , ” is typically credited as the first person to have created microscopes powerful enough to view microbes .
Born in the city of Delft in the Dutch Republic , van Leeuwenhoek began his career selling fabrics .
However , he later became interested in lens making ( perhaps to look at threads ) and his innovative techniques produced microscopes that allowed him to observe microorganisms as no one had before .
In 1674 , he described his observations of single-celled organisms , whose existence was previously unknown , in a series of letters to the Royal Society of London .
His report was initially met with skepticism , but his claims were soon verified and he became something of a celebrity in the scientific community .
While van Leeuwenhoek is credited with the discovery of microorganisms , others before him had contributed to the development of the microscope .
These included eyeglass makers in the Netherlands in the late 1500s , as well as the Italian astronomer Galileo Galilei , who used a compound microscope to examine insect parts .
Whereas van Leeuwenhoek used a simple microscope , in which light is passed through just one lens , Galileo ’ s compound microscope was more sophisticated , passing light through two sets of lenses .
Van Leeuwenhoek ’ s contemporary , the Englishman Robert Hooke ( 1635–1703 ) , also made important contributions to microscopy , publishing in his book Micrographia ( 1665 ) many observations using compound microscopes .
Viewing a thin sample of cork through his microscope , he was the first to observe the structures that we now know as cells .
They likely appeared to Hooke to be filled with air because the cork cells were dead , with only the rigid cell walls providing the structure .
But microscopy continued to advance in the centuries that followed .
In 1830 , Joseph Jackson Lister created an essentially modern light microscope .
The 20th century saw the development of microscopes that leveraged nonvisible light , such as fluorescence microscopy , which uses an ultraviolet light source , and electron microscopy , which uses shortwavelength electron beams .
These advances led to major improvements in magnification , resolution , and contrast .
By comparison , the relatively rudimentary microscopes of van Leeuwenhoek and his contemporaries were far less powerful than even the most basic microscopes in use today .
In this section , we will survey the broad range of modern microscopic technology and common applications for each type of microscope .
Many types of microscopes fall under the category of light microscopes , which use light to visualize images .
Examples of light microscopes include brightfield microscopes , darkfield microscopes , phase-contrast microscopes , differential interference contrast microscopes , fluorescence microscopes , confocal scanning laser microscopes , and two-photon microscopes .
These various types of light microscopes can be used to complement each other in diagnostics and research .
The brightfield microscope , perhaps the most commonly used type of microscope , is a compound microscope with two or more lenses that produce a dark image on a bright background .
Some brightfield microscopes are monocular ( having a single eyepiece ) , though most newer brightfield microscopes are binocular ( having two eyepieces ) , like the one shown in ; in either case , each eyepiece contains a lens called an ocular lens .
The ocular lenses typically magnify images 10 times ( 10 ) .
At the other end of the body tube are a set of objective lenses on a rotating nosepiece .
The magnification of these objective lenses typically ranges from 4 to 100 , with the magnification for each lens designated on the metal casing of the lens .
The ocular and objective lenses work together to create a magnified image .
The total magnification is the product of the ocular magnification times the objective magnification : For example , if a 40 objective lens is selected and the ocular lens is 10 , the total magnification would be The item being viewed is called a specimen .
The specimen is placed on a glass slide , which is then clipped into place on the stage ( a platform ) of the microscope .
Once the slide is secured , the specimen on the slide is positioned over the light using the x-y mechanical stage knobs .
These knobs move the slide on the surface of the stage , but do not raise or lower the stage .
Once the specimen is centered over the light , the stage position can be raised or lowered to focus the image .
The coarse focusing knob is used for large-scale movements with 4 and 10 objective lenses ; the fine focusing knob is used for small-scale movements , especially with 40 or 100 objective lenses .
When images are magnified , they become dimmer because there is less light per unit area of image .
Highly magnified images produced by microscopes , therefore , require intense lighting .
In a brightfield microscope , this light is provided by an illuminator , which is typically a high-intensity bulb below the stage .
Light from the illuminator passes up through condenser lens ( located below the stage ) , which focuses all of the light rays on the specimen to maximize illumination .
The position of the condenser can be optimized using the attached condenser focus knob ; once the optimal distance is established , the condenser should not be moved to adjust the brightness .
If less-than-maximal light levels are needed , the amount of light striking the specimen can be easily adjusted by opening or closing a diaphragm between the condenser and the specimen .
In some cases , brightness can also be adjusted using the rheostat , a dimmer switch that controls the intensity of the illuminator .
A brightfield microscope creates an image by directing light from the illuminator at the specimen ; this light is differentially transmitted , absorbed , reflected , or refracted by different structures .
Different colors can behave differently as they interact with chromophores ( pigments that absorb and reflect particular wavelengths of light ) in parts of the specimen .
Often , chromophores are artificially added to the specimen using stains , which serve to increase contrast and resolution .
In general , structures in the specimen will appear darker , to various extents , than the bright background , creating maximally sharp images at magnifications up to about 1000 .
Further magnification would create a larger image , but without increased resolution .
This allows us to see objects as small as bacteria , which are visible at about 400 or so , but not smaller objects such as viruses .
At very high magnifications , resolution may be compromised when light passes through the small amount of air between the specimen and the lens .
This is due to the large difference between the refractive indices of air and glass ; the air scatters the light rays before they can be focused by the lens .
To solve this problem , a drop of oil can be used to fill the space between the specimen and an oil immersion lens , a special lens designed to be used with immersion oils .
Since the oil has a refractive index very similar to that of glass , it increases the maximum angle at which light leaving the specimen can strike the lens .
This increases the light collected and , thus , the resolution of the image .
A variety of oils can be used for different types of light .
A darkfield microscope is a brightfield microscope that has a small but significant modification to the condenser .
A small , opaque disk ( about 1 cm in diameter ) is placed between the illuminator and the condenser lens .
This opaque light stop , as the disk is called , blocks most of the light from the illuminator as it passes through the condenser on its way to the objective lens , producing a hollow cone of light that is focused on the specimen .
The only light that reaches the objective is light that has been refracted or reflected by structures in the specimen .
The resulting image typically shows bright objects on a dark background .
Darkfield microscopy can often create high-contrast , high-resolution images of specimens without the use of stains , which is particularly useful for viewing live specimens that might be killed or otherwise compromised by the stains .
For example , thin spirochetes like Treponema pallidum , the causative agent of syphilis , can be best viewed using a darkfield microscope .
Phase-contrast microscopes use refraction and interference caused by structures in a specimen to create highcontrast , high-resolution images without staining .
It is the oldest and simplest type of microscope that creates an image by altering the wavelengths of light rays passing through the specimen .
To create altered wavelength paths , an annular stop is used in the condenser .
The annular stop produces a hollow cone of light that is focused on the specimen before reaching the objective lens .
The objective contains a phase plate containing a phase ring .
As a result , light traveling directly from the illuminator passes through the phase ring while light refracted or reflected by the specimen passes through the plate .
This causes waves traveling through the ring to be about one-half of a wavelength out of phase with those passing through the plate .
Because waves have peaks and troughs , they can add together ( if in phase together ) or cancel each other out ( if out of phase ) .
When the wavelengths are out of phase , wave troughs will cancel out wave peaks , which is called destructive interference .
Structures that refract light then appear dark against a bright background of only unrefracted light .
More generally , structures that differ in features such as refractive index will differ in levels of darkness .
Because it increases contrast without requiring stains , phase-contrast microscopy is often used to observe live specimens .
Certain structures , such as organelles in eukaryotic cells and endospores in prokaryotic cells , are especially well visualized with phase-contrast microscopy .
Differential interference contrast ( DIC ) microscopes ( also known as Nomarski optics ) are similar to phase-contrast microscopes in that they use interference patterns to enhance contrast between different features of a specimen .
In a DIC microscope , two beams of light are created in which the direction of wave movement ( polarization ) differs .
Once the beams pass through either the specimen or specimen-free space , they are recombined and effects of the specimens cause differences in the interference patterns generated by the combining of the beams .
This results in high-contrast images of living organisms with a three-dimensional appearance .
These microscopes are especially useful in distinguishing structures within live , unstained specimens .
A fluorescence microscope uses fluorescent chromophores called fluorochromes , which are capable of absorbing energy from a light source and then emitting this energy as visible light .
Fluorochromes include naturally fluorescent substances ( such as chlorophylls ) as well as fluorescent stains that are added to the specimen to create contrast .
Dyes such as Texas red and FITC are examples of fluorochromes .
Other examples include the nucleic acid dyes 4 ’ ,6 ’ diamidino-2-phenylindole ( DAPI ) and acridine orange .
The microscope transmits an excitation light , generally a form of EMR with a short wavelength , such as ultraviolet or blue light , toward the specimen ; the chromophores absorb the excitation light and emit visible light with longer wavelengths .
The excitation light is then filtered out ( in part because ultraviolet light is harmful to the eyes ) so that only visible light passes through the ocular lens .
This produces an image of the specimen in bright colors against a dark background .
Fluorescence microscopes are especially useful in clinical microbiology .
They can be used to identify pathogens , to find particular species within an environment , or to find the locations of particular molecules and structures within a cell .
Approaches have also been developed to distinguish living from dead cells using fluorescence microscopy based upon whether they take up particular fluorochromes .
Sometimes , multiple fluorochromes are used on the same specimen to show different structures or features .
One of the most important applications of fluorescence microscopy is a technique called immunofluorescence , which is used to identify certain disease-causing microbes by observing whether antibodies bind to them .
( Antibodies are protein molecules produced by the immune system that attach to specific pathogens to kill or inhibit them . )
There are two approaches to this technique : direct immunofluorescence assay ( DFA ) and indirect immunofluorescence assay ( IFA ) .
In DFA , specific antibodies ( e.g. , those that the target the rabies virus ) are stained with a fluorochrome .
If the specimen contains the targeted pathogen , one can observe the antibodies binding to the pathogen under the fluorescent microscope .
This is called a primary antibody stain because the stained antibodies attach directly to the pathogen .
In IFA , secondary antibodies are stained with a fluorochrome rather than primary antibodies .
Secondary antibodies do not attach directly to the pathogen , but they do bind to primary antibodies .
When the unstained primary antibodies bind to the pathogen , the fluorescent secondary antibodies can be observed binding to the primary antibodies .
Thus , the secondary antibodies are attached indirectly to the pathogen .
Since multiple secondary antibodies can often attach to a primary antibody , IFA increases the number of fluorescent antibodies attached to the specimen , making it easier visualize features in the specimen .
Whereas other forms of light microscopy create an image that is maximally focused at a single distance from the observer ( the depth , or z-plane ) , a confocal microscope uses a laser to scan multiple z-planes successively .
This produces numerous two-dimensional , high-resolution images at various depths , which can be constructed into a threedimensional image by a computer .
As with fluorescence microscopes , fluorescent stains are generally used to increase contrast and resolution .
Image clarity is further enhanced by a narrow aperture that eliminates any light that is not from the z-plane .
Confocal microscopes are thus very useful for examining thick specimens such as biofilms , which can be examined alive and unfixed .
While the original fluorescent and confocal microscopes allowed better visualization of unique features in specimens , there were still problems that prevented optimum visualization .
The effective sensitivity of fluorescence microscopy when viewing thick specimens was generally limited by out-of-focus flare , which resulted in poor resolution .
This limitation was greatly reduced in the confocal microscope through the use of a confocal pinhole to reject out-of-focus background fluorescence with thin ( < 1 μm ) , unblurred optical sections .
However , even the confocal microscopes lacked the resolution needed for viewing thick tissue samples .
These problems were resolved with the development of the two-photon microscope , which uses a scanning technique , fluorochromes , and long-wavelength light ( such as infrared ) to visualize specimens .
The low energy associated with the long-wavelength light means that two photons must strike a location at the same time to excite the fluorochrome .
The low energy of the excitation light is less damaging to cells , and the long wavelength of the excitation light more easily penetrates deep into thick specimens .
This makes the two-photon microscope useful for examining living cells within intact tissues—brain slices , embryos , whole organs , and even entire animals .
Currently , use of two-photon microscopes is limited to advanced clinical and research laboratories because of the high costs of the instruments .
A single two-photon microscope typically costs between $ 300,000 and $ 500,000 , and the lasers used to excite the dyes used on specimens are also very expensive .
However , as technology improves , twophoton microscopes may become more readily available in clinical settings .
The maximum theoretical resolution of images created by light microscopes is ultimately limited by the wavelengths of visible light .
Most light microscopes can only magnify 1000 , and a few can magnify up to 1500 , but this does not begin to approach the magnifying power of an electron microscope ( EM ) , which uses short-wavelength electron beams rather than light to increase magnification and resolution .
Electrons , like electromagnetic radiation , can behave as waves , but with wavelengths of 0.005 nm , they can produce much better resolution than visible light .
An EM can produce a sharp image that is magnified up to 100,000 .
Thus , EMs can resolve subcellular structures as well as some molecular structures ( e.g. , single strands of DNA ) ; however , electron microscopy can not be used on living material because of the methods needed to prepare the specimens .
There are two basic types of EM : the transmission electron microscope ( TEM ) and the scanning electron microscope ( SEM ) .
The TEM is somewhat analogous to the brightfield light microscope in terms of the way it functions .
However , it uses an electron beam from above the specimen that is focused using a magnetic lens ( rather than a glass lens ) and projected through the specimen onto a detector .
Electrons pass through the specimen , and then the detector captures the image .
For electrons to pass through the specimen in a TEM , the specimen must be extremely thin ( 20–100 nm thick ) .
The image is produced because of varying opacity in various parts of the specimen .
This opacity can be enhanced by staining the specimen with materials such as heavy metals , which are electron dense .
TEM requires that the beam and specimen be in a vacuum and that the specimen be very thin and dehydrated .
The specific steps needed to prepare a specimen for observation under an EM are discussed in detail in the next section .
SEMs form images of surfaces of specimens , usually from electrons that are knocked off of specimens by a beam of electrons .
This can create highly detailed images with a three-dimensional appearance that are displayed on a monitor .
Typically , specimens are dried and prepared with fixatives that reduce artifacts , such as shriveling , that can be produced by drying , before being sputter-coated with a thin layer of metal such as gold .
Some EMs can magnify an image up to 2,000,000 .
A scanning probe microscope does not use light or electrons , but rather very sharp probes that are passed over the surface of the specimen and interact with it directly .
This produces information that can be assembled into images with magnifications up to 100,000,000 .
Such large magnifications can be used to observe individual atoms on surfaces .
To date , these techniques have been used primarily for research rather than for diagnostics .
There are two types of scanning probe microscope : the scanning tunneling microscope ( STM ) and the atomic force microscope ( AFM ) .
An STM uses a probe that is passed just above the specimen as a constant voltage bias creates the potential for an electric current between the probe and the specimen .
This current occurs via quantum tunneling of electrons between the probe and the specimen , and the intensity of the current is dependent upon the distance between the probe and the specimen .
The probe is moved horizontally above the surface and the intensity of the current is measured .
Scanning tunneling microscopy can effectively map the structure of surfaces at a resolution at which individual atoms can be detected .
Similar to an STM , AFMs have a thin probe that is passed just above the specimen .
However , rather than measuring variations in the current at a constant height above the specimen , an AFM establishes a constant current and measures variations in the height of the probe tip as it passes over the specimen .
As the probe tip is passed over the specimen , forces between the atoms ( van der Waals forces , capillary forces , chemical bonding , electrostatic forces , and others ) cause it to move up and down .
Deflection of the probe tip is determined and measured using Hooke ’ s law of elasticity , and this information is used to construct images of the surface of the specimen with resolution at the atomic level .
, , and summarize the microscopy techniques for light microscopes , electron microscopes , and scanning probe microscopes , respectively .
This makes it difficult , if not impossible , to detect important cellular structures and their distinguishing characteristics without artificially treating specimens .
We have already alluded to certain techniques involving stains and fluorescent dyes , and in this section we will discuss specific techniques for sample preparation in greater detail .
Indeed , numerous methods have been developed to identify specific microbes , cellular structures , DNA sequences , or indicators of infection in tissue samples , under the microscope .
Here , we will focus on the most clinically relevant techniques .
In clinical settings , light microscopes are the most commonly used microscopes .
There are two basic types of preparation used to view specimens with a light microscope : wet mounts and fixed specimens .
The simplest type of preparation is the wet mount , in which the specimen is placed on the slide in a drop of liquid .
Some specimens , such as a drop of urine , are already in a liquid form and can be deposited on the slide using a dropper .
Solid specimens , such as a skin scraping , can be placed on the slide before adding a drop of liquid to prepare the wet mount .
Sometimes the liquid used is simply water , but often stains are added to enhance contrast .
Once the liquid has been added to the slide , a coverslip is placed on top and the specimen is ready for examination under the microscope .
The second method of preparing specimens for light microscopy is fixation .
The “ fixing ” of a sample refers to the process of attaching cells to a slide .
Fixation is often achieved either by heating ( heat fixing ) or chemically treating the specimen .
In addition to attaching the specimen to the slide , fixation also kills microorganisms in the specimen , stopping their movement and metabolism while preserving the integrity of their cellular components for observation .
To heat-fix a sample , a thin layer of the specimen is spread on the slide ( called a smear ) , and the slide is then briefly heated over a heat source .
Chemical fixatives are often preferable to heat for tissue specimens .
Chemical agents such as acetic acid , ethanol , methanol , formaldehyde ( formalin ) , and glutaraldehyde can denature proteins , stop biochemical reactions , and stabilize cell structures in tissue samples .
In addition to fixation , staining is almost always applied to color certain features of a specimen before examining it under a light microscope .
Stains , or dyes , contain salts made up of a positive ion and a negative ion .
Depending on the type of dye , the positive or the negative ion may be the chromophore ( the colored ion ) ; the other , uncolored ion is called the counterion .
If the chromophore is the positively charged ion , the stain is classified as a basic dye ; if the negative ion is the chromophore , the stain is considered an acidic dye .
Dyes are selected for staining based on the chemical properties of the dye and the specimen being observed , which determine how the dye will interact with the specimen .
In most cases , it is preferable to use a positive stain , a dye that will be absorbed by the cells or organisms being observed , adding color to objects of interest to make them stand out against the background .
However , there are scenarios in which it is advantageous to use a negative stain , which is absorbed by the background but not by the cells or organisms in the specimen .
Negative staining produces an outline or silhouette of the organisms against a colorful background .
Because cells typically have negatively charged cell walls , the positive chromophores in basic dyes tend to stick to the cell walls , making them positive stains .
Thus , commonly used basic dyes such as basic fuchsin , crystal violet , malachite green , methylene blue , and safranin typically serve as positive stains .
On the other hand , the negatively charged chromophores in acidic dyes are repelled by negatively charged cell walls , making them negative stains .
Commonly used acidic dyes include acid fuchsin , eosin , and rose bengal .
provides more detail .
Some staining techniques involve the application of only one dye to the sample ; others require more than one dye .
In simple staining , a single dye is used to emphasize particular structures in the specimen .
A simple stain will generally make all of the organisms in a sample appear to be the same color , even if the sample contains more than one type of organism .
In contrast , differential staining distinguishes organisms based on their interactions with multiple stains .
In other words , two organisms in a differentially stained sample may appear to be different colors .
Differential staining techniques commonly used in clinical settings include Gram staining , acid-fast staining , endospore staining , flagella staining , and capsule staining .
provides more detail on these differential staining techniques .
The Gram stain procedure is a differential staining procedure that involves multiple steps .
It was developed by Danish microbiologist Hans Christian Gram in 1884 as an effective method to distinguish between bacteria with different types of cell walls , and even today it remains one of the most frequently used staining techniques .
The steps of the Gram stain procedure are listed below and illustrated in .
First , crystal violet , a primary stain , is applied to a heat-fixed smear , giving all of the cells a purple color .
Next , Gram ’ s iodine , a mordant , is added .
Next , a decolorizing agent is added , usually ethanol or an acetone/ethanol solution .
Cells that have thick peptidoglycan layers in their cell walls are much less affected by the decolorizing agent ; they generally retain the crystal violet dye and remain purple .
However , the decolorizing agent more easily washes the dye out of cells with thinner peptidoglycan layers , making them again colorless .
Finally , a secondary counterstain , usually safranin , is added .
This stains the decolorized cells pink and is less noticeable in the cells that still contain the crystal violet dye .
The purple , crystal-violet stained cells are referred to as gram-positive cells , while the red , safranin-dyed cells are gram-negative .
However , there are several important considerations in interpreting the results of a Gram stain .
First , older bacterial cells may have damage to their cell walls that causes them to appear gramnegative even if the species is gram-positive .
Thus , it is best to use fresh bacterial cultures for Gram staining .
Second , errors such as leaving on decolorizer too long can affect the results .
In some cases , most cells will appear grampositive while a few appear gram-negative ( as in ) .
This suggests damage to the individual cells or that decolorizer was left on for too long ; the cells should still be classified as gram-positive if they are all the same species rather than a mixed culture .
Besides their differing interactions with dyes and decolorizing agents , the chemical differences between grampositive and gram-negative cells have other implications with clinical relevance .
For example , Gram staining can help clinicians classify bacterial pathogens in a sample into categories associated with specific properties .
Gram-negative bacteria tend to be more resistant to certain antibiotics than gram-positive bacteria .
We will discuss this and other applications of Gram staining in more detail in later chapters .
Acid-fast staining is another commonly used , differential staining technique that can be an important diagnostic tool .
An acid-fast stain is able to differentiate two types of gram-positive cells : those that have waxy mycolic acids in their cell walls , and those that do not .
Two different methods for acid-fast staining are the Ziehl-Neelsen technique and the Kinyoun technique .
Both use carbolfuchsin as the primary stain .
The waxy , acid-fast cells retain the carbolfuchsin even after a decolorizing agent ( an acid-alcohol solution ) is applied .
A secondary counterstain , methylene blue , is then applied , which renders non–acid-fast cells blue .
The fundamental difference between the two carbolfuchsin-based methods is whether heat is used during the primary staining process .
The Ziehl-Neelsen method uses heat to infuse the carbolfuchsin into the acid-fast cells , whereas the Kinyoun method does not use heat .
Both techniques are important diagnostic tools because a number of specific diseases are caused by acid-fast bacteria ( AFB ) .
If AFB are present in a tissue sample , their red or pink color can be seen clearly against the blue background of the surrounding tissue cells .
Certain bacteria and yeasts have a protective outer structure called a capsule .
Since the presence of a capsule is directly related to a microbe ’ s virulence ( its ability to cause disease ) , the ability to determine whether cells in a sample have capsules is an important diagnostic tool .
Capsules do not absorb most basic dyes ; therefore , a negative staining technique ( staining around the cells ) is typically used for capsule staining .
The dye stains the background but does not penetrate the capsules , which appear like halos around the borders of the cell .
The specimen does not need to be heat-fixed prior to negative staining .
One common negative staining technique for identifying encapsulated yeast and bacteria is to add a few drops of India ink or nigrosin to a specimen .
Other capsular stains can also be used to negatively stain encapsulated cells .
Alternatively , positive and negative staining techniques can be combined to visualize capsules : The positive stain colors the body of the cell , and the negative stain colors the background but not the capsule , leaving halo around each cell .
Endospores are structures produced within certain bacterial cells that allow them to survive harsh conditions .
Gram staining alone can not be used to visualize endospores , which appear clear when Gram-stained cells are viewed .
Endospore staining uses two stains to differentiate endospores from the rest of the cell .
The Schaeffer-Fulton method ( the most commonly used endospore-staining technique ) uses heat to push the primary stain ( malachite green ) into the endospore .
Washing with water decolorizes the cell , but the endospore retains the green stain .
The cell is then counterstained pink with safranin .
The resulting image reveals the shape and location of endospores , if they are present .
The green endospores will appear either within the pink vegetative cells or as separate from the pink cells altogether .
If no endospores are present , then only the pink vegetative cells will be visible .
Endospore-staining techniques are important for identifying Bacillus and Clostridium , two genera of endosporeproducing bacteria that contain clinically significant species .
Among others , B. anthracis ( which causes anthrax ) has been of particular interest because of concern that its spores could be used as a bioterrorism agent .
C. difficile is a particularly important species responsible for the typically hospital-acquired infection known as “ C .
diff. ” Flagella ( singular : flagellum ) are tail-like cellular structures used for locomotion by some bacteria , archaea , and eukaryotes .
Because they are so thin , flagella typically can not be seen under a light microscope without a specialized flagella staining technique .
Flagella staining thickens the flagella by first applying mordant ( generally tannic acid , but sometimes potassium alum ) , which coats the flagella ; then the specimen is stained with pararosaniline ( most commonly ) or basic fuchsin .
Though flagella staining is uncommon in clinical settings , the technique is commonly used by microbiologists , since the location and number of flagella can be useful in classifying and identifying bacteria in a sample .
When using this technique , it is important to handle the specimen with great care ; flagella are delicate structures that can easily be damaged or pulled off , compromising attempts to accurately locate and count the number of flagella .
Samples to be analyzed using a TEM must have very thin sections .
But cells are too soft to cut thinly , even with diamond knives .
To cut cells without damage , the cells must be embedded in plastic resin and then dehydrated through a series of soaks in ethanol solutions ( 50 % , 60 % , 70 % , and so on ) .
The ethanol replaces the water in the cells , and the resin dissolves in ethanol and enters the cell , where it solidifies .
Next , thin sections are cut using a specialized device called an ultramicrotome .
Finally , samples are fixed to fine copper wire or carbon-fiber grids and stained—not with colored dyes , but with substances like uranyl acetate or osmium tetroxide , which contain electrondense heavy metal atoms .
When samples are prepared for viewing using an SEM , they must also be dehydrated using an ethanol series .
However , they must be even drier than is necessary for a TEM .
Critical point drying with inert liquid carbon dioxide under pressure is used to displace the water from the specimen .
After drying , the specimens are sputter-coated with metal by knocking atoms off of a palladium target , with energetic particles .
Sputter-coating prevents specimens from becoming charged by the SEM ’ s electron beam .
Samples for fluorescence and confocal microscopy are prepared similarly to samples for light microscopy , except that the dyes are fluorochromes .
Stains are often diluted in liquid before applying to the slide .
Sample preparation for two-photon microscopy is similar to fluorescence microscopy , except for the use of infrared dyes .
Specimens for STM need to be on a very clean and atomically smooth surface .
They are often mica coated with Au ( 111 ) .
Toluene vapor is a common fixative .
Life takes many forms , from giant redwood trees towering hundreds of feet in the air to the tiniest known microbes , which measure only a few billionths of a meter .
Humans have long pondered life ’ s origins and debated the defining characteristics of life , but our understanding of these concepts has changed radically since the invention of the microscope .
In the 17th century , observations of microscopic life led to the development of the cell theory : the idea that the fundamental unit of life is the cell , that all organisms contain at least one cell , and that cells only come from other cells .
Despite sharing certain characteristics , cells may vary significantly .
The two main types of cells are prokaryotic cells ( lacking a nucleus ) and eukaryotic cells ( containing a well-organized , membrane-bound nucleus ) .
Each type of cell exhibits remarkable variety in structure , function , and metabolic activity .
This chapter will focus on the historical discoveries that have shaped our current understanding of microbes , including their origins and their role in human disease .
We will then explore the distinguishing structures found in prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells .
Religion , philosophy , and science have all wrestled with this question .
One of the oldest explanations was the theory of spontaneous generation , which can be traced back to the ancient Greeks and was widely accepted through the Middle Ages .
The Greek philosopher Aristotle ( 384–322 BC ) was one of the earliest recorded scholars to articulate the theory of spontaneous generation , the notion that life can arise from nonliving matter .
Aristotle proposed that life arose from nonliving material if the material contained pneuma ( “ vital heat ” ) .
As evidence , he noted several instances of the appearance of animals from environments previously devoid of such animals , such as the seemingly sudden appearance of fish in a new puddle of water .
This theory persisted into the 17th century , when scientists undertook additional experimentation to support or disprove it .
By this time , the proponents of the theory cited how frogs simply seem to appear along the muddy banks of the Nile River in Egypt during the annual flooding .
Others observed that mice simply appeared among grain stored in barns with thatched roofs .
When the roof leaked and the grain molded , mice appeared .
Jan Baptista van Helmont , a 17th century Flemish scientist , proposed that mice could arise from rags and wheat kernels left in an open container for 3 weeks .
In reality , such habitats provided ideal food sources and shelter for mouse populations to flourish .
He predicted that preventing flies from having direct contact with the meat would also prevent the appearance of maggots .
Redi left meat in each of six containers .
Two were open to the air , two were covered with gauze , and two were tightly sealed .
His hypothesis was supported when maggots developed in the uncovered jars , but no maggots appeared in either the gauze-covered or the tightly sealed jars .
He concluded that maggots could only form when flies were allowed to lay eggs in the meat , and that the maggots were the offspring of flies , not the product of spontaneous generation .
In 1745 , John Needham ( 1713–1781 ) published a report of his own experiments , in which he briefly boiled broth infused with plant or animal matter , hoping to kill all preexisting microbes .
He then sealed the flasks .
After a few days , Needham observed that the broth had become cloudy and a single drop contained numerous microscopic creatures .
He argued that the new microbes must have arisen spontaneously .
In reality , however , he likely did not boil the broth enough to kill all preexisting microbes .
Lazzaro Spallanzani ( 1729–1799 ) did not agree with Needham ’ s conclusions , however , and performed hundreds of carefully executed experiments using heated broth .
As in Needham ’ s experiment , broth in sealed jars and unsealed jars was infused with plant and animal matter .
Spallanzani ’ s results contradicted the findings of Needham : Heated but sealed flasks remained clear , without any signs of spontaneous growth , unless the flasks were subsequently opened to the air .
This suggested that microbes were introduced into these flasks from the air .
In response to Spallanzani ’ s findings , Needham argued that life originates from a “ life force ” that was destroyed during Spallanzani ’ s extended boiling .
Any subsequent sealing of the flasks then prevented new life force from entering and causing spontaneous generation .
The debate over spontaneous generation continued well into the 19th century , with scientists serving as proponents of both sides .
To settle the debate , the Paris Academy of Sciences offered a prize for resolution of the problem .
Louis Pasteur , a prominent French chemist who had been studying microbial fermentation and the causes of wine spoilage , accepted the challenge .
Later , Pasteur made a series of flasks with long , twisted necks ( “ swan-neck ” flasks ) , in which he boiled broth to sterilize it .
His design allowed air inside the flasks to be exchanged with air from the outside , but prevented the introduction of any airborne microorganisms , which would get caught in the twists and bends of the flasks ’ necks .
If a life force besides the airborne microorganisms were responsible for microbial growth within the sterilized flasks , it would have access to the broth , whereas the microorganisms would not .
He correctly predicted that sterilized broth in his swan-neck flasks would remain sterile as long as the swan necks remained intact .
However , should the necks be broken , microorganisms would be introduced , contaminating the flasks and allowing microbial growth within the broth .
Pasteur ’ s set of experiments irrefutably disproved the theory of spontaneous generation and earned him the prestigious Alhumbert Prize from the Paris Academy of Sciences in 1862 .
In a subsequent lecture in 1864 , Pasteur articulated “ Omne vivum ex vivo ” ( “ Life only comes from life ” ) .
In this lecture , Pasteur recounted his famous swanneck flask experiment , stating that “ …life is a germ and a germ is life .
Never will the doctrine of spontaneous generation recover from the mortal blow of this simple experiment. ” To Pasteur ’ s credit , it never has .
Modern cell theory has two basic tenets : All cells only come from other cells ( the principle of biogenesis ) .
Cells are the fundamental units of organisms .
Today , these tenets are fundamental to our understanding of life on earth .
However , modern cell theory grew out of the collective work of many scientists .
The English scientist Robert Hooke first used the term “ cells ” in 1665 to describe the small chambers within cork that he observed under a microscope of his own design .
To Hooke , thin sections of cork resembled “ Honey-comb , ” or “ small Boxes or Bladders of Air. ” He noted that each “ Cavern , Bubble , or Cell ” was distinct from the others .
At the time , Hooke was not aware that the cork cells were long dead and , therefore , lacked the internal structures found within living cells .
Despite Hooke ’ s early description of cells , their significance as the fundamental unit of life was not yet recognized .
Nearly 200 years later , in 1838 , Matthias Schleiden ( 1804–1881 ) , a German botanist who made extensive microscopic observations of plant tissues , described them as being composed of cells .
Visualizing plant cells was relatively easy because plant cells are clearly separated by their thick cell walls .
Schleiden believed that cells formed through crystallization , rather than cell division .
Theodor Schwann ( 1810–1882 ) , a noted German physiologist , made similar microscopic observations of animal tissue .
In 1839 , after a conversation with Schleiden , Schwann realized that similarities existed between plant and animal tissues .
This laid the foundation for the idea that cells are the fundamental components of plants and animals .
In the 1850s , two Polish scientists living in Germany pushed this idea further , culminating in what we recognize today as the modern cell theory .
In 1852 , Robert Remak ( 1815–1865 ) , a prominent neurologist and embryologist , published convincing evidence that cells are derived from other cells as a result of cell division .
However , this idea was questioned by many in the scientific community .
Given the similarity of Virchow ’ s work to Remak ’ s , there is some controversy as to which scientist should receive credit for articulating cell theory .
See the following Eye on Ethics feature for more about this controversy .
As scientists were making progress toward understanding the role of cells in plant and animal tissues , others were examining the structures within the cells themselves .
In 1831 , Scottish botanist Robert Brown ( 1773–1858 ) was the first to describe observations of nuclei , which he observed in plant cells .
Then , in the early 1880s , German botanist Andreas Schimper ( 1856–1901 ) was the first to describe the chloroplasts of plant cells , identifying their role in starch formation during photosynthesis and noting that they divided independent of the nucleus .
Based upon the chloroplasts ’ ability to reproduce independently , Russian botanist Konstantin Mereschkowski ( 1855–1921 ) suggested in 1905 that chloroplasts may have originated from ancestral photosynthetic bacteria living symbiotically inside a eukaryotic cell .
He proposed a similar origin for the nucleus of plant cells .
This was the first articulation of the endosymbiotic hypothesis , and would explain how eukaryotic cells evolved from ancestral bacteria .
Mereschkowski ’ s endosymbiotic hypothesis was furthered by American anatomist Ivan Wallin ( 1883–1969 ) , who began to experimentally examine the similarities between mitochondria , chloroplasts , and bacteria—in other words , to put the endosymbiotic hypothesis to the test using objective investigation .
Wallin published a series of papers in the 1920s supporting the endosymbiotic hypothesis , including a 1926 publication co-authored with Mereschkowski .
Wallin claimed he could culture mitochondria outside of their eukaryotic host cells .
Many scientists dismissed his cultures of mitochondria as resulting from bacterial contamination .
Modern genome sequencing work supports the dissenting scientists by showing that much of the genome of mitochondria had been transferred to the host cell ’ s nucleus , preventing the mitochondria from being able to live on their own .
Wallin ’ s ideas regarding the endosymbiotic hypothesis were largely ignored for the next 50 years because scientists were unaware that these organelles contained their own DNA .
However , with the discovery of mitochondrial and chloroplast DNA in the 1960s , the endosymbiotic hypothesis was resurrected .
Lynn Margulis ( 1938–2011 ) , an American geneticist , published her ideas regarding the endosymbiotic hypothesis of the origins of mitochondria and chloroplasts in 1967 .
In the decade leading up to her publication , advances in microscopy had allowed scientists to differentiate prokaryotic cells from eukaryotic cells .
In her publication , Margulis reviewed the literature and argued that the eukaryotic organelles such as mitochondria and chloroplasts are of prokaryotic origin .
She presented a growing body of microscopic , genetic , molecular biology , fossil , and geological data to support her claims .
With Margulis ’ initial endosymbiotic theory gaining wide acceptance , she expanded on the theory in her 1981 book Symbiosis in Cell Evolution .
In it , she explains how endosymbiosis is a major driving factor in the evolution of organisms .
More recent genetic sequencing and phylogenetic analysis show that mitochondrial DNA and chloroplast DNA are highly related to their bacterial counterparts , both in DNA sequence and chromosome structure .
However , mitochondrial DNA and chloroplast DNA are reduced compared with nuclear DNA because many of the genes have moved from the organelles into the host cell ’ s nucleus .
Additionally , mitochondrial and chloroplast ribosomes are structurally similar to bacterial ribosomes , rather than to the eukaryotic ribosomes of their hosts .
Last , the binary fission of these organelles strongly resembles the binary fission of bacteria , as compared with mitosis performed by eukaryotic cells .
Since Margulis ’ original proposal , scientists have observed several examples of bacterial endosymbionts in modern-day eukaryotic cells .
Examples include the endosymbiotic bacteria found within the guts of certain insects , such as cockroaches , and photosynthetic bacteria-like organelles found in protists .
Prior to the discovery of microbes during the 17th century , other theories circulated about the origins of disease .
For example , the ancient Greeks proposed the miasma theory , which held that disease originated from particles emanating from decomposing matter , such as that in sewage or cesspits .
Such particles infected humans in close proximity to the rotting material .
Diseases including the Black Death , which ravaged Europe ’ s population during the Middle Ages , were thought to have originated in this way .
In 1546 , Italian physician Girolamo Fracastoro proposed , in his essay De Contagione et Contagiosis Morbis , that seed-like spores may be transferred between individuals through direct contact , exposure to contaminated clothing , or through the air .
We now recognize Fracastoro as an early proponent of the germ theory of disease , which states that diseases may result from microbial infection .
However , in the 16th century , Fracastoro ’ s ideas were not widely accepted and would be largely forgotten until the 19th century .
Semmelweis observed medical students performing autopsies and then subsequently carrying out vaginal examinations on living patients without washing their hands in between .
He suspected that the students carried disease from the autopsies to the patients they examined .
His suspicions were supported by the untimely death of a friend , a physician who contracted a fatal wound infection after a postmortem examination of a woman who had died of a puerperal infection .
The dead physician ’ s wound had been caused by a scalpel used during the examination , and his subsequent illness and death closely paralleled that of the dead patient .
Although Semmelweis did not know the true cause of puerperal fever , he proposed that physicians were somehow transferring the causative agent to their patients .
He suggested that the number of puerperal fever cases could be reduced if physicians and medical students simply washed their hands with chlorinated lime water before and after examining every patient .
When this practice was implemented , the maternal mortality rate in mothers cared for by physicians dropped to the same 1 % mortality rate observed among mothers cared for by midwives .
This demonstrated that handwashing was a very effective method for preventing disease transmission .
Despite this great success , many discounted Semmelweis ’ s work at the time , and physicians were slow to adopt the simple procedure of handwashing to prevent infections in their patients because it contradicted established norms for that time period .
Around the same time Semmelweis was promoting handwashing , in 1848 , British physician John Snow conducted studies to track the source of cholera outbreaks in London .
By tracing the outbreaks to two specific water sources , both of which were contaminated by sewage , Snow ultimately demonstrated that cholera bacteria were transmitted via drinking water .
Snow ’ s work is influential in that it represents the first known epidemiological study , and it resulted in the first known public health response to an epidemic .
The work of both Semmelweis and Snow clearly refuted the prevailing miasma theory of the day , showing that disease is not only transmitted through the air but also through contaminated items .
Although the work of Semmelweis and Snow successfully showed the role of sanitation in preventing infectious disease , the cause of disease was not fully understood .
The subsequent work of Louis Pasteur , Robert Koch , and Joseph Lister would further substantiate the germ theory of disease .
While studying the causes of beer and wine spoilage in 1856 , Pasteur discovered properties of fermentation by microorganisms .
He had demonstrated with his swan-neck flask experiments that airborne microbes , not spontaneous generation , were the cause of food spoilage , and he suggested that if microbes were responsible for food spoilage and fermentation , they could also be responsible for causing infection .
This was the foundation for the germ theory of disease .
Meanwhile , British surgeon Joseph Lister was trying to determine the causes of postsurgical infections .
Many physicians did not give credence to the idea that microbes on their hands , on their clothes , or in the air could infect patients ’ surgical wounds , despite the fact that 50 % of surgical patients , on average , were dying of postsurgical infections .
Lister , however , was familiar with the work of Semmelweis and Pasteur ; therefore , he insisted on handwashing and extreme cleanliness during surgery .
In 1867 , to further decrease the incidence of postsurgical wound infections , Lister began using carbolic acid ( phenol ) spray disinfectant/antiseptic during surgery .
His extremely successful efforts to reduce postsurgical infection caused his techniques to become a standard medical practice .
A few years later , Robert Koch proposed a series of postulates ( Koch ’ s postulates ) based on the idea that the cause of a specific disease could be attributed to a specific microbe .
Using these postulates , Koch and his colleagues were able to definitively identify the causative pathogens of specific diseases , including anthrax , tuberculosis , and cholera .
Koch ’ s “ one microbe , one disease ” concept was the culmination of the 19th century ’ s paradigm shift away from miasma theory and toward the germ theory of disease .
Koch ’ s postulates are discussed more thoroughly in .
However , cells vary significantly in size , shape , structure , and function .
At the simplest level of construction , all cells possess a few fundamental components .
Beyond these basic components , cells can vary greatly between organisms , and even within the same multicellular organism .
The two largest categories of cells— prokaryotic cells and eukaryotic cells —are defined by major differences in several cell structures .
Prokaryotic cells lack a nucleus surrounded by a complex nuclear membrane and generally have a single , circular chromosome located in a nucleoid .
Eukaryotic cells have a nucleus surrounded by a complex nuclear membrane that contains multiple , rod-shaped chromosomes .
All plant cells and animal cells are eukaryotic .
Some microorganisms are composed of prokaryotic cells , whereas others are composed of eukaryotic cells .
Prokaryotic microorganisms are classified within the domains Archaea and Bacteria , whereas eukaryotic organisms are classified within the domain Eukarya .
The structures inside a cell are analogous to the organs inside a human body , with unique structures suited to specific functions .
Some of the structures found in prokaryotic cells are similar to those found in some eukaryotic cells ; others are unique to prokaryotes .
Although there are some exceptions , eukaryotic cells tend to be larger than prokaryotic cells .
The comparatively larger size of eukaryotic cells dictates the need to compartmentalize various chemical processes within different areas of the cell , using complex membrane-bound organelles .
In contrast , prokaryotic cells generally lack membrane-bound organelles ; however , they often contain inclusions that compartmentalize their cytoplasm .
illustrates structures typically associated with prokaryotic cells .
These structures are described in more detail in the next section .
Individual cells of a particular prokaryotic organism are typically similar in shape , or cell morphology .
Although thousands of prokaryotic organisms have been identified , only a handful of cell morphologies are commonly seen microscopically .
names and illustrates cell morphologies commonly found in prokaryotic cells .
In addition to cellular shape , prokaryotic cells of the same species may group together in certain distinctive arrangements depending on the plane of cell division .
Some common arrangements are shown in .
In most prokaryotic cells , morphology is maintained by the cell wall in combination with cytoskeletal elements .
The cell wall is a structure found in most prokaryotes and some eukaryotes ; it envelopes the cell membrane , protecting the cell from changes in osmotic pressure .
Osmotic pressure occurs because of differences in the concentration of solutes on opposing sides of a semipermeable membrane .
Water is able to pass through a semipermeable membrane , but solutes ( dissolved molecules like salts , sugars , and other compounds ) can not .
This diffusion of water is called osmosis , and it can cause extreme osmotic pressure on a cell when its external environment changes .
The external environment of a cell can be described as an isotonic , hypertonic , or hypotonic medium .
In an isotonic medium , the solute concentrations inside and outside the cell are approximately equal , so there is no net movement of water across the cell membrane .
In a hypertonic medium , the solute concentration outside the cell exceeds that inside the cell , so water diffuses out of the cell and into the external medium .
In a hypotonic medium , the solute concentration inside the cell exceeds that outside of the cell , so water will move by osmosis into the cell .
This causes the cell to swell and potentially lyse , or burst .
The degree to which a particular cell is able to withstand changes in osmotic pressure is called tonicity .
Cells that have a cell wall are better able to withstand subtle changes in osmotic pressure and maintain their shape .
In hypertonic environments , cells that lack a cell wall can become dehydrated , causing crenation , or shriveling of the cell ; the plasma membrane contracts and appears scalloped or notched .
By contrast , cells that possess a cell wall undergo plasmolysis rather than crenation .
In plasmolysis , the plasma membrane contracts and detaches from the cell wall , and there is a decrease in interior volume , but the cell wall remains intact , thus allowing the cell to maintain some shape and integrity for a period of time .
Likewise , cells that lack a cell wall are more prone to lysis in hypotonic environments .
The presence of a cell wall allows the cell to maintain its shape and integrity for a longer time before lysing .
All cellular life has a DNA genome organized into one or more chromosomes .
Prokaryotic chromosomes are typically circular , haploid ( unpaired ) , and not bound by a complex nuclear membrane .
Prokaryotic DNA and DNA-associated proteins are concentrated within the nucleoid region of the cell .
In general , prokaryotic DNA interacts with nucleoid-associated proteins ( NAPs ) that assist in the organization and packaging of the chromosome .
In bacteria , NAPs function similar to histones , which are the DNA-organizing proteins found in eukaryotic cells .
In archaea , the nucleoid is organized by either NAPs or histone-like DNA organizing proteins .
Prokaryotic cells may also contain extrachromosomal DNA , or DNA that is not part of the chromosome .
This extrachromosomal DNA is found in plasmids , which are small , circular , double-stranded DNA molecules .
Cells that have plasmids often have hundreds of them within a single cell .
Plasmids are more commonly found in bacteria ; however , plasmids have been found in archaea and eukaryotic organisms .
Plasmids often carry genes that confer advantageous traits such as antibiotic resistance ; thus , they are important to the survival of the organism .
We will discuss plasmids in more detail in .
All cellular life synthesizes proteins , and organisms in all three domains of life possess ribosomes , structures responsible for protein synthesis .
However , ribosomes in each of the three domains are structurally different .
Ribosomes , themselves , are constructed from proteins , along with ribosomal RNA ( rRNA ) .
Prokaryotic ribosomes are found in the cytoplasm .
They are called 70S ribosomes because they have a size of 70S , whereas eukaryotic cytoplasmic ribosomes have a size of 80S .
( The S stands for Svedberg unit , a measure of sedimentation in an ultracentrifuge , which is based on size , shape , and surface qualities of the structure being analyzed ) .
Although they are the same size , bacterial and archaeal ribosomes have different proteins and rRNA molecules , and the archaeal versions are more similar to their eukaryotic counterparts than to those found in bacteria .
As single-celled organisms living in unstable environments , some prokaryotic cells have the ability to store excess nutrients within cytoplasmic structures called inclusions .
Storing nutrients in a polymerized form is advantageous because it reduces the buildup of osmotic pressure that occurs as a cell accumulates solutes .
Various types of inclusions store glycogen and starches , which contain carbon that cells can access for energy .
Volutin granules , also called metachromatic granules because of their staining characteristics , are inclusions that store polymerized inorganic phosphate that can be used in metabolism and assist in the formation of biofilms .
Microbes known to contain volutin granules include the archaea Methanosarcina , the bacterium Corynebacterium diphtheriae , and the unicellular eukaryotic alga Chlamydomonas .
Sulfur granules , another type of inclusion , are found in sulfur bacteria of the genus Thiobacillus ; these granules store elemental sulfur , which the bacteria use for metabolism .
Occasionally , certain types of inclusions are surrounded by a phospholipid monolayer embedded with protein .
Polyhydroxybutyrate ( PHB ) , which can be produced by species of Bacillus and Pseudomonas , is an example of an inclusion that displays this type of monolayer structure .
Industrially , PHB has also been used as a source of biodegradable polymers for bioplastics .
Several different types of inclusions are shown in .
Some prokaryotic cells have other types of inclusions that serve purposes other than nutrient storage .
For example , some prokaryotic cells produce gas vacuoles , accumulations of small , protein-lined vesicles of gas .
These gas vacuoles allow the prokaryotic cells that synthesize them to alter their buoyancy so that they can adjust their location in the water column .
Magnetotactic bacteria , such as Magnetospirillum magnetotacticum , contain magnetosomes , which are inclusions of magnetic iron oxide or iron sulfide surrounded by a lipid layer .
These allow cells to align along a magnetic field , aiding their movement .
Cyanobacteria such as Anabaena cylindrica and bacteria such as Halothiobacillus neapolitanus produce carboxysome inclusions .
Carboxysomes are composed of outer shells of thousands of protein subunits .
Their interior is filled with ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase ( RuBisCO ) and carbonic anhydrase .
Both of these compounds are used for carbon metabolism .
Some prokaryotic cells also possess carboxysomes that sequester functionally related enzymes in one location .
These structures are considered proto-organelles because they compartmentalize important compounds or chemical reactions , much like many eukaryotic organelles .
Bacterial cells are generally observed as vegetative cells , but some genera of bacteria have the ability to form endospores , structures that essentially protect the bacterial genome in a dormant state when environmental conditions are unfavorable .
Endospores ( not to be confused with the reproductive spores formed by fungi ) allow some bacterial cells to survive long periods without food or water , as well as exposure to chemicals , extreme temperatures , and even radiation .
compares the characteristics of vegetative cells and endospores .
The process by which vegetative cells transform into endospores is called sporulation , and it generally begins when nutrients become depleted or environmental conditions become otherwise unfavorable .
The process begins with the formation of a septum in the vegetative bacterial cell .
The septum divides the cell asymmetrically , separating a DNA forespore from the mother cell .
The forespore , which will form the core of the endospore , is essentially a copy of the cell ’ s chromosomes , and is separated from the mother cell by a second membrane .
A cortex gradually forms around the forespore by laying down layers of calcium and dipicolinic acid between membranes .
A protein spore coat then forms around the cortex while the DNA of the mother cell disintegrates .
Further maturation of the endospore occurs with the formation of an outermost exosporium .
The endospore is released upon disintegration of the mother cell , completing sporulation .
Endospores of certain species have been shown to persist in a dormant state for extended periods of time , up to thousands of years .
However , when living conditions improve , endospores undergo germination , reentering a vegetative state .
After germination , the cell becomes metabolically active again and is able to carry out all of its normal functions , including growth and cell division .
Not all bacteria have the ability to form endospores ; however , there are a number of clinically significant endosporeforming gram-positive bacteria of the genera Bacillus and Clostridium .
Pathogens such as these are particularly difficult to combat because their endospores are so hard to kill .
Special sterilization methods for endospore-forming bacteria are discussed in .
Structures that enclose the cytoplasm and internal structures of the cell are known collectively as the cell envelope .
In prokaryotic cells , the structures of the cell envelope vary depending on the type of cell and organism .
Most ( but not all ) prokaryotic cells have a cell wall , but the makeup of this cell wall varies .
All cells ( prokaryotic and eukaryotic ) have a plasma membrane ( also called cytoplasmic membrane or cell membrane ) that exhibits selective permeability , allowing some molecules to enter or leave the cell while restricting the passage of others .
The plasma membrane structure of most bacterial and eukaryotic cell types is a bilayer composed mainly of phospholipids formed with ester linkages and proteins .
These phospholipids and proteins have the ability to move laterally within the plane of the membranes as well as between the two phospholipid layers .
Archaeal membranes are fundamentally different from bacterial and eukaryotic membranes in a few significant ways .
First , archaeal membrane phospholipids are formed with ether linkages , in contrast to the ester linkages found in bacterial or eukaryotic cell membranes .
Second , archaeal phospholipids have branched chains , whereas those of bacterial and eukaryotic cells are straight chained .
Finally , although some archaeal membranes can be formed of bilayers like those found in bacteria and eukaryotes , other archaeal plasma membranes are lipid monolayers .
Proteins on the cell ’ s surface are important for a variety of functions , including cell-to-cell communication , and sensing environmental conditions and pathogenic virulence factors .
Membrane proteins and phospholipids may have carbohydrates ( sugars ) associated with them and are called glycoproteins or glycolipids , respectively .
These glycoprotein and glycolipid complexes extend out from the surface of the cell , allowing the cell to interact with the external environment .
Glycoproteins and glycolipids in the plasma membrane can vary considerably in chemical composition among archaea , bacteria , and eukaryotes , allowing scientists to use them to characterize unique species .
Plasma membranes from different cells types also contain unique phospholipids , which contain fatty acids .
As described in , phospholipid-derived fatty acid analysis ( PLFA ) profiles can be used to identify unique types of cells based on differences in fatty acids .
Archaea , bacteria , and eukaryotes each have a unique PFLA profile .
One of the most important functions of the plasma membrane is to control the transport of molecules into and out of the cell .
Internal conditions must be maintained within a certain range despite any changes in the external environment .
The transport of substances across the plasma membrane allows cells to do so .
Cells use various modes of transport across the plasma membrane .
For example , molecules moving from a higher concentration to a lower concentration with the concentration gradient are transported by simple diffusion , also known as passive transport .
Some small molecules , like carbon dioxide , may cross the membrane bilayer directly by simple diffusion .
However , charged molecules , as well as large molecules , need the help of carriers or channels in the membrane .
These structures ferry molecules across the membrane , a process known as facilitated diffusion .
Active transport occurs when cells move molecules across their membrane against concentration gradients .
A major difference between passive and active transport is that active transport requires adenosine triphosphate ( ATP ) or other forms of energy to move molecules “ uphill. ” Therefore , active transport structures are often called “ pumps. ” Group translocation also transports substances into bacterial cells .
In this case , as a molecule moves into a cell against its concentration gradient , it is chemically modified so that it does not require transport against an unfavorable concentration gradient .
A common example of this is the bacterial phosphotransferase system , a series of carriers that phosphorylates ( i.e. , adds phosphate ions to ) glucose or other sugars upon entry into cells .
Since the phosphorylation of sugars is required during the early stages of sugar metabolism , the phosphotransferase system is considered to be an energy neutral system .
Some prokaryotic cells , namely cyanobacteria and photosynthetic bacteria , have membrane structures that enable them to perform photosynthesis .
These structures consist of an infolding of the plasma membrane that encloses photosynthetic pigments such as green chlorophylls and bacteriochlorophylls .
In cyanobacteria , these membrane structures are called thylakoids ; in photosynthetic bacteria , they are called chromatophores , lamellae , or chlorosomes .
The primary function of the cell wall is to protect the cell from harsh conditions in the outside environment .
When present , there are notable similarities and differences among the cell walls of archaea , bacteria , and eukaryotes .
The major component of bacterial cell walls is called peptidoglycan ( or murein ) ; it is only found in bacteria .
Structurally , peptidoglycan resembles a layer of meshwork or fabric .
Each layer is composed of long chains of alternating molecules of N-acetylglucosamine ( NAG ) and N-acetylmuramic acid ( NAM ) .
The structure of the long chains has significant two-dimensional tensile strength due to the formation of peptide bridges that connect NAG and NAM within each peptidoglycan layer .
In gram-negative bacteria , tetrapeptide chains extending from each NAM unit are directly cross-linked , whereas in gram-positive bacteria , these tetrapeptide chains are linked by pentaglycine cross-bridges .
Peptidoglycan subunits are made inside of the bacterial cell and then exported and assembled in layers , giving the cell its shape .
Since peptidoglycan is unique to bacteria , many antibiotic drugs are designed to interfere with peptidoglycan synthesis , weakening the cell wall and making bacterial cells more susceptible to the effects of osmotic pressure ( see ) .
The Gram staining protocol ( see ) is used to differentiate two common types of cell wall structures .
Gram-positive cells have a cell wall consisting of many layers of peptidoglycan totaling 30–100 nm in thickness .
These peptidoglycan layers are commonly embedded with teichoic acids ( TAs ) , carbohydrate chains that extend through and beyond the peptidoglycan layer .
TA is thought to stabilize peptidoglycan by increasing its rigidity .
TA also plays a role in the ability of pathogenic gram-positive bacteria such as Streptococcus to bind to certain proteins on the surface of host cells , enhancing their ability to cause infection .
Gram-negative cells have a much thinner layer of peptidoglycan ( no more than about 4 nm thick ) than grampositive cells , and the overall structure of their cell envelope is more complex .
In gram-negative cells , a gel-like matrix occupies the periplasmic space between the cell wall and the plasma membrane , and there is a second lipid bilayer called the outer membrane , which is external to the peptidoglycan layer .
This outer membrane is attached to the peptidoglycan by murein lipoprotein .
The outer leaflet of the outer membrane contains the molecule lipopolysaccharide ( LPS ) , which functions as an endotoxin in infections involving gram-negative bacteria , contributing to symptoms such as fever , hemorrhaging , and septic shock .
Each LPS molecule is composed of Lipid A , a core polysaccharide , and an O side chain that is composed of sugar-like molecules that comprise the external face of the LPS .
The composition of the O side chain varies between different species and strains of bacteria .
Parts of the O side chain called antigens can be detected using serological or immunological tests to identify specific pathogenic strains like Escherichia coli O157 : H7 , a deadly strain of bacteria that causes bloody diarrhea and kidney failure .
Archaeal cell wall structure differs from that of bacteria in several significant ways .
First , archaeal cell walls do not contain peptidoglycan ; instead , they contain a similar polymer called pseudopeptidoglycan ( pseudomurein ) in which NAM is replaced with a different subunit .
Other archaea may have a layer of glycoproteins or polysaccharides that serves as the cell wall instead of pseudopeptidoglycan .
Last , as is the case with some bacterial species , there are a few archaea that appear to lack cell walls entirely .
Although most prokaryotic cells have cell walls , some may have additional cell envelope structures exterior to the cell wall , such as glycocalyces and S-layers .
A glycocalyx is a sugar coat , of which there are two important types : capsules and slime layers .
A capsule is an organized layer located outside of the cell wall and usually composed of polysaccharides or proteins .
A slime layer is a less tightly organized layer that is only loosely attached to the cell wall and can be more easily washed off .
Slime layers may be composed of polysaccharides , glycoproteins , or glycolipids .
Glycocalyces allows cells to adhere to surfaces , aiding in the formation of biofilms ( colonies of microbes that form in layers on surfaces ) .
In nature , most microbes live in mixed communities within biofilms , partly because the biofilm affords them some level of protection .
Biofilms generally hold water like a sponge , preventing desiccation .
They also protect cells from predation and hinder the action of antibiotics and disinfectants .
All of these properties are advantageous to the microbes living in a biofilm , but they present challenges in a clinical setting , where the goal is often to eliminate microbes .
The ability to produce a capsule can contribute to a microbe ’ s pathogenicity ( ability to cause disease ) because the capsule can make it more difficult for phagocytic cells ( such as white blood cells ) to engulf and kill the microorganism .
Streptococcus pneumoniae , for example , produces a capsule that is well known to aid in this bacterium ’ s pathogenicity .
As explained in , capsules are difficult to stain for microscopy ; negative staining techniques are typically used .
An S-layer is another type of cell envelope structure ; it is composed of a mixture of structural proteins and glycoproteins .
In bacteria , S-layers are found outside the cell wall , but in some archaea , the S-layer serves as the cell wall .
Many bacterial cells have protein appendages embedded within their cell envelopes that extend outward , allowing interaction with the environment .
These appendages can attach to other surfaces , transfer DNA , or provide movement .
Filamentous appendages include fimbriae , pili , and flagella .
Fimbriae and pili are structurally similar and , because differentiation between the two is problematic , these terms are often used interchangeably .
The term fimbriae commonly refers to short bristle-like proteins projecting from the cell surface by the hundreds .
Fimbriae enable a cell to attach to surfaces and to other cells .
For pathogenic bacteria , adherence to host cells is important for colonization , infectivity , and virulence .
Adherence to surfaces is also important in biofilm formation .
The term pili ( singular : pilus ) commonly refers to longer , less numerous protein appendages that aid in attachment to surfaces .
A specific type of pilus , called the F pilus or sex pilus , is important in the transfer of DNA between bacterial cells , which occurs between members of the same generation when two cells physically transfer or exchange parts of their respective genomes ( see ) .
Flagella are structures used by cells to move in aqueous environments .
Bacterial flagella act like propellers .
They are stiff spiral filaments composed of flagellin protein subunits that extend outward from the cell and spin in solution .
The basal body is the motor for the flagellum and is embedded in the plasma membrane .
A hook region connects the basal body to the filament .
Gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria have different basal body configurations due to differences in cell wall structure .
Different types of motile bacteria exhibit different arrangements of flagella .
A bacterium with a singular flagellum , typically located at one end of the cell ( polar ) , is said to have a monotrichous flagellum .
An example of a monotrichously flagellated bacterial pathogen is Vibrio cholerae , the gram-negative bacterium that causes cholera .
Cells with amphitrichous flagella have a flagellum or tufts of flagella at each end .
An example is Spirillum minor , the cause of spirillary ( Asian ) rat-bite fever or sodoku .
Cells with lophotrichous flagella have a tuft at one end of the cell .
The gram-negative bacillus Pseudomonas aeruginosa , an opportunistic pathogen known for causing many infections , including “ swimmer ’ s ear ” and burn wound infections , has lophotrichous flagella .
Flagella that cover the entire surface of a bacterial cell are called peritrichous flagella .
The gram-negative bacterium E. coli shows a peritrichous arrangement of flagella .
Directional movement depends on the configuration of the flagella .
Bacteria can move in response to a variety of environmental signals , including light ( phototaxis ) , magnetic fields ( magnetotaxis ) using magnetosomes , and , most commonly , chemical gradients ( chemotaxis ) .
Purposeful movement toward a chemical attractant , like a food source , or away from a repellent , like a poisonous chemical , is achieved by increasing the length of runs and decreasing the length of tumbles .
When running , flagella rotate in a counterclockwise direction , allowing the bacterial cell to move forward .
In a peritrichous bacterium , the flagella are all bundled together in a very streamlined way , allowing for efficient movement .
When tumbling , flagella are splayed out while rotating in a clockwise direction , creating a looping motion and preventing meaningful forward movement but reorienting the cell toward the direction of the attractant .
When an attractant exists , runs and tumbles still occur ; however , the length of runs is longer , while the length of the tumbles is reduced , allowing overall movement toward the higher concentration of the attractant .
When no chemical gradient exists , the lengths of runs and tumbles are more equal , and overall movement is more random .
Some eukaryotic cells are independent , single-celled microorganisms , whereas others are part of multicellular organisms .
The cells of eukaryotic organisms have several distinguishing characteristics .
Above all , eukaryotic cells are defined by the presence of a nucleus surrounded by a complex nuclear membrane .
Also , eukaryotic cells are characterized by the presence of membranebound organelles in the cytoplasm .
Organelles such as mitochondria , the endoplasmic reticulum ( ER ) , Golgi apparatus , lysosomes , and peroxisomes are held in place by the cytoskeleton , an internal network that supports transport of intracellular components and helps maintain cell shape .
The genome of eukaryotic cells is packaged in multiple , rod-shaped chromosomes as opposed to the single , circular-shaped chromosome that characterizes most prokaryotic cells .
compares the characteristics of eukaryotic cell structures with those of bacteria and archaea .
Scientists have studied prokaryotes for centuries , but it wasn ’ t until 1966 that scientist Thomas Brock ( 1926– ) discovered that certain bacteria can live in boiling water .
This led many to wonder whether prokaryotes may also live in other extreme environments , such as at the bottom of the ocean , at high altitudes , or inside volcanoes , or even on other planets .
Prokaryotes have an important role in changing , shaping , and sustaining the entire biosphere .
They can produce proteins and other substances used by molecular biologists in basic research and in medicine and industry .
For example , the bacterium Shewanella lives in the deep sea , where oxygen is scarce .
It grows long appendages , which have special sensors used to seek the limited oxygen in its environment .
It can also digest toxic waste and generate electricity .
Other species of prokaryotes can produce more oxygen than the entire Amazon rainforest , while still others supply plants , animals , and humans with usable forms of nitrogen ; and inhabit our body , protecting us from harmful microorganisms and producing some vitally important substances .
This chapter will examine the diversity , structure , and function of prokaryotes .
Identify and describe unique examples of prokaryotes in various habitats on earth Identify and describe symbiotic relationships Compare normal/commensal/resident microbiota to transient microbiota Explain how prokaryotes are classified All living organisms are classified into three domains of life : Archaea , Bacteria , and Eukarya .
In this chapter , we will focus on the domains Archaea and Bacteria .
Archaea and bacteria are unicellular prokaryotic organisms .
Unlike eukaryotes , they have no nuclei or any other membrane-bound organelles .
Prokaryotes are ubiquitous .
They can be found everywhere on our planet , even in hot springs , in the Antarctic ice shield , and under extreme pressure two miles under water .
One bacterium , Paracoccus denitrificans , has even been shown to survive when scientists removed it from its native environment ( soil ) and used a centrifuge to subject it to forces of gravity as strong as those found on the surface of Jupiter .
Prokaryotes also are abundant on and within the human body .
According to a report by National Institutes of Health , prokaryotes , especially bacteria , outnumber human cells 10:1 .
More recent studies suggest the ratio could be closer to 1:1 , but even that ratio means that there are a great number of bacteria within the human body .
Bacteria thrive in the human mouth , nasal cavity , throat , ears , gastrointestinal tract , and vagina .
Large colonies of bacteria can be found on healthy human skin , especially in moist areas ( armpits , navel , and areas behind ears ) .
However , even drier areas of the skin are not free from bacteria .
The existence of prokaryotes is very important for the stability and thriving of ecosystems .
For example , they are a necessary part of soil formation and stabilization processes through the breakdown of organic matter and development of biofilms .
One gram of soil contains up to 10 billion microorganisms ( most of them prokaryotic ) belonging to about 1,000 species .
Many species of bacteria use substances released from plant roots , such as acids and carbohydrates , as nutrients .
The bacteria metabolize these plant substances and release the products of bacterial metabolism back to the soil , forming humus and thus increasing the soil ’ s fertility .
In salty lakes such as the Dead Sea , salt-loving halobacteria decompose dead brine shrimp and nourish young brine shrimp and flies with the products of bacterial metabolism .
In addition to living in the ground and the water , prokaryotic microorganisms are abundant in the air , even high in the atmosphere .
There may be up to 2,000 different kinds of bacteria in the air , similar to their diversity in the soil .
Prokaryotes can be found everywhere on earth because they are extremely resilient and adaptable .
They are often metabolically flexible , which means that they might easily switch from one energy source to another , depending on the availability of the sources , or from one metabolic pathway to another .
For example , certain prokaryotic cyanobacteria can switch from a conventional type of lipid metabolism , which includes production of fatty aldehydes , to a different type of lipid metabolism that generates biofuel , such as fatty acids and wax esters .
Groundwater bacteria store complex high-energy carbohydrates when grown in pure groundwater , but they metabolize these molecules when the groundwater is enriched with phosphates .
Some bacteria get their energy by reducing sulfates into sulfides , but can switch to a different metabolic pathway when necessary , producing acids and free hydrogen ions .
Prokaryotes perform functions vital to life on earth by capturing ( or “ fixing ” ) and recycling elements like carbon and nitrogen .
Organisms such as animals require organic carbon to grow , but , unlike prokaryotes , they are unable to use inorganic carbon sources like carbon dioxide .
Thus , animals rely on prokaryotes to convert carbon dioxide into organic carbon products that they can use .
This process of converting carbon dioxide to organic carbon products is called carbon fixation .
Plants and animals also rely heavily on prokaryotes for nitrogen fixation , the conversion of atmospheric nitrogen into ammonia , a compound that some plants can use to form many different biomolecules necessary to their survival .
Bacteria in the genus Rhizobium , for example , are nitrogen-fixing bacteria ; they live in the roots of legume plants such as clover , alfalfa , and peas .
Ammonia produced by Rhizobium helps these plants to survive by enabling them to make building blocks of nucleic acids .
In turn , these plants may be eaten by animals—sustaining their growth and survival—or they may die , in which case the products of nitrogen fixation will enrich the soil and be used by other plants .
Another positive function of prokaryotes is in cleaning up the environment .
Recently , some researchers focused on the diversity and functions of prokaryotes in manmade environments .
They found that some bacteria play a unique role in degrading toxic chemicals that pollute water and soil .
Despite all of the positive and helpful roles prokaryotes play , some are human pathogens that may cause illness or infection when they enter the body .
In addition , some bacteria can contaminate food , causing spoilage or foodborne illness , which makes them subjects of concern in food preparation and safety .
Less than 1 % of prokaryotes ( all of them bacteria ) are thought to be human pathogens , but collectively these species are responsible for a large number of the diseases that afflict humans .
Besides pathogens , which have a direct impact on human health , prokaryotes also affect humans in many indirect ways .
For example , prokaryotes are now thought to be key players in the processes of climate change .
In recent years , as temperatures in the earth ’ s polar regions have risen , soil that was formerly frozen year-round ( permafrost ) has begun to thaw .
Carbon trapped in the permafrost is gradually released and metabolized by prokaryotes .
This produces massive amounts of carbon dioxide and methane , greenhouse gases that escape into the atmosphere and contribute to the greenhouse effect .
As we have learned , prokaryotic microorganisms can associate with plants and animals .
Often , this association results in unique relationships between organisms .
For example , bacteria living on the roots or leaves of a plant get nutrients from the plant and , in return , produce substances that protect the plant from pathogens .
On the other hand , some bacteria are plant pathogens that use mechanisms of infection similar to bacterial pathogens of animals and humans .
Prokaryotes live in a community , or a group of interacting populations of organisms .
A population is a group of individual organisms belonging to the same biological species and limited to a certain geographic area .
Populations can have cooperative interactions , which benefit the populations , or competitive interactions , in which one population competes with another for resources .
The study of these interactions between microbial populations and their environment is called microbial ecology .
Any interaction between different species that are associated with each other within a community is called symbiosis .
Such interactions fall along a continuum between opposition and cooperation .
Interactions in a symbiotic relationship may be beneficial or harmful , or have no effect on one or both of the species involved .
summarizes the main types of symbiotic interactions among prokaryotes .
When two species benefit from each other , the symbiosis is called mutualism ( or syntropy , or crossfeeding ) .
For example , humans have a mutualistic relationship with the bacterium Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron , which lives in the intestinal tract .
Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron digests complex polysaccharide plant materials that human digestive enzymes can not break down , converting them into monosaccharides that can be absorbed by human cells .
Humans also have a mutualistic relationship with certain strains of Escherichia coli , another bacterium found in the gut .
E. coli relies on intestinal contents for nutrients , and humans derive certain vitamins from E. coli , particularly vitamin K , which is required for the formation of blood clotting factors .
( This is only true for some strains of E. coli , however .
Other strains are pathogenic and do not have a mutualistic relationship with humans . )
A type of symbiosis in which one population harms another but remains unaffected itself is called amensalism .
In the case of bacteria , some amensalist species produce bactericidal substances that kill other species of bacteria .
The microbiota of the skin is composed of a variety of bacterial species , including Staphylococcus epidermidis and Propionibacterium acnes .
Although both species have the potential to cause infectious diseases when protective barriers are breached , they both produce a variety of antibacterial bacteriocins and bacteriocin-like compounds .
S. epidermidis and P. acnes are unaffected by the bacteriocins and bacteriocin-like compounds they produce , but these compounds can target and kill other potential pathogens .
In another type of symbiosis , called commensalism , one organism benefits while the other is unaffected .
This occurs when the bacterium Staphylococcus epidermidis uses the dead cells of the human skin as nutrients .
Billions of these bacteria live on our skin , but in most cases ( especially when our immune system is healthy ) , we do not react to them in any way .
S. epidermidis provides an excellent example of how the classifications of symbiotic relationships are not always distinct .
One could also consider the symbiotic relationship of S. epidermidis with humans as mutualism .
Humans provide a food source of dead skin cells to the bacterium , and in turn the production of bacteriocin can provide an defense against potential pathogens .
If neither of the symbiotic organisms is affected in any way , we call this type of symbiosis neutralism .
An example of neutralism is the coexistence of metabolically active ( vegetating ) bacteria and endospores ( dormant , metabolically passive bacteria ) .
For example , the bacterium Bacillus anthracis typically forms endospores in soil when conditions are unfavorable .
If the soil is warmed and enriched with nutrients , some B. anthracis endospores germinate and remain in symbiosis with other species of endospores that have not germinated .
A type of symbiosis in which one organism benefits while harming the other is called parasitism .
The relationship between humans and many pathogenic prokaryotes can be characterized as parasitic because these organisms invade the body , producing toxic substances or infectious diseases that cause harm .
Diseases such as tetanus , diphtheria , pertussis , tuberculosis , and leprosy all arise from interactions between bacteria and humans .
Scientists have coined the term microbiome to refer to all prokaryotic and eukaryotic microorganisms that are associated with a certain organism or environment .
Within the human microbiome , there are resident microbiota and transient microbiota .
The resident microbiota consists of microorganisms that constantly live in or on our bodies .
The term transient microbiota refers to microorganisms that are only temporarily found in the human body , and these may include pathogenic microorganisms .
Hygiene and diet can alter both the resident and transient microbiota .
The resident microbiota is amazingly diverse , not only in terms of the variety of species but also in terms of the preference of different microorganisms for different areas of the human body .
For example , in the human mouth , there are thousands of commensal or mutualistic species of bacteria .
Some of these bacteria prefer to inhabit the surface of the tongue , whereas others prefer the internal surface of the cheeks , and yet others prefer the front or back teeth or gums .
The inner surface of the cheek has the least diverse microbiota because of its exposure to oxygen .
By contrast , the crypts of the tongue and the spaces between teeth are two sites with limited oxygen exposure , so these sites have more diverse microbiota , including bacteria living in the absence of oxygen ( e.g. , Bacteroides , Fusobacterium ) .
Differences in the oral microbiota between randomly chosen human individuals are also significant .
Studies have shown , for example , that the prevalence of such bacteria as Streptococcus , Haemophilus , Neisseria , and others was dramatically different when compared between individuals .
There are also significant differences between the microbiota of different sites of the same human body .
The inner surface of the cheek has a predominance of Streptococcus , whereas in the throat , the palatine tonsil , and saliva , there are two to three times fewer Streptococcus , and several times more Fusobacterium .
In the plaque removed from gums , the predominant bacteria belong to the genus Fusobacterium .
However , in the intestine , both Streptococcus and Fusobacterium disappear , and the genus Bacteroides becomes predominant .
Not only can the microbiota vary from one body site to another , the microbiome can also change over time within the same individual .
Humans acquire their first inoculations of normal flora during natural birth and shortly after birth .
Before birth , there is a rapid increase in the population of Lactobacillus spp .
in the vagina , and this population serves as the first colonization of microbiota during natural birth .
After birth , additional microbes are acquired from healthcare providers , parents , other relatives , and individuals who come in contact with the baby .
This process establishes a microbiome that will continue to evolve over the course of the individual ’ s life as new microbes colonize and are eliminated from the body .
For example , it is estimated that within a 9-hour period , the microbiota of the small intestine can change so that half of the microbial inhabitants will be different .
The importance of the initial Lactobacillus colonization during vaginal child birth is highlighted by studies demonstrating a higher incidence of diseases in individuals born by cesarean section , compared to those born vaginally .
Studies have shown that babies born vaginally are predominantly colonized by vaginal lactobacillus , whereas babies born by cesarean section are more frequently colonized by microbes of the normal skin microbiota , including common hospital-acquired pathogens .
Throughout the body , resident microbiotas are important for human health because they occupy niches that might be otherwise taken by pathogenic microorganisms .
For instance , Lactobacillus spp .
are the dominant bacterial species of the normal vaginal microbiota for most women .
lactobacillus produce lactic acid , contributing to the acidity of the vagina and inhibiting the growth of pathogenic yeasts .
However , when the population of the resident microbiota is decreased for some reason ( e.g. , because of taking antibiotics ) , the pH of the vagina increases , making it a more favorable environment for the growth of yeasts such as Candida albicans .
Antibiotic therapy can also disrupt the microbiota of the intestinal tract and respiratory tract , increasing the risk for secondary infections and/or promoting the long-term carriage and shedding of pathogens .
Assigning prokaryotes to a certain species is challenging .
They do not reproduce sexually , so it is not possible to classify them according to the presence or absence of interbreeding .
Also , they do not have many morphological features .
Traditionally , the classification of prokaryotes was based on their shape , staining patterns , and biochemical or physiological differences .
More recently , as technology has improved , the nucleotide sequences in genes have become an important criterion of microbial classification .
In 1923 , American microbiologist David Hendricks Bergey ( 1860–1937 ) published A Manual in Determinative Bacteriology .
With this manual , he attempted to summarize the information about the kinds of bacteria known at that time , using Latin binomial classification .
Bergey also included the morphological , physiological , and biochemical properties of these organisms .
His manual has been updated multiple times to include newer bacteria and their properties .
It is a great aid in bacterial taxonomy and methods of characterization of bacteria .
A more recent sister publication , the five-volume Bergey ’ s Manual of Systematic Bacteriology , expands on Bergey ’ s original manual .
It includes a large number of additional species , along with up-to-date descriptions of the taxonomy and biological properties of all named prokaryotic taxa .
This publication incorporates the approved names of bacteria as determined by the List of Prokaryotic Names with Standing in Nomenclature ( LPSN ) .
According to their staining patterns , which depend on the properties of their cell walls , bacteria have traditionally been classified into gram-positive , gram-negative , and “ atypical , ” meaning neither gram-positive nor gram-negative .
As explained in , gram-positive bacteria possess a thick peptidoglycan cell wall that retains the primary stain ( crystal violet ) during the decolorizing step ; they remain purple after the gramstain procedure because the crystal violet dominates the light red/pink color of the secondary counterstain , safranin .
In contrast , gram-negative bacteria possess a thin peptidoglycan cell wall that does not prevent the crystal violet from washing away during the decolorizing step ; therefore , they appear light red/pink after staining with the safranin .
Bacteria that can not be stained by the standard Gram stain procedure are called atypical bacteria .
Included in the atypical category are species of Mycoplasma and Chlamydia .
Rickettsia are also considered atypical because they are too small to be evaluated by the Gram stain .
More recently , scientists have begun to further classify gram-negative and gram-positive bacteria .
They have added a special group of deeply branching bacteria based on a combination of physiological , biochemical , and genetic features .
They also now further classify gram-negative bacteria into Proteobacteria , Cytophaga-FlavobacteriumBacteroides ( CFB ) , and spirochetes .
The deeply branching bacteria are thought to be a very early evolutionary form of bacteria ( see ) .
They live in hot , acidic , ultraviolet-light-exposed , and anaerobic ( deprived of oxygen ) conditions .
Proteobacteria is a phylum of very diverse groups of gram-negative bacteria ; it includes some important human pathogens ( e.g. , E. coli and Bordetella pertussis ) .
The CFB group of bacteria includes components of the normal human gut microbiota , like Bacteroides .
The spirochetes are spiral-shaped bacteria and include the pathogen Treponema pallidum , which causes syphilis .
We will characterize these groups of bacteria in more detail later in the chapter .
Based on their prevalence of guanine and cytosine nucleotides , gram-positive bacteria are also classified into low G+C and high G+C gram-positive bacteria .
The low G+C gram-positive bacteria have less than 50 % of guanine and cytosine nucleotides in their DNA .
They include human pathogens , such as those that cause anthrax ( Bacillus anthracis ) , tetanus ( Clostridium tetani ) , and listeriosis ( Listeria monocytogenes ) .
High G+C gram-positive bacteria , which have more than 50 % guanine and cytosine nucleotides in their DNA , include the bacteria that cause diphtheria ( Corynebacterium diphtheriae ) , tuberculosis ( Mycobacterium tuberculosis ) , and other diseases .
The classifications of prokaryotes are constantly changing as new species are being discovered .
We will describe them in more detail , along with the diseases they cause , in later sections and chapters .
This phylum of gram-negative bacteria subsequently received the name Proteobacteria .
It includes many bacteria that are part of the normal human microbiota as well as many pathogens .
The Proteobacteria are further divided into five classes : Alphaproteobacteria , Betaproteobacteria , Gammaproteobacteria , Deltaproteobacteria , and Epsilonproteobacteria .
The first class of Proteobacteria is the Alphaproteobacteria .
The unifying characteristic of this class is that they are oligotroph s , organisms capable of living in low-nutrient environments such as deep oceanic sediments , glacial ice , or deep undersurface soil .
Among the Alphaproteobacteria are two taxa , chlamydias and rickettsias , that are obligate intracellular pathogen s , meaning that part of their life cycle must occur inside other cells called host cells .
When not growing inside a host cell , Chlamydia and Rickettsia are metabolically inactive outside of the host cell .
They can not synthesize their own adenosine triphosphate ( ATP ) , and , therefore , rely on cells for their energy needs .
include a number of serious human pathogens .
For example , R. rickettsii causes Rocky Mountain spotted fever , a life-threatening form of meningoencephalitis ( inflammation of the membranes that wrap the brain ) .
R. rickettsii infects ticks and can be transmitted to humans via a bite from an infected tick .
Another species of Rickettsia , R. prowazekii , is spread by lice .
It causes epidemic typhus , a severe infectious disease common during warfare and mass migrations of people .
R. prowazekii infects human endothelium cells , causing inflammation of the inner lining of blood vessels , high fever , abdominal pain , and sometimes delirium .
A relative , R. typhi , causes a less severe disease known as murine or endemic typhus , which is still observed in the southwestern United States during warm seasons .
Chlamydia is another taxon of the Alphaproteobacteria .
Members of this genus are gram-negative , obligate intracellular pathogens that are extremely resistant to the cellular defenses , giving them the ability to spread from host to host rapidly via elementary bodies .
The metabolically and reproductively inactive elementary bodies are the endospore-like form of intracellular bacteria that enter an epithelial cell , where they become active .
illustrates the life cycle of Chlamydia .
C. trachomatis is a human pathogen that causes trachoma , a disease of the eyes , often leading to blindness .
C. trachomatis also causes the sexually transmitted disease lymphogranuloma venereum ( LGV ) .
This disease is often mildly symptomatic , manifesting as regional lymph node swelling , or it may be asymptomatic , but it is extremely contagious and is common on college campuses .
summarizes the characteristics of important genera of Alphaproteobacteria .
Unlike Alphaproteobacteria , which survive on a minimal amount of nutrients , the class Betaproteobacteria are eutroph s ( or copiotrophs ) , meaning that they require a copious amount of organic nutrients .
Betaproteobacteria often grow between aerobic and anaerobic areas ( e.g. , in mammalian intestines ) .
Some genera include species that are human pathogens , able to cause severe , sometimes life-threatening disease .
The genus Neisseria , for example , includes the bacteria N. gonorrhoeae , the causative agent of the STI gonorrhea , and N. meningitides , the causative agent of bacterial meningitis .
Neisseria are cocci that live on mucosal surfaces of the human body .
They are fastidious , or difficult to culture , and they require high levels of moisture , nutrient supplements , and carbon dioxide .
Also , Neisseria are microaerophilic , meaning that they require low levels of oxygen .
For optimal growth and for the purposes of identification , Neisseria spp .
are grown on chocolate agar ( i.e. , agar supplemented by partially hemolyzed red blood cells ) .
Their characteristic pattern of growth in culture is diplococcal : pairs of cells resembling coffee beans .
The pathogen responsible for pertussis ( whooping cough ) is also a member of Betaproteobacteria .
The bacterium Bordetella pertussis , from the order Burkholderiales , produces several toxins that paralyze the movement of cilia in the human respiratory tract and directly damage cells of the respiratory tract , causing a severe cough .
summarizes the characteristics of important genera of Betaproteobacteria .
The most diverse class of gram-negative bacteria is Gammaproteobacteria , and it includes a number of human pathogens .
For example , a large and diverse family , Pseudomonaceae , includes the genus Pseudomonas .
Within this genus is the species P. aeruginosa , a pathogen responsible for diverse infections in various regions of the body .
P. aeruginosa is a strictly aerobic , nonfermenting , highly motile bacterium .
It often infects wounds and burns , can be the cause of chronic urinary tract infections , and can be an important cause of respiratory infections in patients with cystic fibrosis or patients on mechanical ventilators .
Infections by P. aeruginosa are often difficult to treat because the bacterium is resistant to many antibiotics and has a remarkable ability to form biofilms .
Other representatives of Pseudomonas include the fluorescent ( glowing ) bacterium P. fluorescens and the soil bacteria P. putida , which is known for its ability to degrade xenobiotics ( substances not naturally produced or found in living organisms ) .
The Pasteurellaceae also includes several clinically relevant genera and species .
This family includes several bacteria that are human and/or animal pathogens .
For example , Pasteurella haemolytica causes severe pneumonia in sheep and goats .
P. multocida is a species that can be transmitted from animals to humans through bites , causing infections of the skin and deeper tissues .
The genus Haemophilus contains two human pathogens , H. influenzae and H. ducreyi .
Despite its name , H. influenzae does not cause influenza ( which is a viral disease ) .
H. influenzae can cause both upper and lower respiratory tract infections , including sinusitis , bronchitis , ear infections , and pneumonia .
Before the development of effective vaccination , strains of H. influenzae were a leading cause of more invasive diseases , like meningitis in children .
H. ducreyi causes the STI known as chancroid .
The order Vibrionales includes the human pathogen Vibrio cholerae .
This comma-shaped aquatic bacterium thrives in highly alkaline environments like shallow lagoons and sea ports .
A toxin produced by V. cholerae causes hypersecretion of electrolytes and water in the large intestine , leading to profuse watery diarrhea and dehydration .
V. parahaemolyticus is also a cause of gastrointestinal disease in humans , whereas V. vulnificus causes serious and potentially life-threatening cellulitis ( infection of the skin and deeper tissues ) and blood-borne infections .
Another representative of Vibrionales , Aliivibrio fischeri , engages in a symbiotic relationship with squid .
The squid provides nutrients for the bacteria to grow and the bacteria produce bioluminescence that protects the squid from predators .
The genus Legionella also belongs to the Gammaproteobacteria .
L. pneumophila , the pathogen responsible for Legionnaires disease , is an aquatic bacterium that tends to inhabit pools of warm water , such as those found in the tanks of air conditioning units in large buildings .
Because the bacteria can spread in aerosols , outbreaks of Legionnaires disease often affect residents of a building in which the water has become contaminated with Legionella .
In fact , these bacteria derive their name from the first known outbreak of Legionnaires disease , which occurred in a hotel hosting an American Legion veterans ’ association convention in Philadelphia in 1976 .
Enterobacteriaceae is a large family of enteric ( intestinal ) bacteria belonging to the Gammaproteobacteria .
They are facultative anaerobes and are able to ferment carbohydrates .
Within this family , microbiologists recognize two distinct categories .
The first category is called the coliforms , after its prototypical bacterium species , Escherichia coli .
Coliforms are able to ferment lactose completely ( i.e. , with the production of acid and gas ) .
The second category , noncoliforms , either can not ferment lactose or can only ferment it incompletely ( producing either acid or gas , but not both ) .
The noncoliforms include some notable human pathogens , such as Salmonella spp . , Shigella spp . , and Yersinia pestis .
E. coli has been perhaps the most studied bacterium since it was first described in 1886 by Theodor Escherich ( 1857–1911 ) .
Many strains of E. coli are in mutualistic relationships with humans .
However , some strains produce a potentially deadly toxin called Shiga toxin .
Shiga toxin is one of the most potent bacterial toxins identified .
Upon entering target cells , Shiga toxin interacts with ribosomes , stopping protein synthesis .
Lack of protein synthesis leads to cellular death and hemorrhagic colitis , characterized by inflammation of intestinal tract and bloody diarrhea .
In the most severe cases , patients can develop a deadly hemolytic uremic syndrome .
Other E. coli strains may cause traveler ’ s diarrhea , a less severe but very widespread disease .
The genus Salmonella , which belongs to the noncoliform group of Enterobacteriaceae , is interesting in that there is still no consensus about how many species it includes .
Scientists have reclassified many of the groups they once thought to be species as serotypes ( also called serovars ) , which are strains or variations of the same species of bacteria .
Their classification is based on patterns of reactivity by animal antisera against molecules on the surface of the bacterial cells .
A number of serotypes of Salmonella can cause salmonellosis , characterized by inflammation of the small and the large intestine , accompanied by fever , vomiting , and diarrhea .
The species S. enterobacterica ( serovar typhi ) causes typhoid fever , with symptoms including fever , abdominal pain , and skin rashes .
summarizes the characteristics of important genera of Gammaproteobacteria .
The Deltaproteobacteria is a small class of gram-negative Proteobacteria that includes sulfate-reducing bacteria ( SRBs ) , so named because they use sulfate as the final electron acceptor in the electron transport chain .
Few SRBs are pathogenic .
However , the SRB Desulfovibrio orale is associated with periodontal disease ( disease of the gums ) .
Deltaproteobacteria also includes the genus Bdellovibrio , species of which are parasites of other gram-negative bacteria .
Bdellovibrio invades the cells of the host bacterium , positioning itself in the periplasm , the space between the plasma membrane and the cell wall , feeding on the host ’ s proteins and polysaccharides .
The infection is lethal for the host cells .
Another type of Deltaproteobacteria , myxobacteria , lives in the soil , scavenging inorganic compounds .
Motile and highly social , they interact with other bacteria within and outside their own group .
They can form multicellular , macroscopic “ fruiting bodies ” , structures that are still being studied by biologists and bacterial ecologists .
These bacteria can also form metabolically inactive myxospores .
summarizes the characteristics of several important genera of Deltaproteobacteria .
The smallest class of Proteobacteria is Epsilonproteobacteria , which are gram-negative microaerophilic bacteria ( meaning they only require small amounts of oxygen in their environment ) .
Two clinically relevant genera of Epsilonproteobacteria are Campylobacter and Helicobacter , both of which include human pathogens .
Campylobacter can cause food poisoning that manifests as severe enteritis ( inflammation in the small intestine ) .
This condition , caused by the species C. jejuni , is rather common in developed countries , usually because of eating contaminated poultry products .
Chickens often harbor C. jejuni in their gastrointestinal tract and feces , and their meat can become contaminated during processing .
Within the genus Helicobacter , the helical , flagellated bacterium H. pylori has been identified as a beneficial member of the stomach microbiota , but it is also the most common cause of chronic gastritis and ulcers of the stomach and duodenum .
Studies have also shown that H. pylori is linked to stomach cancer .
H. pylori is somewhat unusual in its ability to survive in the highly acidic environment of the stomach .
It produces urease and other enzymes that modify its environment to make it less acidic .
summarizes the characteristics of the most clinically relevant genera of Epsilonproteobacteria .
Describe the unique features of nonproteobacteria gram-negative bacteria Give an example of a nonproteobacteria bacterium in each category Describe the unique features of phototrophic bacteria The majority of the gram-negative bacteria belong to the phylum Proteobacteria , discussed in the previous section .
Those that do not are called the nonproteobacteria .
In this section , we will describe three classes of gram-negative nonproteobacteria : the spirochetes , the CFB group , and the Planctomycetes .
A diverse group of phototrophic bacteria that includes Proteobacteria and nonproteobacteria will be discussed at the end of this section .
Identify phototrophic bacteria Spirochetes are characterized by their long ( up to 250 μm ) , spiral-shaped bodies .
Most spirochetes are also very thin , which makes it difficult to examine gram-stained preparations under a conventional brightfield microscope .
Darkfield fluorescent microscopy is typically used instead .
Spirochetes are also difficult or even impossible to culture .
They are highly motile , using their axial filament to propel themselves .
The axial filament is similar to a flagellum , but it wraps around the cell and runs inside the cell body of a spirochete in the periplasmic space between the outer membrane and the plasma membrane .
Several genera of spirochetes include human pathogens .
For example , the genus Treponema includes a species T. pallidum , which is further classified into four subspecies : T. pallidum pallidum , T. pallidum pertenue , T. pallidum carateum , and T. pallidum endemicum .
The subspecies T. pallidum pallidum causes the sexually transmitted infection known as syphilis , the third most prevalent sexually transmitted bacterial infection in the United States , after chlamydia and gonorrhea .
The other subspecies of T. pallidum cause tropical infectious diseases of the skin , bones , and joints .
Another genus of spirochete , Borrelia , contains a number of pathogenic species .
B. burgdorferi causes Lyme disease , which is transmitted by several genera of ticks ( notably Ixodes and Amblyomma ) and often produces a “ bull ’ s eye ” rash , fever , fatigue , and , sometimes , debilitating arthritis .
B. recurrens causes a condition known as relapsing fever .
lists the genera , species , and related diseases for spirochetes .
The gram-negative nonproteobacteria of the genera Cytophaga , Fusobacterium , and Bacteroides are classified together as a phylum and called the CFB group .
Although they are phylogenetically diverse , bacteria of the CFB group share some similarities in the sequence of nucleotides in their DNA .
They are rod-shaped bacteria adapted to anaerobic environments , such as the tissue of the gums , gut , and rumen of ruminating animals .
CFB bacteria are avid fermenters , able to process cellulose in rumen , thus enabling ruminant animals to obtain carbon and energy from grazing .
Cytophaga are motile aquatic bacteria that glide .
Fusobacteria inhabit the human mouth and may cause severe infectious diseases .
The largest genus of the CFB group is Bacteroides , which includes dozens of species that are prevalent inhabitants of the human large intestine , making up about 30 % of the entire gut microbiome .
One gram of human feces contains up to 100 billion Bacteroides cells .
Most Bacteroides are mutualistic .
They benefit from nutrients they find in the gut , and humans benefit from their ability to prevent pathogens from colonizing the large intestine .
Indeed , when populations of Bacteroides are reduced in the gut—as often occurs when a patient takes antibiotics—the gut becomes a more favorable environment for pathogenic bacteria and fungi , which can cause secondary infections .
Only a few species of Bacteroides are pathogenic .
B. melaninogenicus , for example , can cause wound infections in patients with weakened immune systems .
The Planctomycetes are found in aquatic environments , inhabiting freshwater , saltwater , and brackish water .
Planctomycetes are unusual in that they reproduce by budding , meaning that instead of one maternal cell splitting into two equal daughter cells in the process of binary fission , the mother cell forms a bud that detaches from the mother cell and lives as an independent cell .
These so-called swarmer cells are motile and not attached to a surface .
However , they will soon differentiate into sessile ( immobile ) cells with an appendage called a holdfast that allows them to attach to surfaces in the water .
Only the sessile cells are able to reproduce .
summarizes the characteristics of some of the most clinically relevant genera of nonproteobacteria .
The phototrophic bacteria are a large and diverse category of bacteria that do not represent a taxon but , rather , a group of bacteria that use sunlight as their primary source of energy .
This group contains both Proteobacteria and nonproteobacteria .
They use solar energy to synthesize ATP through photosynthesis .
When they produce oxygen , they perform oxygenic photosynthesis .
When they do not produce oxygen , they perform anoxygenic photosynthesis .
With the exception of some cyanobacteria , the majority of phototrophic bacteria perform anoxygenic photosynthesis .
One large group of phototrophic bacteria includes the purple or green bacteria that perform photosynthesis with the help of bacteriochlorophylls , which are green , purple , or blue pigments similar to chlorophyll in plants .
Some of these bacteria have a varying amount of red or orange pigments called carotenoids .
Their color varies from orange to red to purple to green , and they are able to absorb light of various wavelengths .
Traditionally , these bacteria are classified into sulfur and nonsulfur bacteria ; they are further differentiated by color .
The sulfur bacteria perform anoxygenic photosynthesis , using sulfites as electron donors and releasing free elemental sulfur .
Nonsulfur bacteria use organic substrates , such as succinate and malate , as donors of electrons .
The purple sulfur bacteria oxidize hydrogen sulfide into elemental sulfur and sulfuric acid and get their purple color from the pigments bacteriochlorophylls and carotenoids .
Bacteria of the genus Chromatium are purple sulfur Gammaproteobacteria .
These microorganisms are strict anaerobes and live in water .
They use carbon dioxide as their only source of carbon , but their survival and growth are possible only in the presence of sulfites , which they use as electron donors .
Chromatium has been used as a model for studies of bacterial photosynthesis since the 1950s .
The green sulfur bacteria use sulfide for oxidation and produce large amounts of green bacteriochlorophyll .
The genus Chlorobium is a green sulfur bacterium that is implicated in climate change because it produces methane , a greenhouse gas .
These bacteria use at least four types of chlorophyll for photosynthesis .
The most prevalent of these , bacteriochlorophyll , is stored in special vesicle-like organelles called chlorosomes .
Purple nonsulfur bacteria are similar to purple sulfur bacteria , except that they use hydrogen rather than hydrogen sulfide for oxidation .
Among the purple nonsulfur bacteria is the genus Rhodospirillum .
These microorganisms are facultative anaerobes , which are actually pink rather than purple , and can metabolize ( “ fix ” ) nitrogen .
They may be valuable in the field of biotechnology because of their potential ability to produce biological plastic and hydrogen fuel .
The green nonsulfur bacteria are similar to green sulfur bacteria but they use substrates other than sulfides for oxidation .
Chloroflexus is an example of a green nonsulfur bacterium .
It often has an orange color when it grows in the dark , but it becomes green when it grows in sunlight .
It stores bacteriochlorophyll in chlorosomes , similar to Chlorobium , and performs anoxygenic photosynthesis , using organic sulfites ( low concentrations ) or molecular hydrogen as electron donors , so it can survive in the dark if oxygen is available .
Chloroflexus does not have flagella but can glide , like Cytophaga .
It grows at a wide range of temperatures , from 35 °C to 70 °C , thus can be thermophilic .
Another large , diverse group of phototrophic bacteria compose the phylum Cyanobacteria ; they get their bluegreen color from the chlorophyll contained in their cells .
Species of this group perform oxygenic photosynthesis , producing megatons of gaseous oxygen .
Scientists hypothesize that cyanobacteria played a critical role in the change of our planet ’ s anoxic atmosphere 1–2 billion years ago to the oxygen-rich environment we have today .
Cyanobacteria have other remarkable properties .
Amazingly adaptable , they thrive in many habitats , including marine and freshwater environments , soil , and even rocks .
They can live at a wide range of temperatures , even in the extreme temperatures of the Antarctic .
They can live as unicellular organisms or in colonies , and they can be filamentous , forming sheaths or biofilms .
Many of them fix nitrogen , converting molecular nitrogen into nitrites and nitrates that other bacteria , plants , and animals can use .
The reactions of nitrogen fixation occur in specialized cells called heterocysts .
Photosynthesis in Cyanobacteria is oxygenic , using the same type of chlorophyll a found in plants and algae as the primary photosynthetic pigment .
Cyanobacteria also use phycocyanin and cyanophycin , two secondary photosynthetic pigments that give them their characteristic blue color .
They are located in special organelles called phycobilisomes and in folds of the cellular membrane called thylakoids , which are remarkably similar to the photosynthetic apparatus of plants .
Scientists hypothesize that plants originated from endosymbiosis of ancestral eukaryotic cells and ancestral photosynthetic bacteria .
Cyanobacteria are also an interesting object of research in biochemistry , with studies investigating their potential as biosorbents and products of human nutrition .
Unfortunately , cyanobacteria can sometimes have a negative impact on human health .
Genera such as Microcystis can form harmful cyanobacterial blooms , forming dense mats on bodies of water and producing large quantities of toxins that can harm wildlife and humans .
These toxins have been implicated in tumors of the liver and diseases of the nervous system in animals and humans .
summarizes the characteristics of important phototrophic bacteria .
Crystal violet , the primary stain of the Gram stain procedure , is readily retained and stabilized within this matrix , causing gram-positive prokaryotes to appear purple under a brightfield microscope after Gram staining .
For many years , the retention of Gram stain was one of the main criteria used to classify prokaryotes , even though some prokaryotes did not readily stain with either the primary or secondary stains used in the Gram stain procedure .
Advances in nucleic acid biochemistry have revealed additional characteristics that can be used to classify grampositive prokaryotes , namely the guanine to cytosine ratios ( G+C ) in DNA and the composition of 16S rRNA subunits .
Microbiologists currently recognize two distinct groups of gram-positive , or weakly staining gram-positive , prokaryotes .
The class Actinobacteria comprises the high G+C gram-positive bacteria , which have more than 50 % guanine and cytosine nucleotides in their DNA .
The class Bacilli comprises low G+C gram-positive bacteria , which have less than 50 % of guanine and cytosine nucleotides in their DNA .
The name Actinobacteria comes from the Greek words for rays and small rod , but Actinobacteria are very diverse .
Their microscopic appearance can range from thin filamentous branching rods to coccobacilli .
Some Actinobacteria are very large and complex , whereas others are among the smallest independently living organisms .
Most Actinobacteria live in the soil , but some are aquatic .
The vast majority are aerobic .
One distinctive feature of this group is the presence of several different peptidoglycans in the cell wall .
The genus Actinomyces is a much studied representative of Actinobacteria .
play an important role in soil ecology , and some species are human pathogens .
A number of Actinomyces spp .
inhabit the human mouth and are opportunistic pathogens , causing infectious diseases like periodontitis ( inflammation of the gums ) and oral abscesses .
The species A. israelii is an anaerobe notorious for causing endocarditis ( inflammation of the inner lining of the heart ) .
The genus Mycobacterium is represented by bacilli covered with a mycolic acid coat .
This waxy coat protects the bacteria from some antibiotics , prevents them from drying out , and blocks penetration by Gram stain reagents ( see ) .
Because of this , a special acid-fast staining procedure is used to visualize these bacteria .
The genus Mycobacterium is an important cause of a diverse group of infectious diseases .
M. tuberculosis is the causative agent of tuberculosis , a disease that primarily impacts the lungs but can infect other parts of the body as well .
It has been estimated that one-third of the world ’ s population has been infected with M. tuberculosis and millions of new infections occur each year .
Treatment of M. tuberculosis is challenging and requires patients to take a combination of drugs for an extended time .
Complicating treatment even further is the development and spread of multidrug-resistant strains of this pathogen .
Another pathogenic species , M. leprae , is the cause of Hansen ’ s disease ( leprosy ) , a chronic disease that impacts peripheral nerves and the integrity of the skin and mucosal surface of the respiratory tract .
Loss of pain sensation and the presence of skin lesions increase susceptibility to secondary injuries and infections with other pathogens .
Bacteria in the genus Corynebacterium contain diaminopimelic acid in their cell walls , and microscopically often form palisades , or pairs of rod-shaped cells resembling the letter V. Cells may contain metachromatic granules , intracellular storage of inorganic phosphates that are useful for identification of Corynebacterium .
The vast majority of Corynebacterium spp .
are nonpathogenic ; however , C. diphtheria is the causative agent of diphtheria , a disease that can be fatal , especially in children .
C. diphtheria produces a toxin that forms a pseudomembrane in the patient ’ s throat , causing swelling , difficulty breathing , and other symptoms that can become serious if untreated .
The genus Bifidobacterium consists of filamentous anaerobes , many of which are commonly found in the gastrointestinal tract , vagina , and mouth .
In fact , Bifidobacterium spp .
constitute a substantial part of the human gut microbiota and are frequently used as probiotics and in yogurt production .
The genus Gardnerella , contains only one species , G. vaginalis .
This species is defined as “ gram-variable ” because its small coccobacilli do not show consistent results when Gram stained .
Based on its genome , it is placed into the high G+C gram-positive group .
G. vaginalis can cause bacterial vaginosis in women ; symptoms are typically mild or even undetectable , but can lead to complications during pregnancy .
summarizes the characteristics of some important genera of Actinobacteria .
Additional information on Actinobacteria appears in .
The low G+C gram-positive bacteria have less than 50 % guanine and cytosine in their DNA , and this group of bacteria includes a number of genera of bacteria that are pathogenic .
One large and diverse class of low G+C gram-positive bacteria is Clostridia .
The best studied genus of this class is Clostridium .
These rod-shaped bacteria are generally obligate anaerobes that produce endospores and can be found in anaerobic habitats like soil and aquatic sediments rich in organic nutrients .
The endospores may survive for many years .
produce more kinds of protein toxins than any other bacterial genus , and several species are human pathogens .
C. perfringens is the third most common cause of food poisoning in the United States and is the causative agent of an even more serious disease called gas gangrene .
Gas gangrene occurs when C. perfringens endospores enter a wound and germinate , becoming viable bacterial cells and producing a toxin that can cause the necrosis ( death ) of tissue .
C. tetani , which causes tetanus , produces a neurotoxin that is able to enter neurons , travel to regions of the central nervous system where it blocks the inhibition of nerve impulses involved in muscle contractions , and cause a life-threatening spastic paralysis .
C. botulinum produces botulinum neurotoxin , the most lethal biological toxin known .
Botulinum toxin is responsible for rare but frequently fatal cases of botulism .
The toxin blocks the release of acetylcholine in neuromuscular junctions , causing flaccid paralysis .
In very small concentrations , botulinum toxin has been used to treat muscle pathologies in humans and in a cosmetic procedure to eliminate wrinkles .
C. difficile is a common source of hospital-acquired infections that can result in serious and even fatal cases of colitis ( inflammation of the large intestine ) .
Infections often occur in patients who are immunosuppressed or undergoing antibiotic therapy that alters the normal microbiota of the gastrointestinal tract .
lists the genera , species , and related diseases for Clostridia .
The order Lactobacillales comprises low G+C gram-positive bacteria that include both bacilli and cocci in the genera Lactobacillus , Leuconostoc , Enterococcus , and Streptococcus .
Bacteria of the latter three genera typically are spherical or ovoid and often form chains .
Streptococcus , the name of which comes from the Greek word for twisted chain , is responsible for many types of infectious diseases in humans .
Species from this genus , often referred to as streptococci , are usually classified by serotypes called Lancefield groups , and by their ability to lyse red blood cells when grown on blood agar .
S. pyogenes belongs to the Lancefield group A , β-hemolytic Streptococcus .
This species is considered a pyogenic pathogen because of the associated pus production observed with infections it causes .
The nonpyogenic ( i.e. , not associated with pus production ) streptococci are a group of streptococcal species that are not a taxon but are grouped together because they inhabit the human mouth .
The nonpyogenic streptococci do not belong to any of the Lancefield groups .
Most are commensals , but a few , such as S. mutans , are implicated in the development of dental caries .
S. pneumoniae ( commonly referred to as pneumococcus ) , is a Streptococcus species that also does not belong to any Lancefield group .
S. pneumoniae cells appear microscopically as diplococci , pairs of cells , rather than the long chains typical of most streptococci .
Scientists have known since the 19th century that S. pneumoniae causes pneumonia and other respiratory infections .
However , this bacterium can also cause a wide range of other diseases , including meningitis , septicemia , osteomyelitis , and endocarditis , especially in newborns , the elderly , and patients with immunodeficiency .
The name of the class Bacilli suggests that it is made up of bacteria that are bacillus in shape , but it is a morphologically diverse class that includes bacillus-shaped and cocccus-shaped genera .
Among the many genera in this class are two that are very important clinically : Bacillus and Staphylococcus .
Bacteria in the genus Bacillus are bacillus in shape and can produce endospores .
They include aerobes or facultative anaerobes .
A number of Bacillus spp .
are used in various industries , including the production of antibiotics ( e.g. , barnase ) , enzymes ( e.g. , alpha-amylase , BamH1 restriction endonuclease ) , and detergents ( e.g. , subtilisin ) .
Two notable pathogens belong to the genus Bacillus .
B. anthracis is the pathogen that causes anthrax , a severe disease that affects wild and domesticated animals and can spread from infected animals to humans .
Anthrax manifests in humans as charcoal-black ulcers on the skin , severe enterocolitis , pneumonia , and brain damage due to swelling .
If untreated , anthrax is lethal .
B. cereus , a closely related species , is a pathogen that may cause food poisoning .
It is a rod-shaped species that forms chains .
Colonies appear milky white with irregular shapes when cultured on blood agar .
One other important species is B. thuringiensis .
This bacterium produces a number of substances used as insecticides because they are toxic for insects .
The genus Staphylococcus also belongs to the class Bacilli , even though its shape is coccus rather than a bacillus .
The name Staphylococcus comes from a Greek word for bunches of grapes , which describes their microscopic appearance in culture .
are facultative anaerobic , halophilic , and nonmotile .
The two beststudied species of this genus are S. epidermidis and S. aureus .
S. epidermidis , whose main habitat is the human skin , is thought to be nonpathogenic for humans with healthy immune systems , but in patients with immunodeficiency , it may cause infections in skin wounds and prostheses ( e.g. , artificial joints , heart valves ) .
S. epidermidis is also an important cause of infections associated with intravenous catheters .
This makes it a dangerous pathogen in hospital settings , where many patients may be immunocompromised .
Strains of S. aureus cause a wide variety of infections in humans , including skin infections that produce boils , carbuncles , cellulitis , or impetigo .
Certain strains of S. aureus produce a substance called enterotoxin , which can cause severe enteritis , often called staph food poisoning .
Some strains of S. aureus produce the toxin responsible for toxic shock syndrome , which can result in cardiovascular collapse and death .
Many strains of S. aureus have developed resistance to antibiotics .
Some antibiotic-resistant strains are designated as methicillin-resistant S. aureus ( MRSA ) and vancomycin-resistant S. aureus ( VRSA ) .
These strains are some of the most difficult to treat because they exhibit resistance to nearly all available antibiotics , not just methicillin and vancomycin .
Because they are difficult to treat with antibiotics , infections can be lethal .
MRSA and VRSA are also contagious , posing a serious threat in hospitals , nursing homes , dialysis facilities , and other places where there are large populations of elderly , bedridden , and/or immunocompromised patients .
lists the genera , species , and related diseases for bacilli .
Although Mycoplasma spp .
do not possess a cell wall and , therefore , are not stained by Gram-stain reagents , this genus is still included with the low G+C gram-positive bacteria .
The genus Mycoplasma includes more than 100 species , which share several unique characteristics .
They are very small cells , some with a diameter of about 0.2 μm , which is smaller than some large viruses .
They have no cell walls and , therefore , are pleomorphic , meaning that they may take on a variety of shapes and can even resemble very small animal cells .
Because they lack a characteristic shape , they can be difficult to identify .
One species , M. pneumoniae , causes the mild form of pneumonia known as “ walking pneumonia ” or “ atypical pneumonia. ” This form of pneumonia is typically less severe than forms caused by other bacteria or viruses .
summarizes the characteristics of notable genera low G+C Gram-positive bacteria .
Scientists consider the deeply branching bacteria , such as the genus Acetothermus , to be the first of these non-LUCA forms of life produced by evolution some 3.5 billion years ago .
When placed on the phylogenetic tree , they stem from the common root of life , deep and close to the LUCA root—hence the name “ deeply branching ” .
The deeply branching bacteria may provide clues regarding the structure and function of ancient and now extinct forms of life .
We can hypothesize that ancient bacteria , like the deeply branching bacteria that still exist , were thermophiles or hyperthermophiles , meaning that they thrived at very high temperatures .
Acetothermus paucivorans , a gram-negative anaerobic bacterium discovered in 1988 in sewage sludge , is a thermophile growing at an optimal temperature of 58 °C .
Scientists have determined it to be the deepest branching bacterium , or the closest evolutionary relative of the LUCA .
The class Aquificae includes deeply branching bacteria that are adapted to the harshest conditions on our planet , resembling the conditions thought to dominate the earth when life first appeared .
Bacteria from the genus Aquifex are hyperthermophiles , living in hot springs at a temperature higher than 90 °C .
The species A. pyrophilus thrives near underwater volcanoes and thermal ocean vents , where the temperature of water ( under high pressure ) can reach 138 °C .
Aquifex bacteria use inorganic substances as nutrients .
For example , A. pyrophilus can reduce oxygen , and it is able to reduce nitrogen in anaerobic conditions .
They also show a remarkable resistance to ultraviolet light and ionizing radiation .
Taken together , these observations support the hypothesis that the ancient ancestors of deeply branching bacteria began evolving more than 3 billion years ago , when the earth was hot and lacked an atmosphere , exposing the bacteria to nonionizing and ionizing radiation .
The class Thermotogae is represented mostly by hyperthermophilic , as well as some mesophilic ( preferring moderate temperatures ) , anaerobic gram-negative bacteria whose cells are wrapped in a peculiar sheath-like outer membrane called a toga .
The thin layer of peptidoglycan in their cell wall has an unusual structure ; it contains diaminopimelic acid and D-lysine .
These bacteria are able to use a variety of organic substrates and produce molecular hydrogen , which can be used in industry .
The class contains several genera , of which the best known is the genus Thermotoga .
One species of this genus , T. maritima , lives near the thermal ocean vents and thrives in temperatures of 90 °C ; another species , T. subterranea , lives in underground oil reservoirs .
Finally , the deeply branching bacterium Deinococcus radiodurans belongs to a genus whose name is derived from a Greek word meaning terrible berry .
Nicknamed “ Conan the Bacterium , ” D. radiodurans is considered a polyextremophile because of its ability to survive under the many different kinds of extreme conditions—extreme heat , drought , vacuum , acidity , and radiation .
It owes its name to its ability to withstand doses of ionizing radiation that kill all other known bacteria ; this special ability is attributed to some unique mechanisms of DNA repair .
Describe the unique features of each category of Archaea Explain why archaea might not be associated with human microbiomes or pathology Give common examples of archaea commonly associated with unique environmental habitats Like organisms in the domain Bacteria , organisms of the domain Archaea are all unicellular organisms .
However , archaea differ structurally from bacteria in several significant ways , as discussed in .
To summarize : The archaeal cell membrane is composed of ether linkages with branched isoprene chains ( as opposed to the bacterial cell membrane , which has ester linkages with unbranched fatty acids ) .
Archaeal cell walls lack peptidoglycan , but some contain a structurally similar substance called pseudopeptidoglycan or pseudomurein .
The genomes of Archaea are larger and more complex than those of bacteria .
Domain Archaea is as diverse as domain Bacteria , and its representatives can be found in any habitat .
Some archaea are mesophiles , and many are extremophiles , preferring extreme hot or cold , extreme salinity , or other conditions that are hostile to most other forms of life on earth .
Their metabolism is adapted to the harsh environments , and they can perform methanogenesis , for example , which bacteria and eukaryotes can not .
The size and complexity of the archaeal genome makes it difficult to classify .
Most taxonomists agree that within the Archaea , there are currently five major phyla : Crenarchaeota , Euryarchaeota , Korarchaeota , Nanoarchaeota , and Thaumarchaeota .
There are likely many other archaeal groups that have not yet been systematically studied and classified .
With few exceptions , archaea are not present in the human microbiota , and none are currently known to be associated with infectious diseases in humans , animals , plants , or microorganisms .
However , many play important roles in the environment and may thus have an indirect impact on human health .
Crenarchaeota is a class of Archaea that is extremely diverse , containing genera and species that differ vastly in their morphology and requirements for growth .
All Crenarchaeota are aquatic organisms , and they are thought to be the most abundant microorganisms in the oceans .
Most , but not all , Crenarchaeota are hyperthermophiles ; some of them ( notably , the genus Pyrolobus ) are able to grow at temperatures up to 113 °C .
Archaea of the genus Sulfolobus are thermophiles that prefer temperatures around 70–80°C and acidophiles that prefer a pH of 2–3 .
Sulfolobus can live in aerobic or anaerobic environments .
In the presence of oxygen , Sulfolobus spp .
use metabolic processes similar to those of heterotrophs .
In anaerobic environments , they oxidize sulfur to produce sulfuric acid , which is stored in granules .
are used in biotechnology for the production of thermostable and acid-resistant proteins called affitins .
Affitins can bind and neutralize various antigens ( molecules found in toxins or infectious agents that provoke an immune response from the body ) .
Another genus , Thermoproteus , is represented by strictly anaerobic organisms with an optimal growth temperature of 85 °C .
They have flagella and , therefore , are motile .
Thermoproteus has a cellular membrane in which lipids form a monolayer rather than a bilayer , which is typical for archaea .
Its metabolism is autotrophic .
To synthesize ATP , Thermoproteus spp .
reduce sulfur or molecular hydrogen and use carbon dioxide or carbon monoxide as a source of carbon .
Thermoproteus is thought to be the deepest-branching genus of Archaea , and thus is a living example of some of our planet ’ s earliest forms of life .
The phylum Euryarchaeota includes several distinct classes .
Species in the classes Methanobacteria , Methanococci , and Methanomicrobia represent Archaea that can be generally described as methanogens .
Methanogens are unique in that they can reduce carbon dioxide in the presence of hydrogen , producing methane .
They can live in the most extreme environments and can reproduce at temperatures varying from below freezing to boiling .
Methanogens have been found in hot springs as well as deep under ice in Greenland .
Some scientists have even hypothesized that methanogens may inhabit the planet Mars because the mixture of gases produced by methanogens resembles the makeup of the Martian atmosphere .
Methanogens are thought to contribute to the formation of anoxic sediments by producing hydrogen sulfide , making “ marsh gas. ” They also produce gases in ruminants and humans .
Some genera of methanogens , notably Methanosarcina , can grow and produce methane in the presence of oxygen , although the vast majority are strict anaerobes .
The class Halobacteria ( which was named before scientists recognized the distinction between Archaea and Bacteria ) includes halophilic ( “ salt-loving ” ) archaea .
Halobacteria require a very high concentrations of sodium chloride in their aquatic environment .
The required concentration is close to saturation , at 36 % ; such environments include the Dead Sea as well as some salty lakes in Antarctica and south-central Asia .
One remarkable feature of these organisms is that they perform photosynthesis using the protein bacteriorhodopsin , which gives them , and the bodies of water they inhabit , a beautiful purple color .
Notable species of Halobacteria include Halobacterium salinarum , which may be the oldest living organism on earth ; scientists have isolated its DNA from fossils that are 250 million years old .
Another species , Haloferax volcanii , shows a very sophisticated system of ion exchange , which enables it to balance the concentration of salts at high temperatures .
Although bacteria and viruses account for a large number of the infectious diseases that afflict humans , many serious illnesses are caused by eukaryotic organisms .
One example is malaria , which is caused by Plasmodium , a eukaryotic organism transmitted through mosquito bites .
Malaria is a major cause of morbidity ( illness ) and mortality ( death ) that threatens 3.4 billion people worldwide .
In severe cases , organ failure and blood or metabolic abnormalities contribute to medical emergencies and sometimes death .
Even after initial recovery , relapses may occur years later .
In countries where malaria is endemic , the disease represents a major public health challenge that can place a tremendous strain on developing economies .
Worldwide , major efforts are underway to reduce malaria infections .
Efforts include the distribution of insecticidetreated bed nets and the spraying of pesticides .
Researchers are also making progress in their efforts to develop effective vaccines .
The President ’ s Malaria Initiative , started in 2005 , supports prevention and treatment .
The Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation has a large initiative to eliminate malaria .
Despite these efforts , malaria continues to cause long-term morbidity ( such as intellectual disabilities in children ) and mortality ( especially in children younger than 5 years ) , so we still have far to go .
Although more diseases are caused by viruses and bacteria than by microscopic eukaryotes , these eukaryotes are responsible for some diseases of great public health importance .
For example , the protozoal disease malaria was responsible for 584,000 deaths worldwide ( primarily children in Africa ) in 2013 , according to the World Health Organization ( WHO ) .
The protist parasite Giardia causes a diarrheal illness ( giardiasis ) that is easily transmitted through contaminated water supplies .
In the United States , Giardia is the most common human intestinal parasite .
Although it may seem surprising , parasitic worms are included within the study of microbiology because identification depends on observation of microscopic adult worms or eggs .
Even in developed countries , these worms are important parasites of humans and of domestic animals .
There are fewer fungal pathogens , but these are important causes of illness , as well .
On the other hand , fungi have been important in producing antimicrobial substances such as penicillin .
In this chapter , we will examine characteristics of protists , worms , and fungi while considering their roles in causing disease .
The word protist is a historical term that is now used informally to refer to a diverse group of microscopic eukaryotic organisms .
It is not considered a formal taxonomic term because the organisms it describes do not have a shared evolutionary origin .
Historically , the protists were informally grouped into the “ animal-like ” protozoans , the “ plantlike ” algae , and the “ fungus-like ” protists such as water molds .
These three groups of protists differ greatly in terms of their basic characteristics .
For example , algae are photosynthetic organisms that can be unicellular or multicellular .
Protozoa , on the other hand , are nonphotosynthetic , motile organisms that are always unicellular .
Other informal terms may also be used to describe various groups of protists .
For example , microorganisms that drift or float in water , moved by currents , are referred to as plankton .
Types of plankton include zooplankton , which are motile and nonphotosynthetic , and phytoplankton , which are photosynthetic .
Protozoans inhabit a wide variety of habitats , both aquatic and terrestrial .
Many are free-living , while others are parasitic , carrying out a life cycle within a host or hosts and potentially causing illness .
There are also beneficial symbionts that provide metabolic services to their hosts .
During the feeding and growth part of their life cycle , they are called trophozoites ; these feed on small particulate food sources such as bacteria .
While some types of protozoa exist exclusively in the trophozoite form , others can develop from trophozoite to an encapsulated cyst stage when environmental conditions are too harsh for the trophozoite .
A cyst is a cell with a protective wall , and the process by which a trophozoite becomes a cyst is called encystment .
When conditions become more favorable , these cysts are triggered by environmental cues to become active again through excystment .
One protozoan genus capable of encystment is Eimeria , which includes some human and animal pathogens .
illustrates the life cycle of Eimeria .
Protozoans have a variety of reproductive mechanisms .
Some protozoans reproduce asexually and others reproduce sexually ; still others are capable of both sexual and asexual reproduction .
In protozoans , asexual reproduction occurs by binary fission , budding , or schizogony .
In schizogony , the nucleus of a cell divides multiple times before the cell divides into many smaller cells .
The products of schizogony are called merozoites and they are stored in structures known as schizonts .
Protozoans may also reproduce sexually , which increases genetic diversity and can lead to complex life cycles .
Protozoans can produce haploid gametes that fuse through syngamy .
However , they can also exchange genetic material by joining to exchange DNA in a process called conjugation .
This is a different process than the conjugation that occurs in bacteria .
The term protist conjugation refers to a true form of eukaryotic sexual reproduction between two cells of different mating types .
It is found in ciliates , a group of protozoans , and is described later in this subsection .
All protozoans have a plasma membrane , or plasmalemma , and some have bands of protein just inside the membrane that add rigidity , forming a structure called the pellicle .
Some protists , including protozoans , have distinct layers of cytoplasm under the membrane .
In these protists , the outer gel layer ( with microfilaments of actin ) is called the ectoplasm .
Inside this layer is a sol ( fluid ) region of cytoplasm called the endoplasm .
These structures contribute to complex cell shapes in some protozoans , whereas others ( such as amoebas ) have more flexible shapes .
Different groups of protozoans have specialized feeding structures .
They may have a specialized structure for taking in food through phagocytosis , called a cytostome , and a specialized structure for the exocytosis of wastes called a cytoproct .
Oral grooves leading to cytostomes are lined with hair-like cilia to sweep in food particles .
Protozoans are heterotrophic .
Protozoans that are holozoic ingest whole food particles through phagocytosis .
Forms that are saprozoic ingest small , soluble food molecules .
Many protists have whip-like flagella or hair-like cilia made of microtubules that can be used for locomotion .
Other protists use cytoplasmic extensions known as pseudopodia ( “ false feet ” ) to attach the cell to a surface ; they then allow cytoplasm to flow into the extension , thus moving themselves forward .
Protozoans have a variety of unique organelles and sometimes lack organelles found in other cells .
Some have contractile vacuoles , organelles that can be used to move water out of the cell for osmotic regulation ( salt and water balance ) .
Mitochondria may be absent in parasites or altered to kinetoplastids ( modified mitochondria ) or hydrogenosomes ( see for more discussion of these structures ) .
The protists are a polyphyletic group , meaning they lack a shared evolutionary origin .
Since the current taxonomy is based on evolutionary history ( as determined by biochemistry , morphology , and genetics ) , protists are scattered across many different taxonomic groups within the domain Eukarya .
Eukarya is currently divided into six supergroups that are further divided into subgroups , as illustrated in .
In this section , we will primarily be concerned with the supergroups Amoebozoa , Excavata , and Chromalveolata ; these supergroups include many protozoans of clinical significance .
The supergroups Opisthokonta and Rhizaria also include some protozoans , but few of clinical significance .
In addition to protozoans , Opisthokonta also includes animals and fungi , some of which we will discuss in and .
Some examples of the Archaeplastida will be discussed in .
and summarize the characteristics of each supergroup and subgroup and list representatives of each .
The supergroup Amoebozoa includes protozoans that use amoeboid movement .
Actin microfilaments produce pseudopodia , into which the remainder of the protoplasm flows , thereby moving the organism .
The genus Entamoeba includes commensal or parasitic species , including the medically important E. histolytica , which is transmitted by cysts in feces and is the primary cause of amoebic dysentery .
The notorious “ brain-eating amoeba , ” Naegleria fowleri , is also classified within the Amoebozoa .
This deadly parasite is found in warm , fresh water and causes primary amoebic meningoencephalitis ( PAM ) .
Another member of this group is Acanthamoeba , which can cause keratitis ( corneal inflammation ) and blindness .
The Eumycetozoa are an unusual group of organisms called slime molds , which have previously been classified as animals , fungi , and plants .
Slime molds can be divided into two types : cellular slime molds and plasmodial slime molds .
The cellular slime molds exist as individual amoeboid cells that periodically aggregate into a mobile slug .
The aggregate then forms a fruiting body that produces haploid spores .
Plasmodial slime molds exist as large , multinucleate amoeboid cells that form reproductive stalks to produce spores that divide into gametes .
One cellular slime mold , Dictyostelium discoideum , has been an important study organism for understanding cell differentiation , because it has both single-celled and multicelled life stages , with the cells showing some degree of differentiation in the multicelled form .
and illustrate the life cycles of cellular and plasmodial slime molds , respectively .
The supergroup Chromalveolata is united by similar origins of its members ’ plastids and includes the apicomplexans , ciliates , diatoms , and dinoflagellates , among other groups ( we will cover the diatoms and dinoflagellates in ) .
The apicomplexans are intraor extracellular parasites that have an apical complex at one end of the cell .
The apical complex is a concentration of organelles , vacuoles , and microtubules that allows the parasite to enter host cells .
Apicomplexans have complex life cycles that include an infective sporozoite that undergoes schizogony to make many merozoites ( see the example in ) .
Many are capable of infecting a variety of animal cells , from insects to livestock to humans , and their life cycles often depend on transmission between multiple hosts .
The genus Plasmodium is an example of this group .
Other apicomplexans are also medically important .
Cryptosporidium parvum causes intestinal symptoms and can cause epidemic diarrhea when the cysts contaminate drinking water .
Finally , Toxoplasma gondii causes toxoplasmosis and can be transmitted from cat feces , unwashed fruit and vegetables , or from undercooked meat .
Because toxoplasmosis can be associated with serious birth defects , pregnant women need to be aware of this risk and use caution if they are exposed to the feces of potentially infected cats .
A national survey found the frequency of individuals with antibodies for toxoplasmosis ( and thus who presumably have a current latent infection ) in the United States to be 11 % .
Rates are much higher in other countries , including some developed countries .
There is also evidence and a good deal of theorizing that the parasite may be responsible for altering infected humans ’ behavior and personality traits .
The ciliates ( Ciliaphora ) , also within the Chromalveolata , are a large , very diverse group characterized by the presence of cilia on their cell surface .
Although the cilia may be used for locomotion , they are often used for feeding , as well , and some forms are nonmotile .
Balantidium coli is the only parasitic ciliate that affects humans by causing intestinal illness , although it rarely causes serious medical issues except in the immunocompromised ( those having a weakened immune system ) .
Perhaps the most familiar ciliate is Paramecium , a motile organism with a clearly visible cytostome and cytoproct that is often studied in biology laboratories .
Another ciliate , Stentor , is sessile and uses its cilia for feeding .
Generally , these organisms have a micronucleus that is diploid , somatic , and used for sexual reproduction by conjugation .
They also have a macronucleus that is derived from the micronucleus ; the macronucleus becomes polyploid ( multiple sets of duplicate chromosomes ) , and has a reduced set of metabolic genes .
Ciliates are able to reproduce through conjugation , in which two cells attach to each other .
In each cell , the diploid micronuclei undergo meiosis , producing eight haploid nuclei each .
Then , all but one of the haploid micronuclei and the macronucleus disintegrate ; the remaining ( haploid ) micronucleus undergoes mitosis .
The two cells then exchange one micronucleus each , which fuses with the remaining micronucleus present to form a new , genetically different , diploid micronucleus .
The diploid micronucleus undergoes two mitotic divisions , so each cell has four micronuclei , and two of the four combine to form a new macronucleus .
The chromosomes in the macronucleus then replicate repeatedly , the macronucleus reaches its polyploid state , and the two cells separate .
The two cells are now genetically different from each other and from their previous versions .
Öomycetes have similarities to fungi and were once classified with them .
They are also called water molds .
However , they differ from fungi in several important ways .
Öomycetes have cell walls of cellulose ( unlike the chitinous cell walls of fungi ) and they are generally diploid , whereas the dominant life forms of fungi are typically haploid .
Phytophthora , the plant pathogen found in the soil that caused the Irish potato famine , is classified within this group .
The third and final supergroup to be considered in this section is the Excavata , which includes primitive eukaryotes and many parasites with limited metabolic abilities .
These organisms have complex cell shapes and structures , often including a depression on the surface of the cell called an excavate .
The group Excavata includes the subgroups Fornicata , Parabasalia , and Euglenozoa .
The Fornicata lack mitochondria but have flagella .
This group includes Giardia lamblia ( also known as G. intestinalis or G. duodenalis ) , a widespread pathogen that causes diarrheal illness and can be spread through cysts from feces that contaminate water supplies .
Parabasalia are frequent animal endosymbionts ; they live in the guts of animals like termites and cockroaches .
They have basal bodies and modified mitochondria ( kinetoplastids ) .
They also have a large , complex cell structure with an undulating membrane and often have many flagella .
The trichomonads ( a subgroup of the Parabasalia ) include pathogens such as Trichomonas vaginalis , which causes the human sexually transmitted disease trichomoniasis .
Trichomoniasis often does not cause symptoms in men , but men are able to transmit the infection .
In women , it causes vaginal discomfort and discharge and may cause complications in pregnancy if left untreated .
The Euglenozoa are common in the environment and include photosynthetic and nonphotosynthetic species .
Members of the genus Euglena are typically not pathogenic .
Their cells have two flagella , a pellicle , a stigma ( eyespot ) to sense light , and chloroplasts for photosynthesis .
The pellicle of Euglena is made of a series of protein bands surrounding the cell ; it supports the cell membrane and gives the cell shape .
The Euglenozoa also include the trypanosomes , which are parasitic pathogens .
The genus Trypanosoma includes T. brucei , which causes African trypanosomiasis ( African sleeping sickness and T. cruzi , which causes American trypanosomiasis ( Chagas disease ) .
These tropical diseases are spread by insect bites .
In African sleeping sickness , T. brucei colonizes the blood and the brain after being transmitted via the bite of a tsetse fly ( Glossina spp . )
The early symptoms include confusion , difficulty sleeping , and lack of coordination .
Left untreated , it is fatal .
Chagas ’ disease originated and is most common in Latin America .
The disease is transmitted by Triatoma spp. , insects often called “ kissing bugs , ” and affects either the heart tissue or tissues of the digestive system .
Untreated cases can eventually lead to heart failure or significant digestive or neurological disorders .
The genus Leishmania includes trypanosomes that cause disfiguring skin disease and sometimes systemic illness as well .
There are two major groups of parasitic helminths : the roundworms ( Nematoda ) and flatworms ( Platyhelminthes ) .
Of the many species that exist in these groups , about half are parasitic and some are important human pathogens .
As animals , they are multicellular and have organ systems .
However , the parasitic species often have limited digestive tracts , nervous systems , and locomotor abilities .
Parasitic forms may have complex reproductive cycles with several different life stages and more than one type of host .
Some are monoecious , having both male and female reproductive organs in a single individual , while others are dioecious , each having either male or female reproductive organs .
Phylum Nematoda ( the roundworms ) is a diverse group containing more than 15,000 species , of which several are important human parasites .
These unsegmented worms have a full digestive system even when parasitic .
Some are common intestinal parasites , and their eggs can sometimes be identified in feces or around the anus of infected individuals .
Ascaris lumbricoides is the largest nematode intestinal parasite found in humans ; females may reach lengths greater than 1 meter .
A. lumbricoides is also very widespread , even in developed nations , although it is now a relatively uncommon problem in the United States .
It may cause symptoms ranging from relatively mild ( such as a cough and mild abdominal pain ) to severe ( such as intestinal blockage and impaired growth ) .
Of all nematode infections in the United States , pinworm ( caused by Enterobius vermicularis ) is the most common .
Pinworm causes sleeplessness and itching around the anus , where the female worms lay their eggs during the night .
Toxocara canis and T. cati are nematodes found in dogs and cats , respectively , that can be transmitted to humans , causing toxocariasis .
Antibodies to these parasites have been found in approximately 13.9 % of the U.S. population , suggesting that exposure is common .
Infection can cause larval migrans , which can result in vision loss and eye inflammation , or fever , fatigue , coughing , and abdominal pain , depending on whether the organism infects the eye or the viscera .
Another common nematode infection is hookworm , which is caused by Necator americanus ( the New World or North American hookworm ) and Ancylostoma duodenale ( the Old World hookworm ) .
Symptoms of hookworm infection can include abdominal pain , diarrhea , loss of appetite , weight loss , fatigue , and anemia .
Trichinellosis , also called trichinosis , caused by Trichinella spiralis , is contracted by consuming undercooked meat , which releases the larvae and allows them to encyst in muscles .
Infection can cause fever , muscle pains , and digestive system problems ; severe infections can lead to lack of coordination , breathing and heart problems , and even death .
Finally , heartworm in dogs and other animals is caused by the nematode Dirofilaria immitis , which is transmitted by mosquitoes .
Symptoms include fatigue and cough ; when left untreated , death may result .
Phylum Platyhelminthes ( the platyhelminths ) are flatworms .
This group includes the flukes , tapeworms , and the turbellarians , which include planarians .
The flukes and tapeworms are medically important parasites .
The flukes ( trematodes ) are nonsegmented flatworms that have an oral sucker ( and sometimes a second ventral sucker ) and attach to the inner walls of intestines , lungs , large blood vessels , or the liver .
Trematodes have complex life cycles , often with multiple hosts .
Several important examples are the liver flukes ( Clonorchis and Opisthorchis ) , the intestinal fluke ( Fasciolopsis buski ) , and the oriental lung fluke ( Paragonimus westermani ) .
Schistosomiasis is a serious parasitic disease , considered second in the scale of its impact on human populations only to malaria .
The parasites Schistosoma mansoni , S. haematobium , and S. japonicum , which are found in freshwater snails , are responsible for schistosomiasis .
Immature forms burrow through the skin into the blood .
They migrate to the lungs , then to the liver and , later , other organs .
Symptoms include anemia , malnutrition , fever , abdominal pain , fluid buildup , and sometimes death .
The other medically important group of platyhelminths are commonly known as tapeworms ( cestodes ) and are segmented flatworms that may have suckers or hooks at the scolex ( head region ) .
Tapeworms use these suckers or hooks to attach to the wall of the small intestine .
The body of the worm is made up of segments called proglottids that contain reproductive structures ; these detach when the gametes are fertilized , releasing gravid proglottids with eggs .
Tapeworms often have an intermediate host that consumes the eggs , which then hatch into a larval form called an oncosphere .
The oncosphere migrates to a particular tissue or organ in the intermediate host , where it forms cysticerci .
After being eaten by the definitive host , the cysticerci develop into adult tapeworms in the host 's digestive system .
Taenia saginata ( the beef tapeworm ) and T. solium ( the pork tapeworm ) enter humans through ingestion of undercooked , contaminated meat .
The adult worms develop and reside in the intestine , but the larval stage may migrate and be found in other body locations such as skeletal and smooth muscle .
The beef tapeworm is relatively benign , although it can cause digestive problems and , occasionally , allergic reactions .
The pork tapeworm can cause more serious problems when the larvae leave the intestine and colonize other tissues , including those of the central nervous system .
Diphylobothrium latum is the largest human tapeworm and can be ingested in undercooked fish .
It can grow to a length of 15 meters .
Echinococcus granulosus , the dog tapeworm , can parasitize humans and uses dogs as an important host .
In addition to the well-known macroscopic fungi ( such as mushrooms and molds ) , many unicellular yeasts and spores of macroscopic fungi are microscopic .
For this reason , fungi are included within the field of microbiology .
Fungi are important to humans in a variety of ways .
Both microscopic and macroscopic fungi have medical relevance , with some pathogenic species that can cause mycoses ( illnesses caused by fungi ) .
Some pathogenic fungi are opportunistic , meaning that they mainly cause infections when the host ’ s immune defenses are compromised and do not normally cause illness in healthy individuals .
Fungi are important in other ways .
They act as decomposers in the environment , and they are critical for the production of certain foods such as cheeses .
Fungi are also major sources of antibiotics , such as penicillin from the fungus Penicillium .
Fungi have well-defined characteristics that set them apart from other organisms .
Most multicellular fungal bodies , commonly called molds , are made up of filaments called hyphae .
Hyphae can form a tangled network called a mycelium and form the thallus ( body ) of fleshy fungi .
Hyphae that have walls between the cells are called septate hyphae ; hyphae that lack walls and cell membranes between the cells are called nonseptate or coenocytic hyphae ) .
In contrast to molds , yeasts are unicellular fungi .
The budding yeasts reproduce asexually by budding off a smaller daughter cell ; the resulting cells may sometimes stick together as a short chain or pseudohypha .
Candida albicans is a common yeast that forms pseudohyphae ; it is associated with various infections in humans , including vaginal yeast infections , oral thrush , and candidiasis of the skin .
Some fungi are dimorphic , having more than one appearance during their life cycle .
These dimorphic fungi may be able to appear as yeasts or molds , which can be important for infectivity .
They are capable of changing their appearance in response to environmental changes such as nutrient availability or fluctuations in temperature , growing as a mold , for example , at 25 °C ( 77 °F ) , and as yeast cells at 37 °C ( 98.6 °F ) .
This ability helps dimorphic fungi to survive in diverse environments .
Histoplasma capsulatum , the pathogen that causes histoplasmosis , a lung infection , is an example of a dimorphic fungus .
There are notable unique features in fungal cell walls and membranes .
Fungal cell walls contain chitin , as opposed to the cellulose found in the cell walls of plants and many protists .
Additionally , whereas animals have cholesterol in their cell membranes , fungal cell membranes have different sterols called ergosterols .
Ergosterols are often exploited as targets for antifungal drugs .
Fungal life cycles are unique and complex .
Fungi reproduce sexually either through crossor self-fertilization .
Haploid fungi form hyphae that have gametes at the tips .
Two different mating types ( represented as “ + type ” and “ – type ” ) are involved .
The cytoplasms of the + and – type gametes fuse ( in an event called plasmogamy ) , producing a cell with two distinct nuclei ( a dikaryotic cell ) .
Later , the nuclei fuse ( in an event called karyogamy ) to create a diploid zygote .
The zygote undergoes meiosis to form spores that germinate to start the haploid stage , which eventually creates more haploid mycelia .
Depending on the taxonomic group , these sexually produced spores are known as zygospores ( in Zygomycota ) , ascospores ( in Ascomycota ) , or basidiospores ( in Basidiomycota ) .
Fungi may also exhibit asexual reproduction by mitosis , mitosis with budding , fragmentation of hyphae , and formation of asexual spores by mitosis .
These spores are specialized cells that , depending on the organism , may have unique characteristics for survival , reproduction , and dispersal .
Fungi exhibit several types of asexual spores and these can be important in classification .
The fungi are very diverse , comprising seven major groups .
Not all of the seven groups contain pathogens .
Some of these groups are generally associated with plants and include plant pathogens .
For example , Urediniomycetes and Ustilagomycetes include the plant rusts and smuts , respectively .
These form reddish or dark masses , respectively , on plants as rusts ( red ) or smuts ( dark ) .
Some species have substantial economic impact because of their ability to reduce crop yields .
Glomeromycota includes the mycorrhizal fungi , important symbionts with plant roots that can promote plant growth by acting like an extended root system .
The Glomeromycota are obligate symbionts , meaning that they can only survive when associated with plant roots ; the fungi receive carbohydrates from the plant and the plant benefits from the increased ability to take up nutrients and minerals from the soil .
The Chytridiomycetes ( chytrids ) are small fungi , but are extremely ecologically important .
Chytrids are generally aquatic and have flagellated , motile gametes ; specific types are implicated in amphibian declines around the world .
Because of their medical importance , we will focus on Zygomycota , Ascomycota , Basidiomycota , and Microsporidia .
summarizes the characteristics of these medically important groups of fungi .
The Zygomycota ( zygomycetes ) are mainly saprophytes with coenocytic hyphae and haploid nuclei .
They use sporangiospores for asexual reproduction .
The group name comes from the zygospores that they use for sexual reproduction , which have hard walls formed from the fusion of reproductive cells from two individuals .
Zygomycetes are important for food science and as crop pathogens .
One example is Rhizopus stolonifer , an important bread mold that also causes rice seedling blight .
Mucor is a genus of fungi that can potentially cause necrotizing infections in humans , although most species are intolerant of temperatures found in mammalian bodies .
The Ascomycota include fungi that are used as food ( edible mushrooms , morels , and truffles ) , others that are common causes of food spoilage ( bread molds and plant pathogens ) , and still others that are human pathogens .
Ascomycota may have septate hyphae and cup-shaped fruiting bodies called ascocarps .
Some genera of Ascomycota use sexually produced ascospores as well as asexual spores called conidia , but sexual phases have not been discovered or described for others .
Some produce an ascus containing ascospores within an ascocarp .
Examples of the Ascomycota include several bread molds and minor pathogens , as well as species capable of causing more serious mycoses .
Species in the genus Aspergillus are important causes of allergy and infection , and are useful in research and in the production of certain fermented alcoholic beverages such as Japanese sake .
The fungus Aspergillus flavus , a contaminant of nuts and stored grains , produces an aflatoxin that is both a toxin and the most potent known natural carcinogen .
Neurospora crassa is of particular use in genetics research because the spores produced by meiosis are kept inside the ascus in a row that reflects the cell divisions that produced them , giving a direct view of segregation and assortment of genes .
Penicillium produces the antibiotic penicillin .
Many species of ascomycetes are medically important .
A large number of species in the genera Trichophyton , Microsporum , and Epidermophyton are dermatophytes , pathogenic fungi capable of causing skin infections such as athlete ’ s foot , jock itch , and ringworm .
Blastomyces dermatitidis is a dimorphic fungus that can cause blastomycosis , a respiratory infection that , if left untreated , can become disseminated to other body sites , sometimes leading to death .
Another important respiratory pathogen is the dimorphic fungus Histoplasma capsulatum , which is associated with birds and bats in the Ohio and Mississippi river valleys .
Coccidioides immitis causes the serious lung disease Valley fever .
Candida albicans , the most common cause of vaginal and other yeast infections , is also an ascomycete fungus ; it is a part of the normal microbiota of the skin , intestine , genital tract , and ear .
Ascomycetes also cause plant diseases , including ergot infections , Dutch elm disease , and powdery mildews .
Saccharomyces yeasts , including the baker ’ s yeast S. cerevisiae , are unicellular ascomycetes with haploid and diploid stages .
This and other Saccharomyces species are used for brewing beer .
The Basidiomycota ( basidiomycetes ) are fungi that have basidia ( club-shaped structures ) that produce basidiospores ( spores produced through budding ) within fruiting bodies called basidiocarps .
They are important as decomposers and as food .
This group includes rusts , stinkhorns , puffballs , and mushrooms .
Several species are of particular importance .
Cryptococcus neoformans , a fungus commonly found as a yeast in the environment , can cause serious lung infections when inhaled by individuals with weakened immune systems .
The edible meadow mushroom , Agricus campestris , is a basidiomycete , as is the poisonous mushroom Amanita phalloides , known as the death cap .
The deadly toxins produced by A. phalloides have been used to study transcription .
Finally , the Microsporidia are unicellular fungi that are obligate intracellular parasites .
They lack mitochondria , peroxisomes , and centrioles , but their spores release a unique polar tubule that pierces the host cell membrane to allow the fungus to gain entry into the cell .
A number of microsporidia are human pathogens , and infections with microsporidia are called microsporidiosis .
One pathogenic species is Enterocystozoan bieneusi , which can cause symptoms such as diarrhea , cholecystitis ( inflammation of the gall bladder ) , and in rare cases , respiratory illness .
These organisms are found in the supergroups Chromalveolata ( dinoflagellates , diatoms , golden algae , and brown algae ) and Archaeplastida ( red algae and green algae ) .
They are important ecologically and environmentally because they are responsible for the production of approximately 70 % of the oxygen and organic matter in aquatic environments .
Some types of algae , even those that are microscopic , are regularly eaten by humans and other animals .
Additionally , algae are the source for agar , agarose , and carrageenan , solidifying agents used in laboratories and in food production .
Although algae are typically not pathogenic , some produce toxins .
Harmful algal blooms , which occur when algae grow quickly and produce dense populations , can produce high concentrations of toxins that impair liver and nervous-system function in aquatic animals and humans .
Like protozoans , algae often have complex cell structures .
For instance , algal cells can have one or more chloroplasts that contain structures called pyrenoids to synthesize and store starch .
The chloroplasts themselves differ in their number of membranes , indicative of secondary or rare tertiary endosymbiotic events .
Primary chloroplasts have two membranes—one from the original cyanobacteria that the ancestral eukaryotic cell engulfed , and one from the plasma membrane of the engulfing cell .
Chloroplasts in some lineages appear to have resulted from secondary endosymbiosis , in which another cell engulfed a green or red algal cell that already had a primary chloroplast within it .
The engulfing cell destroyed everything except the chloroplast and possibly the cell membrane of its original cell , leaving three or four membranes around the chloroplast .
Different algal groups have different pigments , which are reflected in common names such as red algae , brown algae , and green algae .
Some algae , the seaweeds , are macroscopic and may be confused with plants .
Seaweeds can be red , brown , or green , depending on their photosynthetic pigments .
Green algae , in particular , share some important similarities with land plants ; however , there are also important distinctions .
For example , seaweeds do not have true tissues or organs like plants do .
Additionally , seaweeds do not have a waxy cuticle to prevent desiccation .
Algae can also be confused with cyanobacteria , photosynthetic bacteria that bear a resemblance to algae ; however , cyanobacteria are prokaryotes ( see ) .
Algae have a variety of life cycles .
Reproduction may be asexual by mitosis or sexual using gametes .
Although the algae and protozoa were formerly separated taxonomically , they are now mixed into supergroups .
The algae are classified within the Chromalveolata and the Archaeplastida .
Although the Euglenozoa ( within the supergroup Excavata ) include photosynthetic organisms , these are not considered algae because they feed and are motile .
The dinoflagellates and stramenopiles fall within the Chromalveolata .
The dinoflagellates are mostly marine organisms and are an important component of plankton .
They have a variety of nutritional types and may be phototrophic , heterotrophic , or mixotrophic .
Those that are photosynthetic use chlorophyll a , chlorophyll c , and other photosynthetic pigments .
They generally have two flagella , causing them to whirl ( in fact , the name dinoflagellate comes from the Greek word for “ whirl ” : dini ) .
Some have cellulose plates forming a hard outer covering , or theca , as armor .
Additionally , some dinoflagellates produce neurotoxins that can cause paralysis in humans or fish .
Exposure can occur through contact with water containing the dinoflagellate toxins or by feeding on organisms that have eaten dinoflagellates .
When a population of dinoflagellates becomes particularly dense , a red tide ( a type of harmful algal bloom ) can occur .
Red tides cause harm to marine life and to humans who consume contaminated marine life .
Major toxin producers include Gonyaulax and Alexandrium , both of which cause paralytic shellfish poisoning .
The stramenopiles include the golden algae ( Chrysophyta ) , the brown algae ( Phaeophyta ) , and the diatoms ( Bacillariophyta ) .
Stramenopiles have chlorophyll a , chlorophyll c /c , and fucoxanthin as photosynthetic pigments .
Their storage carbohydrate is chrysolaminarin .
While some lack cell walls , others have scales .
Diatoms have flagella and frustules , which are outer cell walls of crystallized silica ; their fossilized remains are used to produce diatomaceous earth , which has a range of uses such as filtration and insulation .
Additionally , diatoms can reproduce sexually or asexually .
One diatom genus , Pseudo-nitzschia , is known to be associated with harmful algal blooms .
Brown algae ( Phaeophyta ) are multicellular marine seaweeds .
Some can be extremely large , such as the giant kelp ( Laminaria ) .
They have leaf-like blades , stalks , and structures called holdfasts that are used to attach to substrate .
However , these are not true leaves , stems , or roots .
Their photosynthetic pigments are chlorophyll a , chlorophyll c , β -carotene , and fucoxanthine .
They use laminarin as a storage carbohydrate .
The Archaeplastids include the green algae ( Chlorophyta ) , the red algae ( Rhodophyta ) , another group of green algae ( Charophyta ) , and the land plants .
The Charaphyta are the most similar to land plants because they share a mechanism of cell division and an important biochemical pathway , among other traits that the other groups do not have .
Like land plants , the Charophyta and Chlorophyta have chlorophyll a and chlorophyll b as photosynthetic pigments , cellulose cell walls , and starch as a carbohydrate storage molecule .
Chlamydomonas is a green alga that has a single large chloroplast , two flagella , and a stigma ( eyespot ) ; it is important in molecular biology research .
Chlorella is a nonmotile , large , unicellular alga , and Acetabularia is an even larger unicellular green alga .
The size of these organisms challenges the idea that all cells are small , and they have been used in genetics research since Joachim Hämmerling ( 1901–1980 ) began to work with them in 1943 .
Volvox is a colonial , unicellular alga .
A larger , multicellular green alga is Ulva , also known as the sea lettuce because of its large , edible , green blades .
The range of life forms within the Chlorophyta—from unicellular to various levels of coloniality to multicellular forms—has been a useful research model for understanding the evolution of multicellularity .
The red algae are mainly multicellular but include some unicellular forms .
They have rigid cell walls containing agar or carrageenan , which are useful as food solidifying agents and as a solidifier added to growth media for microbes .
Lichens provide opportunities for study of close relationships between unrelated microorganisms .
Lichens contribute to soil production by breaking down rock , and they are early colonizers in soilless environments such as lava flows .
The cyanobacteria in some lichens can fix nitrogen and act as a nitrogen source in some environments .
Lichens are also important soil stabilizers in some desert environments and they are an important winter food source for caribou and reindeer .
Finally , lichens produce compounds that have antibacterial effects , and further research may discover compounds that are medically useful to humans .
A lichen is a combination of two organisms , a green alga or cyanobacterium and an ascomycete fungus , living in a symbiotic relationship .
Whereas algae normally grow only in aquatic or extremely moist environments , lichens can potentially be found on almost any surface ( especially rocks ) or as epiphytes ( meaning that they grow on other plants ) .
In some ways , the symbiotic relationship between lichens and algae seems like a mutualism ( a relationship in which both organisms benefit ) .
The fungus can obtain photosynthates from the algae or cyanobacterium and the algae or cyanobacterium can grow in a drier environment than it could otherwise tolerate .
However , most scientists consider this symbiotic relationship to be a controlled parasitism ( a relationship in which one organism benefits and the other is harmed ) because the photosynthetic organism grows less well than it would without the fungus .
It is important to note that such symbiotic interactions fall along a continuum between conflict and cooperation .
Lichens are slow growing and can live for centuries .
They have been used in foods and to extract chemicals as dyes or antimicrobial substances .
Some are very sensitive to pollution and have been used as environmental indicators .
Lichens have a body called a thallus , an outer , tightly packed fungal layer called a cortex , and an inner , loosely packed fungal layer called a medulla .
Lichens use hyphal bundles called rhizines to attach to the substrate .
Lichens are classified as fungi and the fungal partners belong to the Ascomycota and Basidiomycota .
Lichens can also be grouped into types based on their morphology .
There are three major types of lichens , although other types exist as well .
Lichens that are tightly attached to the substrate , giving them a crusty appearance , are called crustose lichens .
Those that have leaf-like lobes are foliose lichens ; they may only be attached at one point in the growth form , and they also have a second cortex below the medulla .
Finally , fruticose lichens have rounded structures and an overall branched appearance .
shows an example of each of the forms of lichens .
Public health measures in the developed world have dramatically reduced mortality from viral epidemics .
But when epidemics do occur , they can spread quickly with global air travel .
In 2009 , an outbreak of H1N1 influenza spread across various continents .
In early 2014 , cases of Ebola in Guinea led to a massive epidemic in western Africa .
This included the case of an infected man who traveled to the United States , sparking fears the epidemic might spread beyond Africa .
Until the late 1930s and the advent of the electron microscope , no one had seen a virus .
Yet treatments for preventing or curing viral infections were used and developed long before that .
Historical records suggest that by the 17th century , and perhaps earlier , inoculation ( also known as variolation ) was being used to prevent the viral disease smallpox in various parts of the world .
By the late 18th century , Englishman Edward Jenner was inoculating patients with cowpox to prevent smallpox , a technique he coined vaccination .
Today , the structure and genetics of viruses are well defined , yet new discoveries continue to reveal their complexities .
In this chapter , we will learn about the structure , classification , and cultivation of viruses , and how they impact their hosts .
In addition , we will learn about other infective particles such as viroids and prions .
At that time , Dmitri Ivanovski , a Russian botanist , discovered the source of TMD by using a porcelain filtering device first invented by Charles Chamberland and Louis Pasteur in Paris in 1884 .
Porcelain Chamberland filters have a pore size of 0.1 µm , which is small enough to remove all bacteria ≥0.2 µm from any liquids passed through the device .
An extract obtained from TMD-infected tobacco plants was made to determine the cause of the disease .
Initially , the source of the disease was thought to be bacterial .
It was surprising to everyone when Ivanovski , using a Chamberland filter , found that the cause of TMD was not removed after passing the extract through the porcelain filter .
So if a bacterium was not the cause of TMD , what could be causing the disease ?
Ivanovski concluded the cause of TMD must be an extremely small bacterium or bacterial spore .
Other scientists , including Martinus Beijerinck , continued investigating the cause of TMD .
It was Beijerinck , in 1899 , who eventually concluded the causative agent was not a bacterium but , instead , possibly a chemical , like a biological poison we would describe today as a toxin .
As a result , the word virus , Latin for poison , was used to describe the cause of TMD a few years after Ivanovski ’ s initial discovery .
Even though he was not able to see the virus that caused TMD , and did not realize the cause was not a bacterium , Ivanovski is credited as the original discoverer of viruses and a founder of the field of virology .
Today , we can see viruses using electron microscopes and we know much more about them .
Viruses are distinct biological entities ; however , their evolutionary origin is still a matter of speculation .
In terms of taxonomy , they are not included in the tree of life because they are acellular ( not consisting of cells ) .
In order to survive and reproduce , viruses must infect a cellular host , making them obligate intracellular parasites .
The genome of a virus enters a host cell and directs the production of the viral components , proteins and nucleic acids , needed to form new virus particles called virions .
New virions are made in the host cell by assembly of viral components .
The new virions transport the viral genome to another host cell to carry out another round of infection .
summarizes the properties of viruses .
Viruses can infect every type of host cell , including those of plants , animals , fungi , protists , bacteria , and archaea .
Most viruses will only be able to infect the cells of one or a few species of organism .
This is called the host range .
However , having a wide host range is not common and viruses will typically only infect specific hosts and only specific cell types within those hosts .
The viruses that infect bacteria are called bacteriophages , or simply phages .
The word phage comes from the Greek word for devour .
Other viruses are just identified by their host group , such as animal or plant viruses .
Once a cell is infected , the effects of the virus can vary depending on the type of virus .
Viruses may cause abnormal growth of the cell or cell death , alter the cell ’ s genome , or cause little noticeable effect in the cell .
Viruses can be transmitted through direct contact , indirect contact with fomites , or through a vector : an animal that transmits a pathogen from one host to another .
Arthropods such as mosquitoes , ticks , and flies , are typical vectors for viral diseases , and they may act as mechanical vectors or biological vectors .
Mechanical transmission occurs when the arthropod carries a viral pathogen on the outside of its body and transmits it to a new host by physical contact .
Biological transmission occurs when the arthropod carries the viral pathogen inside its body and transmits it to the new host through biting .
In humans , a wide variety of viruses are capable of causing various infections and diseases .
Some of the deadliest emerging pathogens in humans are viruses , yet we have few treatments or drugs to deal with viral infections , making them difficult to eradicate .
Viruses that can be transmitted from an animal host to a human host can cause zoonoses .
For example , the avian influenza virus originates in birds , but can cause disease in humans .
Reverse zoonoses are caused by infection of an animal by a virus that originated in a human .
In general , virions ( viral particles ) are small and can not be observed using a regular light microscope .
They are much smaller than prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells ; this is an adaptation allowing viruses to infect these larger cells ( see ) .
The size of a virion can range from 20 nm for small viruses up to 900 nm for typical , large viruses ( see ) .
Recent discoveries , however , have identified new giant viral species , such as Pandoravirus salinus and Pithovirus sibericum , with sizes approaching that of a bacterial cell .
In 1935 , after the development of the electron microscope , Wendell Stanley was the first scientist to crystallize the structure of the tobacco mosaic virus and discovered that it is composed of RNA and protein .
In 1943 , he isolated Influenza B virus , which contributed to the development of an influenza ( flu ) vaccine .
Stanley ’ s discoveries unlocked the mystery of the nature of viruses that had been puzzling scientists for over 40 years and his contributions to the field of virology led to him being awarded the Nobel Prize in 1946 .
As a result of continuing research into the nature of viruses , we now know they consist of a nucleic acid ( either RNA or DNA , but never both ) surrounded by a protein coat called a capsid ( see ) .
The interior of the capsid is not filled with cytosol , as in a cell , but instead it contains the bare necessities in terms of genome and enzymes needed to direct the synthesis of new virions .
Each capsid is composed of protein subunits called capsomeres made of one or more different types of capsomere proteins that interlock to form the closely packed capsid .
There are two categories of viruses based on general composition .
Viruses formed from only a nucleic acid and capsid are called naked viruses or nonenveloped viruses .
Viruses formed with a nucleic-acid packed capsid surrounded by a lipid layer are called enveloped viruses ( see ) .
The viral envelope is a small portion of phospholipid membrane obtained as the virion buds from a host cell .
The viral envelope may either be intracellular or cytoplasmic in origin .
Extending outward and away from the capsid on some naked viruses and enveloped viruses are protein structures called spikes .
Influenza viruses are often identified by their H and N spikes .
For example , H1N1 influenza viruses were responsible for the pandemics in 1918 and 2009 , H2N2 for the pandemic in 1957 , and H3N2 for the pandemic in 1968 .
Viruses vary in the shape of their capsids , which can be either helical , polyhedral , or complex .
A helical capsid forms the shape of tobacco mosaic virus ( TMV ) , a naked helical virus , and Ebola virus , an enveloped helical virus .
The capsid is cylindrical or rod shaped , with the genome fitting just inside the length of the capsid .
Polyhedral capsids form the shapes of poliovirus and rhinovirus , and consist of a nucleic acid surrounded by a polyhedral ( manysided ) capsid in the form of an icosahedron .
An icosahedral capsid is a three-dimensional , 20-sided structure with 12 vertices .
These capsids somewhat resemble a soccer ball .
Both helical and polyhedral viruses can have envelopes .
Viral shapes seen in certain types of bacteriophages , such as T4 phage , and poxviruses , like vaccinia virus , may have features of both polyhedral and helical viruses so they are described as a complex viral shape ( see ) .
In the bacteriophage complex form , the genome is located within the polyhedral head and the sheath connects the head to the tail fibers and tail pins that help the virus attach to receptors on the host cell ’ s surface .
Poxviruses that have complex shapes are often brick shaped , with intricate surface characteristics not seen in the other categories of capsid .
Although viruses are not classified in the three domains of life , their numbers are great enough to require classification .
Since 1971 , the International Union of Microbiological Societies Virology Division has given the task of developing , refining , and maintaining a universal virus taxonomy to the International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses ( ICTV ) .
Since viruses can mutate so quickly , it can be difficult to classify them into a genus and a species epithet using the binomial nomenclature system .
Thus , the ICTV ’ s viral nomenclature system classifies viruses into families and genera based on viral genetics , chemistry , morphology , and mechanism of multiplication .
To date , the ICTV has classified known viruses in seven orders , 96 families , and 350 genera .
Viral family names end in viridae ( e.g , Parvoviridae ) and genus names end in −virus ( e.g. , Parvovirus ) .
The names of viral orders , families , and genera are all italicized .
When referring to a viral species , we often use a genus and species epithet such as Pandoravirus dulcis or Pandoravirus salinus .
The Baltimore classification system is an alternative to ICTV nomenclature .
The Baltimore system classifies viruses according to their genomes ( DNA or RNA , single versus double stranded , and mode of replication ) .
This system thus creates seven groups of viruses that have common genetics and biology .
Aside from formal systems of nomenclature , viruses are often informally grouped into categories based on chemistry , morphology , or other characteristics they share in common .
Categories may include naked or enveloped structure , single-stranded ( ss ) or double-stranded ( ds ) DNA or ss or ds RNA genomes , segmented or nonsegmented genomes , and positive-strand ( + ) or negative-strand ( − ) RNA .
For example , herpes viruses can be classified as a dsDNA enveloped virus ; human immunodeficiency virus ( HIV ) is a +ssRNA enveloped virus , and tobacco mosaic virus is a +ssRNA virus .
Other characteristics such as host specificity , tissue specificity , capsid shape , and special genes or enzymes may also be used to describe groups of similar viruses .
lists some of the most common viruses that are human pathogens by genome type .
While the ICTV has been tasked with the biological classification of viruses , it has also played an important role in the classification of diseases caused by viruses .
To facilitate the tracking of virus-related human diseases , the ICTV has created classifications that link to the International Classification of Diseases ( ICD ) , the standard taxonomy of disease that is maintained and updated by the World Health Organization ( WHO ) .
The ICD assigns an alphanumeric code of up to six characters to every type of viral infection , as well as all other types of diseases , medical conditions , and causes of death .
This ICD code is used in conjunction with two other coding systems ( the Current Procedural Terminology , and the Healthcare Common Procedure Coding System ) to categorize patient conditions for treatment and insurance reimbursement .
For example , when a patient seeks treatment for a viral infection , ICD codes are routinely used by clinicians to order laboratory tests and prescribe treatments specific to the virus suspected of causing the illness .
This ICD code is then used by medical laboratories to identify tests that must be performed to confirm the diagnosis .
The ICD code is used by the health-care management system to verify that all treatments and laboratory work performed are appropriate for the given virus .
Medical coders use ICD codes to assign the proper code for procedures performed , and medical billers , in turn , use this information to process claims for reimbursement by insurance companies .
Vitalrecords keepers use ICD codes to record cause of death on death certificates , and epidemiologists used ICD codes to calculate morbidity and mortality statistics .
By themselves , viruses do not encode for all of the enzymes necessary for viral replication .
But within a host cell , a virus can commandeer cellular machinery to produce more viral particles .
Bacteriophages replicate only in the cytoplasm , since prokaryotic cells do not have a nucleus or organelles .
In eukaryotic cells , most DNA viruses can replicate inside the nucleus , with an exception observed in the large DNA viruses , such as the poxviruses , that can replicate in the cytoplasm .
RNA viruses that infect animal cells often replicate in the cytoplasm .
The life cycle of bacteriophages has been a good model for understanding how viruses affect the cells they infect , since similar processes have been observed for eukaryotic viruses , which can cause immediate death of the cell or establish a latent or chronic infection .
Virulent phages typically lead to the death of the cell through cell lysis .
Temperate phages , on the other hand , can become part of a host chromosome and are replicated with the cell genome until such time as they are induced to make newly assembled viruses , or progeny viruses .
During the lytic cycle of virulent phage , the bacteriophage takes over the cell , reproduces new phages , and destroys the cell .
T-even phage is a good example of a well-characterized class of virulent phages .
There are five stages in the bacteriophage lytic cycle ( see ) .
Attachment is the first stage in the infection process in which the phage interacts with specific bacterial surface receptors ( e.g. , lipopolysaccharides and OmpC protein on host surfaces ) .
Most phages have a narrow host range and may infect one species of bacteria or one strain within a species .
This unique recognition can be exploited for targeted treatment of bacterial infection by phage therapy or for phage typing to identify unique bacterial subspecies or strains .
The second stage of infection is entry or penetration .
This occurs through contraction of the tail sheath , which acts like a hypodermic needle to inject the viral genome through the cell wall and membrane .
The phage head and remaining components remain outside the bacteria .
The third stage of infection is biosynthesis of new viral components .
After entering the host cell , the virus synthesizes virus-encoded endonucleases to degrade the bacterial chromosome .
It then hijacks the host cell to replicate , transcribe , and translate the necessary viral components ( capsomeres , sheath , base plates , tail fibers , and viral enzymes ) for the assembly of new viruses .
Polymerase genes are usually expressed early in the cycle , while capsid and tail proteins are expressed later .
During the maturation phase , new virions are created .
To liberate free phages , the bacterial cell wall is disrupted by phage proteins such as holin or lysozyme .
The final stage is release .
Mature viruses burst out of the host cell in a process called lysis and the progeny viruses are liberated into the environment to infect new cells .
In a lysogenic cycle , the phage genome also enters the cell through attachment and penetration .
A prime example of a phage with this type of life cycle is the lambda phage .
During the lysogenic cycle , instead of killing the host , the phage genome integrates into the bacterial chromosome and becomes part of the host .
The integrated phage genome is called a prophage .
A bacterial host with a prophage is called a lysogen .
The process in which a bacterium is infected by a temperate phage is called lysogeny .
It is typical of temperate phages to be latent or inactive within the cell .
As the bacterium replicates its chromosome , it also replicates the phage ’ s DNA and passes it on to new daughter cells during reproduction .
The presence of the phage may alter the phenotype of the bacterium , since it can bring in extra genes ( e.g. , toxin genes that can increase bacterial virulence ) .
This change in the host phenotype is called lysogenic conversion or phage conversion .
Some bacteria , such as Vibrio cholerae and Clostridium botulinum , are less virulent in the absence of the prophage .
The phages infecting these bacteria carry the toxin genes in their genome and enhance the virulence of the host when the toxin genes are expressed .
In the case of V. cholera , phage encoded toxin can cause severe diarrhea ; in C. botulinum , the toxin can cause paralysis .
During lysogeny , the prophage will persist in the host chromosome until induction , which results in the excision of the viral genome from the host chromosome .
After induction has occurred the temperate phage can proceed through a lytic cycle and then undergo lysogeny in a newly infected cell ( see ) .
Transduction occurs when a bacteriophage transfers bacterial DNA from one bacterium to another during sequential infections .
There are two types of transduction : generalized and specialized transduction .
During the lytic cycle of viral replication , the virus hijacks the host cell , degrades the host chromosome , and makes more viral genomes .
As it assembles and packages DNA into the phage head , packaging occasionally makes a mistake .
Instead of packaging viral DNA , it takes a random piece of host DNA and inserts it into the capsid .
Once released , this virion will then inject the former host ’ s DNA into a newly infected host .
The asexual transfer of genetic information can allow for DNA recombination to occur , thus providing the new host with new genes ( e.g. , an antibiotic-resistance gene , or a sugar-metabolizing gene ) .
Generalized transduction occurs when a random piece of bacterial chromosomal DNA is transferred by the phage during the lytic cycle .
Specialized transduction occurs at the end of the lysogenic cycle , when the prophage is excised and the bacteriophage enters the lytic cycle .
Since the phage is integrated into the host genome , the prophage can replicate as part of the host .
However , some conditions ( e.g. , ultraviolet light exposure or chemical exposure ) stimulate the prophage to undergo induction , causing the phage to excise from the genome , enter the lytic cycle , and produce new phages to leave host cells .
During the process of excision from the host chromosome , a phage may occasionally remove some bacterial DNA near the site of viral integration .
The phage and host DNA from one end or both ends of the integration site are packaged within the capsid and are transferred to the new , infected host .
Since the DNA transferred by the phage is not randomly packaged but is instead a specific piece of DNA near the site of integration , this mechanism of gene transfer is referred to as specialized transduction ( see ) .
The DNA can then recombine with host chromosome , giving the latter new characteristics .
Transduction seems to play an important role in the evolutionary process of bacteria , giving them a mechanism for asexual exchange of genetic information .
Lytic animal viruses follow similar infection stages to bacteriophages : attachment , penetration , biosynthesis , maturation , and release ( see ) .
However , the mechanisms of penetration , nucleic-acid biosynthesis , and release differ between bacterial and animal viruses .
After binding to host receptors , animal viruses enter through endocytosis ( engulfment by the host cell ) or through membrane fusion ( viral envelope with the host cell membrane ) .
Many viruses are host specific , meaning they only infect a certain type of host ; and most viruses only infect certain types of cells within tissues .
This specificity is called a tissue tropism .
Examples of this are demonstrated by the poliovirus , which exhibits tropism for the tissues of the brain and spinal cord , or the influenza virus , which has a primary tropism for the respiratory tract .
Animal viruses do not always express their genes using the normal flow of genetic information—from DNA to RNA to protein .
Some viruses have a dsDNA genome like cellular organisms and can follow the normal flow .
However , others may have ssDNA , dsRNA , or ssRNA genomes .
The nature of the genome determines how the genome is replicated and expressed as viral proteins .
If a genome is ssDNA , host enzymes will be used to synthesize a second strand that is complementary to the genome strand , thus producing dsDNA .
The dsDNA can now be replicated , transcribed , and translated similar to host DNA .
If the viral genome is RNA , a different mechanism must be used .
There are three types of RNA genome : dsRNA , positive ( + ) single-strand ( +ssRNA ) or negative ( − ) single-strand RNA ( −ssRNA ) .
If a virus has a +ssRNA genome , it can be translated directly to make viral proteins .
Viral genomic +ssRNA acts like cellular mRNA .
However , if a virus contains a −ssRNA genome , the host ribosomes can not translate it until the −ssRNA is replicated into +ssRNA by viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerase ( RdRP ) ( see ) .
The RdRP is brought in by the virus and can be used to make +ssRNA from the original −ssRNA genome .
The RdRP is also an important enzyme for the replication of dsRNA viruses , because it uses the negative strand of the double-stranded genome as a template to create +ssRNA .
The newly synthesized +ssRNA copies can then be translated by cellular ribosomes .
An alternative mechanism for viral nucleic acid synthesis is observed in the retroviruses , which are +ssRNA viruses ( see ) .
Single-stranded RNA viruses such as HIV carry a special enzyme called reverse transcriptase within the capsid that synthesizes a complementary ssDNA ( cDNA ) copy using the +ssRNA genome as a template .
The ssDNA is then made into dsDNA , which can integrate into the host chromosome and become a permanent part of the host .
The integrated viral genome is called a provirus .
The virus now can remain in the host for a long time to establish a chronic infection .
The provirus stage is similar to the prophage stage in a bacterial infection during the lysogenic cycle .
However , unlike prophage , the provirus does not undergo excision after splicing into the genome .
Persistent infection occurs when a virus is not completely cleared from the system of the host but stays in certain tissues or organs of the infected person .
The virus may remain silent or undergo productive infection without seriously harming or killing the host .
Mechanisms of persistent infection may involve the regulation of the viral or host gene expressions or the alteration of the host immune response .
The two primary categories of persistent infections are latent infection and chronic infection .
Examples of viruses that cause latent infections include herpes simplex virus ( oral and genital herpes ) , varicella-zoster virus ( chickenpox and shingles ) , and Epstein-Barr virus ( mononucleosis ) .
Hepatitis C virus and HIV are two examples of viruses that cause long-term chronic infections .
Not all animal viruses undergo replication by the lytic cycle .
There are viruses that are capable of remaining hidden or dormant inside the cell in a process called latency .
These types of viruses are known as latent viruses and may cause latent infections .
Viruses capable of latency may initially cause an acute infection before becoming dormant .
For example , the varicella-zoster virus infects many cells throughout the body and causes chickenpox , characterized by a rash of blisters covering the skin .
About 10 to 12 days postinfection , the disease resolves and the virus goes dormant , living within nerve-cell ganglia for years .
During this time , the virus does not kill the nerve cells or continue replicating .
It is not clear why the virus stops replicating within the nerve cells and expresses few viral proteins but , in some cases , typically after many years of dormancy , the virus is reactivated and causes a new disease called shingles .
Whereas chickenpox affects many areas throughout the body , shingles is a nerve cell-specific disease emerging from the ganglia in which the virus was dormant .
Latent viruses may remain dormant by existing as circular viral genome molecules outside of the host chromosome .
Others become proviruses by integrating into the host genome .
During dormancy , viruses do not cause any symptoms of disease and may be difficult to detect .
A patient may be unaware that he or she is carrying the virus unless a viral diagnostic test has been performed .
A chronic infection is a disease with symptoms that are recurrent or persistent over a long time .
Some viral infections can be chronic if the body is unable to eliminate the virus .
HIV is an example of a virus that produces a chronic infection , often after a long period of latency .
Once a person becomes infected with HIV , the virus can be detected in tissues continuously thereafter , but untreated patients often experience no symptoms for years .
However , the virus maintains chronic persistence through several mechanisms that interfere with immune function , including preventing expression of viral antigens on the surface of infected cells , altering immune cells themselves , restricting expression of viral genes , and rapidly changing viral antigens through mutation .
Eventually , the damage to the immune system results in progression of the disease leading to acquired immunodeficiency syndrome ( AIDS ) .
The various mechanisms that HIV uses to avoid being cleared by the immune system are also used by other chronically infecting viruses , including the hepatitis C virus .
Plant viruses are more similar to animal viruses than they are to bacteriophages .
Plant viruses may be enveloped or non-enveloped .
Like many animal viruses , plant viruses can have either a DNA or RNA genome and be single stranded or double stranded .
However , most plant viruses do not have a DNA genome ; the majority have a +ssRNA genome , which acts like messenger RNA ( mRNA ) .
Only a minority of plant viruses have other types of genomes .
Plant viruses may have a narrow or broad host range .
For example , the citrus tristeza virus infects only a few plants of the Citrus genus , whereas the cucumber mosaic virus infects thousands of plants of various plant families .
Most plant viruses are transmitted by contact between plants , or by fungi , nematodes , insects , or other arthropods that act as mechanical vectors .
However , some viruses can only be transferred by a specific type of insect vector ; for example , a particular virus might be transmitted by aphids but not whiteflies .
In some cases , viruses may also enter healthy plants through wounds , as might occur due to pruning or weather damage .
Viruses that infect plants are considered biotrophic parasites , which means that they can establish an infection without killing the host , similar to what is observed in the lysogenic life cycles of bacteriophages .
Viral infection can be asymptomatic ( latent ) or can lead to cell death ( lytic infection ) .
The life cycle begins with the penetration of the virus into the host cell .
Next , the virus is uncoated within the cytoplasm of the cell when the capsid is removed .
Depending on the type of nucleic acid , cellular components are used to replicate the viral genome and synthesize viral proteins for assembly of new virions .
To establish a systemic infection , the virus must enter a part of the vascular system of the plant , such as the phloem .
The time required for systemic infection may vary from a few days to a few weeks depending on the virus , the plant species , and the environmental conditions .
The virus life cycle is complete when it is transmitted from an infected plant to a healthy plant .
Unlike the growth curve for a bacterial population , the growth curve for a virus population over its life cycle does not follow a sigmoidal curve .
During the initial stage , an inoculum of virus causes infection .
In the eclipse phase , viruses bind and penetrate the cells with no virions detected in the medium .
The chief difference that next appears in the viral growth curve compared to a bacterial growth curve occurs when virions are released from the lysed host cell at the same time .
Such an occurrence is called a burst , and the number of virions per bacterium released is described as the burst size .
In a one-step multiplication curve for bacteriophage , the host cells lyse , releasing many viral particles to the medium , which leads to a very steep rise in viral titer ( the number of virions per unit volume ) .
If no viable host cells remain , the viral particles begin to degrade during the decline of the culture ( see ) .
Today , porcelain filters have been replaced with membrane filters and other devices used to isolate and identify viruses .
Unlike bacteria , many of which can be grown on an artificial nutrient medium , viruses require a living host cell for replication .
Infected host cells ( eukaryotic or prokaryotic ) can be cultured and grown , and then the growth medium can be harvested as a source of virus .
Virions in the liquid medium can be separated from the host cells by either centrifugation or filtration .
Filters can physically remove anything present in the solution that is larger than the virions ; the viruses can then be collected in the filtrate ( see ) .
Viruses can be grown in vivo ( within a whole living organism , plant , or animal ) or in vitro ( outside a living organism in cells in an artificial environment , such as a test tube , cell culture flask , or agar plate ) .
Bacteriophages can be grown in the presence of a dense layer of bacteria ( also called a bacterial lawn ) grown in a 0.7 % soft agar in a Petri dish or flat ( horizontal ) flask ( see ) .
The agar concentration is decreased from the 1.5 % usually used in culturing bacteria .
The soft 0.7 % agar allows the bacteriophages to easily diffuse through the medium .
For lytic bacteriophages , lysing of the bacterial hosts can then be readily observed when a clear zone called a plaque is detected ( see ) .
As the phage kills the bacteria , many plaques are observed among the cloudy bacterial lawn .
Animal viruses require cells within a host animal or tissue-culture cells derived from an animal .
Animal virus cultivation is important for 1 ) identification and diagnosis of pathogenic viruses in clinical specimens , 2 ) production of vaccines , and 3 ) basic research studies .
In vivo host sources can be a developing embryo in an embryonated bird ’ s egg ( e.g. , chicken , turkey ) or a whole animal .
For example , most of the influenza vaccine manufactured for annual flu vaccination programs is cultured in hens ’ eggs .
The embryo or host animal serves as an incubator for viral replication ( see ) .
Location within the embryo or host animal is important .
Many viruses have a tissue tropism , and must therefore be introduced into a specific site for growth .
Within an embryo , target sites include the amniotic cavity , the chorioallantoic membrane , or the yolk sac .
Viral infection may damage tissue membranes , producing lesions called pox ; disrupt embryonic development ; or cause the death of the embryo .
For in vitro studies , various types of cells can be used to support the growth of viruses .
A primary cell culture is freshly prepared from animal organs or tissues .
Cells are extracted from tissues by mechanical scraping or mincing to release cells or by an enzymatic method using trypsin or collagenase to break up tissue and release single cells into suspension .
Because of anchorage-dependence requirements , primary cell cultures require a liquid culture medium in a Petri dish or tissue-culture flask so cells have a solid surface such as glass or plastic for attachment and growth .
Primary cultures usually have a limited life span .
When cells in a primary culture undergo mitosis and a sufficient density of cells is produced , cells come in contact with other cells .
When this cell-to-cell-contact occurs , mitosis is triggered to stop .
This is called contact inhibition and it prevents the density of the cells from becoming too high .
To prevent contact inhibition , cells from the primary cell culture must be transferred to another vessel with fresh growth medium .
This is called a secondary cell culture .
Periodically , cell density must be reduced by pouring off some cells and adding fresh medium to provide space and nutrients to maintain cell growth .
In contrast to primary cell cultures , continuous cell lines , usually derived from transformed cells or tumors , are often able to be subcultured many times or even grown indefinitely ( in which case they are called immortal ) .
Continuous cell lines may not exhibit anchorage dependency ( they will grow in suspension ) and may have lost their contact inhibition .
As a result , continuous cell lines can grow in piles or lumps resembling small tumor growths ( see ) .
An example of an immortal cell line is the HeLa cell line , which was originally cultivated from tumor cells obtained from Henrietta Lacks , a patient who died of cervical cancer in 1951 .
HeLa cells were the first continuous tissueculture cell line and were used to establish tissue culture as an important technology for research in cell biology , virology , and medicine .
Prior to the discovery of HeLa cells , scientists were not able to establish tissue cultures with any reliability or stability .
More than six decades later , this cell line is still alive and being used for medical research .
See to read more about this important cell line and the controversial means by which it was obtained .
Cytopathic effects ( CPEs ) are distinct observable cell abnormalities due to viral infection .
Further pathological changes include viral disruption of the host genome and altering normal cells into transformed cells , which are the types of cells associated with carcinomas and sarcomas .
The type or severity of the CPE depends on the type of virus involved .
lists CPEs for specific viruses .
A serological assay is used to detect the presence of certain types of viruses in patient serum .
Serum is the strawcolored liquid fraction of blood plasma from which clotting factors have been removed .
Serum can be used in a direct assay called a hemagglutination assay to detect specific types of viruses in the patient ’ s sample .
Hemagglutination is the agglutination ( clumping ) together of erythrocytes ( red blood cells ) .
Many viruses produce surface proteins or spikes called hemagglutinins that can bind to receptors on the membranes of erythrocytes and cause the cells to agglutinate .
Hemagglutination is observable without using the microscope , but this method does not always differentiate between infectious and noninfectious viral particles , since both can agglutinate erythrocytes .
To identify a specific pathogenic virus using hemagglutination , we must use an indirect approach .
Proteins called antibodies , generated by the patient ’ s immune system to fight a specific virus , can be used to bind to components such as hemagglutinins that are uniquely associated with specific types of viruses .
The binding of the antibodies with the hemagglutinins found on the virus subsequently prevent erythrocytes from directly interacting with the virus .
So when erythrocytes are added to the antibody-coated viruses , there is no appearance of agglutination ; agglutination has been inhibited .
We call these types of indirect assays for virus-specific antibodies hemagglutination inhibition ( HAI ) assays .
HAI can be used to detect the presence of antibodies specific to many types of viruses that may be causing or have caused an infection in a patient even months or years after infection ( see ) .
This assay is described in greater detail in .
Nucleic acid amplification tests ( NAAT ) are used in molecular biology to detect unique nucleic acid sequences of viruses in patient samples .
Polymerase chain reaction ( PCR ) is an NAAT used to detect the presence of viral DNA in a patient ’ s tissue or body fluid sample .
PCR is a technique that amplifies ( i.e. , synthesizes many copies ) of a viral DNA segment of interest .
Using PCR , short nucleotide sequences called primers bind to specific sequences of viral DNA , enabling identification of the virus .
Reverse transcriptase-PCR ( RT-PCR ) is an NAAT used to detect the presence of RNA viruses .
RT-PCR differs from PCR in that the enzyme reverse transcriptase ( RT ) is used to make a cDNA from the small amount of viral RNA in the specimen .
The cDNA can then be amplified by PCR .
Both PCR and RT-PCR are used to detect and confirm the presence of the viral nucleic acid in patient specimens .
Enzyme immunoassays ( EIAs ) rely on the ability of antibodies to detect and attach to specific biomolecules called antigens .
The detecting antibody attaches to the target antigen with a high degree of specificity in what might be a complex mixture of biomolecules .
Also included in this type of assay is a colorless enzyme attached to the detecting antibody .
The enzyme acts as a tag on the detecting antibody and can interact with a colorless substrate , leading to the production of a colored end product .
EIAs often rely on layers of antibodies to capture and react with antigens , all of which are attached to a membrane filter ( see ) .
EIAs for viral antigens are often used as preliminary screening tests .
If the results are positive , further confirmation will require tests with even greater sensitivity , such as a western blot or an NAAT .
EIAs are discussed in more detail in .
Describe viroids and their unique characteristics Describe virusoids and their unique characteristics Describe prions and their unique characteristics Research attempts to discover the causative agents of previously uninvestigated diseases have led to the discovery of nonliving disease agents quite different from viruses .
These include particles consisting only of RNA or only of protein that , nonetheless , are able to self-propagate at the expense of a host—a key similarity to viruses that allows them to cause disease conditions .
To date , these discoveries include viroids , virusoids , and the proteinaceous prions .
In 1971 , Theodor Diener , a pathologist working at the Agriculture Research Service , discovered an acellular particle that he named a viroid , meaning “ virus-like. ” Viroids consist only of a short strand of circular RNA capable of selfreplication .
The first viroid discovered was found to cause potato tuber spindle disease , which causes slower sprouting and various deformities in potato plants ( see ) .
Like viruses , potato spindle tuber viroids ( PSTVs ) take control of the host machinery to replicate their RNA genome .
Unlike viruses , viroids do not have a protein coat to protect their genetic information .
Viroids can result in devastating losses of commercially important agricultural food crops grown in fields and orchards .
Since the discovery of PSTV , other viroids have been discovered that cause diseases in plants .
Tomato planta macho viroid ( TPMVd ) infects tomato plants , which causes loss of chlorophyll , disfigured and brittle leaves , and very small tomatoes , resulting in loss of productivity in this field crop .
Avocado sunblotch viroid ( ASBVd ) results in lower yields and poorer-quality fruit .
ASBVd is the smallest viroid discovered thus far that infects plants .
Peach latent mosaic viroid ( PLMVd ) can cause necrosis of flower buds and branches , and wounding of ripened fruit , which leads to fungal and bacterial growth in the fruit .
PLMVd can also cause similar pathological changes in plums , nectarines , apricots , and cherries , resulting in decreased productivity in these orchards , as well .
Viroids , in general , can be dispersed mechanically during crop maintenance or harvesting , vegetative reproduction , and possibly via seeds and insects , resulting in a severe drop in food availability and devastating economic consequences .
A second type of pathogenic RNA that can infect commercially important agricultural crops are the virusoids , which are subviral particles best described as non–self-replicating ssRNAs .
RNA replication of virusoids is similar to that of viroids but , unlike viroids , virusoids require that the cell also be infected with a specific “ helper ” virus .
There are currently only five described types of virusoids and their associated helper viruses .
The helper viruses are all from the family of Sobemoviruses .
An example of a helper virus is the subterranean clover mottle virus , which has an associated virusoid packaged inside the viral capsid .
Once the helper virus enters the host cell , the virusoids are released and can be found free in plant cell cytoplasm , where they possess ribozyme activity .
The helper virus undergoes typical viral replication independent of the activity of the virusoid .
The virusoid genomes are small , only 220 to 388 nucleotides long .
A virusoid genome does not code for any proteins , but instead serves only to replicate virusoid RNA .
Virusoids belong to a larger group of infectious agents called satellite RNAs , which are similar pathogenic RNAs found in animals .
Unlike the plant virusoids , satellite RNAs may encode for proteins ; however , like plant virusoids , satellite RNAs must coinfect with a helper virus to replicate .
One satellite RNA that infects humans and that has been described by some scientists as a virusoid is the hepatitis delta virus ( HDV ) , which , by some reports , is also called hepatitis delta virusoid .
Much larger than a plant virusoid , HDV has a circular , ssRNA genome of 1,700 nucleotides and can direct the biosynthesis of HDV-associated proteins .
The HDV helper virus is the hepatitis B virus ( HBV ) .
Coinfection with HBV and HDV results in more severe pathological changes in the liver during infection , which is how HDV was first discovered .
At one time , scientists believed that any infectious particle must contain DNA or RNA .
Then , in 1982 , Stanley Prusiner , a medical doctor studying scrapie ( a fatal , degenerative disease in sheep ) discovered that the disease was caused by proteinaceous infectious particles , or prions .
Because proteins are acellular and do not contain DNA or RNA , Prusiner ’ s findings were originally met with resistance and skepticism ; however , his research was eventually validated , and he received the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1997 .
A prion is a misfolded rogue form of a normal protein ( PrPc ) found in the cell .
This rogue prion protein ( PrPsc ) , which may be caused by a genetic mutation or occur spontaneously , can be infectious , stimulating other endogenous normal proteins to become misfolded , forming plaques ( see ) .
Today , prions are known to cause various forms of transmissible spongiform encephalopathy ( TSE ) in human and animals .
TSE is a rare degenerative disorder that affects the brain and nervous system .
The accumulation of rogue proteins causes the brain tissue to become spongelike , killing brain cells and forming holes in the tissue , leading to brain damage , loss of motor coordination , and dementia ( see ) .
Infected individuals are mentally impaired and become unable to move or speak .
There is no cure , and the disease progresses rapidly , eventually leading to death within a few months or years .
TSEs in humans include kuru , fatal familial insomnia , Gerstmann-Straussler-Scheinker disease , and CreutzfeldtJakob disease ( see ) .
TSEs in animals include mad cow disease , scrapie ( in sheep and goats ) , and chronic wasting disease ( in elk and deer ) .
TSEs can be transmitted between animals and from animals to humans by eating contaminated meat or animal feed .
Transmission between humans can occur through heredity ( as is often the case with GSS and CJD ) or by contact with contaminated tissue , as might occur during a blood transfusion or organ transplant .
There is no evidence for transmission via casual contact with an infected person .
lists TSEs that affect humans and their modes of transmission .
Prions are extremely difficult to destroy because they are resistant to heat , chemicals , and radiation .
Even standard sterilization procedures do not ensure the destruction of these particles .
Currently , there is no treatment or cure for TSE disease , and contaminated meats or infected animals must be handled according to federal guidelines to prevent transmission .
The earth is estimated to be 4.6 billion years old , but for the first 2 billion years , the atmosphere lacked oxygen , without which the earth could not support life as we know it .
In 1952 , Stanley Miller ( 1930–2007 ) , a graduate student at the University of Chicago , and his professor Harold Urey ( 1893–1981 ) , set out to confirm this hypothesis in a nowfamous experiment .
Miller and Urey combined what they believed to be the major components of the earth ’ s early atmosphere—water ( H O ) , methane ( CH ) , hydrogen ( H ) , and ammonia ( NH ) —and sealed them in a sterile flask .
Next , they heated the flask to produce water vapor and passed electric sparks through the mixture to mimic lightning in the atmosphere .
When they analyzed the contents of the flask a week later , they found amino acids , the structural units of proteins—molecules essential to the function of all organisms .
Organic chemistry is the discipline devoted to the study of carbon-based chemistry , which is the foundation for the study of biomolecules and the discipline of biochemistry .
Both biochemistry and organic chemistry are based on the concepts of general chemistry , some of which are presented in .
The most abundant element in cells is hydrogen ( H ) , followed by carbon ( C ) , oxygen ( O ) , nitrogen ( N ) , phosphorous ( P ) , and sulfur ( S ) .
We call these elements macronutrients , and they account for about 99 % of the dry weight of cells .
All of these elements are essential to the function of many biochemical reactions , and , therefore , are essential to life .
The four most abundant elements in living matter ( C , N , O , and H ) have low atomic numbers and are thus light elements capable of forming strong bonds with other atoms to produce molecules .
Carbon forms four chemical bonds , whereas nitrogen forms three , oxygen forms two , and hydrogen forms one .
When bonded together within molecules , oxygen , sulfur , and nitrogen often have one or more “ lone pairs ” of electrons that play important roles in determining many of the molecules ’ physical and chemical properties ( see ) .
These traits in combination permit the formation of a vast number of diverse molecular species necessary to form the structures and enable the functions of living organisms .
Living organisms contain inorganic compounds ( mainly water and salts ; see ) and organic molecules .
Organic molecules contain carbon ; inorganic compounds do not .
Carbon oxides and carbonates are exceptions ; they contain carbon but are considered inorganic because they do not contain hydrogen .
The atoms of an organic molecule are typically organized around chains of carbon atoms .
Inorganic compounds make up 1 % –1.5 % of a living cell ’ s mass .
They are small , simple compounds that play important roles in the cell , although they do not form cell structures .
Most of the carbon found in organic molecules originates from inorganic carbon sources such as carbon dioxide captured via carbon fixation by microorganisms .
Organic molecules in organisms are generally larger and more complex than inorganic molecules .
Their carbon skeletons are held together by covalent bonds .
They form the cells of an organism and perform the chemical reactions that facilitate life .
All of these molecules , called biomolecules because they are part of living matter , contain carbon , which is the building block of life .
Carbon is a very unique element in that it has four valence electrons in its outer orbitals and can form four single covalent bonds with up to four other atoms at the same time ( see ) .
These atoms are usually oxygen , hydrogen , nitrogen , sulfur , phosphorous , and carbon itself ; the simplest organic compound is methane , in which carbon binds only to hydrogen .
As a result of carbon ’ s unique combination of size and bonding properties , carbon atoms can bind together in large numbers , thus producing a chain or carbon skeleton .
The carbon skeleton of organic molecules can be straight , branched , or ring shaped ( cyclic ) .
Organic molecules are built on chains of carbon atoms of varying lengths ; most are typically very long , which allows for a huge number and variety of compounds .
No other element has the ability to form so many different molecules of so many different sizes and shapes .
Molecules with the same atomic makeup but different structural arrangement of atoms are called isomers .
The concept of isomerism is very important in chemistry because the structure of a molecule is always directly related to its function .
Slight changes in the structural arrangements of atoms in a molecule may lead to very different properties .
Chemists represent molecules by their structural formula , which is a graphic representation of the molecular structure , showing how the atoms are arranged .
Compounds that have identical molecular formulas but differ in the bonding sequence of the atoms are called structural isomers .
The monosaccharides glucose , galactose , and fructose all have the same molecular formula , C H O , but we can see from that the atoms are bonded together differently .
Isomers that differ in the spatial arrangements of atoms are called stereoisomers ; one unique type is enantiomers .
The properties of enantiomers were originally discovered by Louis Pasteur in 1848 while using a microscope to analyze crystallized fermentation products of wine .
Enantiomers are molecules that have the characteristic of chirality , in which their structures are nonsuperimposable mirror images of each other .
Chirality is an important characteristic in many biologically important molecules , as illustrated by the examples of structural differences in the enantiomeric forms of the monosaccharide glucose or the amino acid alanine .
Many organisms are only able to use one enantiomeric form of certain types of molecules as nutrients and as building blocks to make structures within a cell .
Some enantiomeric forms of amino acids have distinctly different tastes and smells when consumed as food .
For example , L-aspartame , commonly called aspartame , tastes sweet , whereas Daspartame is tasteless .
Drug enantiomers can have very different pharmacologic affects .
For example , the compound methorphan exists as two enantiomers , one of which acts as an antitussive ( dextro methorphan , a cough suppressant ) , whereas the other acts as an analgesic ( levo methorphan , a drug similar in effect to codeine ) .
Enantiomers are also called optical isomers because they can rotate the plane of polarized light .
Some of the crystals Pasteur observed from wine fermentation rotated light clockwise whereas others rotated the light counterclockwise .
Today , we denote enantiomers that rotate polarized light clockwise ( + ) as d forms , and the mirror image of the same molecule that rotates polarized light counterclockwise ( − ) as the l form .
The d and l labels are derived from the Latin words dexter ( on the right ) and laevus ( on the left ) , respectively .
These two different optical isomers often have very different biological properties and activities .
Certain species of molds , yeast , and bacteria , such as Rhizopus , Yarrowia , and Lactobacillus spp. , respectively , can only metabolize one type of optical isomer ; the opposite isomer is not suitable as a source of nutrients .
Another important reason to be aware of optical isomers is the therapeutic use of these types of chemicals for drug treatment , because some microorganisms can only be affected by one specific optical isomer .
In addition to containing carbon atoms , biomolecules also contain functional groups —groups of atoms within molecules that are categorized by their specific chemical composition and the chemical reactions they perform , regardless of the molecule in which the group is found .
Some of the most common functional groups are listed in .
In the formulas , the symbol R stands for “ residue ” and represents the remainder of the molecule .
R might symbolize just a single hydrogen atom or it may represent a group of many atoms .
Notice that some functional groups are relatively simple , consisting of just one or two atoms , while some comprise two of these simpler functional groups .
For example , a carbonyl group is a functional group composed of a carbon atom double bonded to an oxygen atom : C=O .
It is present in several classes of organic compounds as part of larger functional groups such as ketones , aldehydes , carboxylic acids , and amides .
In ketones , the carbonyl is present as an internal group , whereas in aldehydes it is a terminal group .
Carbon chains form the skeletons of most organic molecules .
Functional groups combine with the chain to form biomolecules .
Because these biomolecules are typically large , we call them macromolecule s. Many biologically relevant macromolecules are formed by linking together a great number of identical , or very similar , smaller organic molecules .
The smaller molecules act as building blocks and are called monomers , and the macromolecules that result from their linkage are called polymers .
Cells and cell structures include four main groups of carbon-containing macromolecules : polysaccharides , proteins , lipids , and nucleic acids .
The first three groups of molecules will be studied throughout this chapter .
The biochemistry of nucleic acids will be discussed in .
Of the many possible ways that monomers may be combined to yield polymers , one common approach encountered in the formation of biological macromolecules is dehydration synthesis .
In this chemical reaction , monomer molecules bind end to end in a process that results in the formation of water molecules as a byproduct : shows dehydration synthesis of glucose binding together to form maltose and a water molecule .
summarizes macromolecules and some of their functions .
Give examples of monosaccharides and polysaccharides Describe the function of monosaccharides and polysaccharides within a cell The most abundant biomolecules on earth are carbohydrates .
From a chemical viewpoint , carbohydrates are primarily a combination of carbon and water , and many of them have the empirical formula ( CH O ) , where n is the number of repeated units .
Carbohydrates have myriad different functions .
They are abundant in terrestrial ecosystems , many forms of which we use as food sources .
These molecules are also vital parts of macromolecular structures that store and transmit genetic information ( i.e. , DNA and RNA ) .
They are the basis of biological polymers that impart strength to various structural components of organisms ( e.g. , cellulose and chitin ) , and they are the primary source of energy storage in the form of starch and glycogen .
In biochemistry , carbohydrates are often called saccharides , from the Greek sakcharon , meaning sugar , although not all the saccharides are sweet .
The simplest carbohydrates are called monosaccharides , or simple sugars .
They are the building blocks ( monomers ) for the synthesis of polymers or complex carbohydrates , as will be discussed further in this section .
Monosaccharides are classified based on the number of carbons in the molecule .
The hexose D-glucose is the most abundant monosaccharide in nature .
Other very common and abundant hexose monosaccharides are galactose , used to make the disaccharide milk sugar lactose , and the fruit sugar fructose .
Monosaccharides of four or more carbon atoms are typically more stable when they adopt cyclic , or ring , structures .
These ring structures result from a chemical reaction between functional groups on opposite ends of the sugar ’ s flexible carbon chain , namely the carbonyl group and a relatively distant hydroxyl group .
Glucose , for example , forms a six-membered ring .
Two monosaccharide molecules may chemically bond to form a disaccharide .
The name given to the covalent bond between the two monosaccharides is a glycosidic bond .
Polysaccharides , also called glycans , are large polymers composed of hundreds of monosaccharide monomers .
Unlike monoand disaccharides , polysaccharides are not sweet and , in general , they are not soluble in water .
Like disaccharides , the monomeric units of polysaccharides are linked together by glycosidic bonds .
Polysaccharides are very diverse in their structure .
Three of the most biologically important polysaccharides— starch , glycogen , and cellulose —are all composed of repetitive glucose units , although they differ in their structure .
Cellulose consists of a linear chain of glucose molecules and is a common structural component of cell walls in plants and other organisms .
Glycogen and starch are branched polymers ; glycogen is the primary energy-storage molecule in animals and bacteria , whereas plants primarily store energy in starch .
The orientation of the glycosidic linkages in these three polymers is different as well and , as a consequence , linear and branched macromolecules have different properties .
Modified glucose molecules can be fundamental components of other structural polysaccharides .
Examples of these types of structural polysaccharides are N-acetyl glucosamine ( NAG ) and N-acetyl muramic acid ( NAM ) found in bacterial cell wall peptidoglycan .
Polymers of NAG form chitin , which is found in fungal cell walls and in the exoskeleton of insects .
Describe the chemical composition of lipids Describe the unique characteristics and diverse structures of lipids Compare and contrast triacylglycerides ( triglycerides ) and phospholipids .
Describe how phospholipids are used to construct biological membranes .
Although they are composed primarily of carbon and hydrogen , lipid molecules may also contain oxygen , nitrogen , sulfur , and phosphorous .
Lipids serve numerous and diverse purposes in the structure and functions of organisms .
They can be a source of nutrients , a storage form for carbon , energy-storage molecules , or structural components of membranes and hormones .
Lipids comprise a broad class of many chemically distinct compounds , the most common of which are discussed in this section .
The fatty acid s are lipids that contain long-chain hydrocarbons terminated with a carboxylic acid functional group .
Because the long hydrocarbon chain , fatty acids are hydrophobic ( “ water fearing ” ) or nonpolar .
Fatty acids with hydrocarbon chains that contain only single bonds are called saturated fatty acid s because they have the greatest number of hydrogen atoms possible and are , therefore , “ saturated ” with hydrogen .
Fatty acids with hydrocarbon chains containing at least one double bond are called unsaturated fatty acid s because they have fewer hydrogen atoms .
Saturated fatty acids have a straight , flexible carbon backbone , whereas unsaturated fatty acids have “ kinks ” in their carbon skeleton because each double bond causes a rigid bend of the carbon skeleton .
These differences in saturated versus unsaturated fatty acid structure result in different properties for the corresponding lipids in which the fatty acids are incorporated .
For example , lipids containing saturated fatty acids are solids at room temperature , whereas lipids containing unsaturated fatty acids are liquids .
A triacylglycerol , or triglyceride , is formed when three fatty acids are chemically linked to a glycerol molecule .
Triglycerides are the primary components of adipose tissue ( body fat ) , and are major constituents of sebum ( skin oils ) .
They play an important metabolic role , serving as efficient energy-storage molecules that can provide more than double the caloric content of both carbohydrates and proteins .
Triglycerides are classified as simple lipids because they are formed from just two types of compounds : glycerol and fatty acids .
In contrast , complex lipids contain at least one additional component , for example , a phosphate group ( phospholipids ) or a carbohydrate moiety ( glycolipids ) .
depicts a typical phospholipid composed of two fatty acids linked to glycerol ( a diglyceride ) .
The two fatty acid carbon chains may be both saturated , both unsaturated , or one of each .
Instead of another fatty acid molecule ( as for triglycerides ) , the third binding position on the glycerol molecule is occupied by a modified phosphate group .
The molecular structure of lipids results in unique behavior in aqueous environments .
depicts the structure of a triglyceride .
Because all three substituents on the glycerol backbone are long hydrocarbon chains , these compounds are nonpolar and not significantly attracted to polar water molecules—they are hydrophobic .
Conversely , phospholipids such as the one shown in have a negatively charged phosphate group .
Notice the “ R ” designation within the hydrophilic head depicted in , indicating that a polar head group can be more complex than a simple phosphate moiety .
Glycolipids are examples in which carbohydrates are bonded to the lipids ’ head groups .
The amphipathic nature of phospholipids enables them to form uniquely functional structures in aqueous environments .
As mentioned , the polar heads of these molecules are strongly attracted to water molecules , and the nonpolar tails are not .
Because of their considerable lengths , these tails are , in fact , strongly attracted to one another .
As a result , energetically stable , large-scale assemblies of phospholipid molecules are formed in which the hydrophobic tails congregate within enclosed regions , shielded from contact with water by the polar heads .
The simplest of these structures are micelles , spherical assemblies containing a hydrophobic interior of phospholipid tails and an outer surface of polar head groups .
Larger and more complex structures are created from lipid-bilayer sheets , or unit membranes , which are large , two-dimensional assemblies of phospholipids congregated tail to tail .
The cell membranes of nearly all organisms are made from lipid-bilayer sheets , as are the membranes of many intracellular components .
These sheets may also form lipid-bilayer spheres that are the structural basis of vesicles and liposomes , subcellular components that play a role in numerous physiological functions .
The isoprenoids are branched lipids , also referred to as terpenoids , that are formed by chemical modifications of the isoprene molecule .
Long-chain isoprenoids are also found in hydrophobic oils and waxes .
Waxes are typically water resistant and hard at room temperature , but they soften when heated and liquefy if warmed adequately .
In humans , the main wax production occurs within the sebaceous glands of hair follicles in the skin , resulting in a secreted material called sebum , which consists mainly of triacylglycerol , wax esters , and the hydrocarbon squalene .
There are many bacteria in the microbiota on the skin that feed on these lipids .
One of the most prominent bacteria that feed on lipids is Propionibacterium acnes , which uses the skin ’ s lipids to generate short-chain fatty acids and is involved in the production of acne .
Another type of lipids are steroids , complex , ringed structures that are found in cell membranes ; some function as hormones .
The most common types of steroids are sterols , which are steroids containing an OH group .
These are mainly hydrophobic molecules , but also have hydrophilic hydroxyl groups .
The most common sterol found in animal tissues is cholesterol .
Its structure consists of four rings with a double bond in one of the rings , and a hydroxyl group at the sterol-defining position .
The function of cholesterol is to strengthen cell membranes in eukaryotes and in bacteria without cell walls , such as Mycoplasma .
Prokaryotes generally do not produce cholesterol , although bacteria produce similar compounds called hopanoids , which are also multiringed structures that strengthen bacterial membranes .
Fungi and some protozoa produce a similar compound called ergosterol , which strengthens the cell membranes of these organisms .
These compounds are capable of bonding together in essentially any number , yielding molecules of essentially any size that possess a wide array of physical and chemical properties and perform numerous functions vital to all organisms .
The molecules derived from amino acids can function as structural components of cells and subcellular entities , as sources of nutrients , as atomand energy-storage reservoirs , and as functional species such as hormones , enzymes , receptors , and transport molecules .
An amino acid is an organic molecule in which a hydrogen atom , a carboxyl group ( –COOH ) , and an amino group ( –NH ) are all bonded to the same carbon atom , the so-called α carbon .
The fourth group bonded to the α carbon varies among the different amino acids and is called a residue or a side chain , represented in structural formulas by the letter R .
A residue is a monomer that results when two or more amino acids combine and remove water molecules .
The primary structure of a protein , a peptide chain , is made of amino acid residues .
The unique characteristics of the functional groups and R groups allow these components of the amino acids to form hydrogen , ionic , and disulfide bonds , along with polar/nonpolar interactions needed to form secondary , tertiary , and quaternary protein structures .
These groups are composed primarily of carbon , hydrogen , oxygen , nitrogen , and sulfur , in the form of hydrocarbons , acids , amides , alcohols , and amines .
A few examples illustrating these possibilities are provided in .
Amino acids may chemically bond together by reaction of the carboxylic acid group of one molecule with the amine group of another .
This reaction forms a peptide bond and a water molecule and is another example of dehydration synthesis .
Molecules formed by chemically linking relatively modest numbers of amino acids ( approximately 50 or fewer ) are called peptides , and prefixes are often used to specify these numbers : dipeptides ( two amino acids ) , tripeptides ( three amino acids ) , and so forth .
More generally , the approximate number of amino acids is designated : oligopeptides are formed by joining up to approximately 20 amino acids , whereas polypeptides are synthesized from up to approximately 50 amino acids .
When the number of amino acids linked together becomes very large , or when multiple polypeptides are used as building subunits , the macromolecules that result are called proteins .
The continuously variable length ( the number of monomers ) of these biopolymers , along with the variety of possible R groups on each amino acid , allows for a nearly unlimited diversity in the types of proteins that may be formed .
The size ( length ) and specific amino acid sequence of a protein are major determinants of its shape , and the shape of a protein is critical to its function .
For example , in the process of biological nitrogen fixation ( see ) , soil microorganisms collectively known as rhizobia symbiotically interact with roots of legume plants such as soybeans , peanuts , or beans to form a novel structure called a nodule on the plant roots .
The plant then produces a carrier protein called leghemoglobin , a protein that carries nitrogen or oxygen .
Leghemoglobin binds with a very high affinity to its substrate oxygen at a specific region of the protein where the shape and amino acid sequence are appropriate ( the active site ) .
If the shape or chemical environment of the active site is altered , even slightly , the substrate may not be able to bind as strongly , or it may not bind at all .
Thus , for the protein to be fully active , it must have the appropriate shape for its function .
Protein structure is categorized in terms of four levels : primary , secondary , tertiary , and quaternary .
The primary structure is simply the sequence of amino acids that make up the polypeptide chain .
depicts the primary structure of a protein .
The chain of amino acids that defines a protein ’ s primary structure is not rigid , but instead is flexible because of the nature of the bonds that hold the amino acids together .
When the chain is sufficiently long , hydrogen bonding may occur between amine and carbonyl functional groups within the peptide backbone ( excluding the R side group ) , resulting in localized folding of the polypeptide chain into helices and sheets .
These shapes constitute a protein ’ s secondary structure .
The most common secondary structures are the α-helix and β-pleated sheet .
In the α-helix structure , the helix is held by hydrogen bonds between the oxygen atom in a carbonyl group of one amino acid and the hydrogen atom of the amino group that is just four amino acid units farther along the chain .
In the β-pleated sheet , the pleats are formed by similar hydrogen bonds between continuous sequences of carbonyl and amino groups that are further separated on the backbone of the polypeptide chain .
The next level of protein organization is the tertiary structure , which is the large-scale three-dimensional shape of a single polypeptide chain .
Tertiary structure is determined by interactions between amino acid residues that are far apart in the chain .
A variety of interactions give rise to protein tertiary structure , such as disulfide bridge s , which are bonds between the sulfhydryl ( –SH ) functional groups on amino acid side groups ; hydrogen bonds ; ionic bonds ; and hydrophobic interactions between nonpolar side chains .
All these interactions , weak and strong , combine to determine the final three-dimensional shape of the protein and its function .
The process by which a polypeptide chain assumes a large-scale , three-dimensional shape is called protein folding .
Folded proteins that are fully functional in their normal biological role are said to possess a native structure .
When a protein loses its three-dimensional shape , it may no longer be functional .
These unfolded proteins are denatured .
Denaturation implies the loss of the secondary structure and tertiary structure ( and , if present , the quaternary structure ) without the loss of the primary structure .
Some proteins are assemblies of several separate polypeptides , also known as protein subunits .
These proteins function adequately only when all subunits are present and appropriately configured .
The interactions that hold these subunits together constitute the quaternary structure of the protein .
The overall quaternary structure is stabilized by relatively weak interactions .
Hemoglobin , for example , has a quaternary structure of four globular protein subunits : two α and two β polypeptides , each one containing an iron-based heme .
Another important class of proteins is the conjugated proteins that have a nonprotein portion .
If the conjugated protein has a carbohydrate attached , it is called a glycoprotein .
If it has a lipid attached , it is called a lipoprotein .
These proteins are important components of membranes .
summarizes the four levels of protein structure .
Describe examples of biosynthesis products within a cell that can be detected to identify bacteria Accurate identification of bacterial isolates is essential in a clinical microbiology laboratory because the results often inform decisions about treatment that directly affect patient outcomes .
For example , cases of food poisoning require accurate identification of the causative agent so that physicians can prescribe appropriate treatment .
Likewise , it is important to accurately identify the causative pathogen during an outbreak of disease so that appropriate strategies can be employed to contain the epidemic .
There are many ways to detect , characterize , and identify microorganisms .
Some methods rely on phenotypic biochemical characteristics , while others use genotypic identification .
The biochemical characteristics of a bacterium provide many traits that are useful for classification and identification .
Analyzing the nutritional and metabolic capabilities of the bacterial isolate is a common approach for determining the genus and the species of the bacterium .
Some of the most important metabolic pathways that bacteria use to survive will be discussed in .
In this section , we will discuss a few methods that use biochemical characteristics to identify microorganisms .
Some microorganisms store certain compounds as granules within their cytoplasm , and the contents of these granules can be used for identification purposes .
For example , poly-β-hydroxybutyrate ( PHB ) is a carbonand energy-storage compound found in some nonfluorescent bacteria of the genus Pseudomonas .
Different species within this genus can be classified by the presence or the absence of PHB and fluorescent pigments .
The human pathogen P. aeruginosa and the plant pathogen P. syringae are two examples of fluorescent Pseudomonas species that do not accumulate PHB granules .
Other systems rely on biochemical characteristics to identify microorganisms by their biochemical reactions , such as carbon utilization and other metabolic tests .
In small laboratory settings or in teaching laboratories , those assays are carried out using a limited number of test tubes .
However , more modern systems , such as the one developed by Biolog , Inc. , are based on panels of biochemical reactions performed simultaneously and analyzed by software .
Biolog ’ s system identifies cells based on their ability to metabolize certain biochemicals and on their physiological properties , including pH and chemical sensitivity .
It uses all major classes of biochemicals in its analysis .
Identifications can be performed manually or with the semior fully automated instruments .
Another automated system identifies microorganisms by determining the specimen ’ s mass spectrum and then comparing it to a database that contains known mass spectra for thousands of microorganisms .
This method is based on matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry ( MALDI-TOF ) and uses disposable MALDI plates on which the microorganism is mixed with a specialized matrix reagent .
The sample/ reagent mixture is irradiated with a high-intensity pulsed ultraviolet laser , resulting in the ejection of gaseous ions generated from the various chemical constituents of the microorganism .
These gaseous ions are collected and accelerated through the mass spectrometer , with ions traveling at a velocity determined by their mass-to-charge ratio ( m/z ) , thus , reaching the detector at different times .
A plot of detector signal versus m/z yields a mass spectrum for the organism that is uniquely related to its biochemical composition .
Comparison of the mass spectrum to a library of reference spectra obtained from identical analyses of known microorganisms permits identification of the unknown microbe .
Microbes can also be identified by measuring their unique lipid profiles .
As we have learned , fatty acids of lipids can vary in chain length , presence or absence of double bonds , and number of double bonds , hydroxyl groups , branches , and rings .
To identify a microbe by its lipid composition , the fatty acids present in their membranes are analyzed .
A common biochemical analysis used for this purpose is a technique used in clinical , public health , and food laboratories .
It relies on detecting unique differences in fatty acids and is called fatty acid methyl ester ( FAME ) analysis .
In a FAME analysis , fatty acids are extracted from the membranes of microorganisms , chemically altered to form volatile methyl esters , and analyzed by gas chromatography ( GC ) .
The resulting GC chromatogram is compared with reference chromatograms in a database containing data for thousands of bacterial isolates to identify the unknown microorganism .
A related method for microorganism identification is called phospholipid-derived fatty acids ( PLFA ) analysis .
Membranes are mostly composed of phospholipids , which can be saponified ( hydrolyzed with alkali ) to release the fatty acids .
The resulting fatty acid mixture is then subjected to FAME analysis , and the measured lipid profiles can be compared with those of known microorganisms to identify the unknown microorganism .
Bacterial identification can also be based on the proteins produced under specific growth conditions within the human body .
These types of identification procedures are called proteomic analysis .
To perform proteomic analysis , proteins from the pathogen are first separated by high-pressure liquid chromatography ( HPLC ) , and the collected fractions are then digested to yield smaller peptide fragments .
These peptides are identified by mass spectrometry and compared with those of known microorganisms to identify the unknown microorganism in the original specimen .
Microorganisms can also be identified by the carbohydrates attached to proteins ( glycoproteins ) in the plasma membrane or cell wall .
Antibodies and other carbohydrate-binding proteins can attach to specific carbohydrates on cell surfaces , causing the cells to clump together .
Serological tests ( e.g. , the Lancefield groups tests , which are used for identification of Streptococcus species ) are performed to detect the unique carbohydrates located on the surface of the cell .
Throughout earth ’ s history , microbial metabolism has been a driving force behind the development and maintenance of the planet ’ s biosphere .
Eukaryotic organisms such as plants and animals typically depend on organic molecules for energy , growth , and reproduction .
By metabolizing such substances , microbes chemically convert them to other forms .
In some cases , microbial metabolism produces chemicals that can be harmful to other organisms ; in others , it produces substances that are essential to the metabolism and survival of other life forms .
Cellular processes such as the building or breaking down of complex molecules occur through series of stepwise , interconnected chemical reactions called metabolic pathways .
Reactions that are spontaneous and release energy are exergonic reaction s , whereas endergonic reaction s require energy to proceed .
The term anabolism refers to those endergonic metabolic pathways involved in biosynthesis , converting simple molecular building blocks into more complex molecules , and fueled by the use of cellular energy .
Conversely , the term catabolism refers to exergonic pathways that break down complex molecules into simpler ones .
Molecular energy stored in the bonds of complex molecules is released in catabolic pathways and harvested in such a way that it can be used to produce high-energy molecules , which are used to drive anabolic pathways .
Thus , in terms of energy and molecules , cells are continually balancing catabolism with anabolism .
Organisms can be identified according to the source of carbon they use for metabolism as well as their energy source .
The prefixes auto ( “ self ” ) and hetero ( “ other ” ) refer to the origins of the carbon sources various organisms can use .
Organisms that convert inorganic carbon dioxide ( CO ) into organic carbon compounds are autotrophs .
Plants and cyanobacteria are well-known examples of autotrophs .
Conversely , heterotrophs rely on more complex organic carbon compounds as nutrients ; these are provided to them initially by autotrophs .
Many organisms , ranging from humans to many prokaryotes , including the well-studied Escherichia coli , are heterotrophic .
Organisms can also be identified by the energy source they use .
All energy is derived from the transfer of electrons , but the source of electrons differs between various types of organisms .
The prefixes photo ( “ light ” ) and chemo ( “ chemical ” ) refer to the energy sources that various organisms use .
Those that get their energy for electron transfer from light are phototrophs , whereas chemotrophs obtain energy for electron transfer by breaking chemical bonds .
There are two types of chemotrophs : organotrophs and lithotrophs .
Organotrophs , including humans , fungi , and many prokaryotes , are chemotrophs that obtain energy from organic compounds .
Lithotrophs ( “ litho ” means “ rock ” ) are chemotrophs that get energy from inorganic compounds , including hydrogen sulfide ( H S ) and reduced iron .
Lithotrophy is unique to the microbial world .
The strategies used to obtain both carbon and energy can be combined for the classification of organisms according to nutritional type .
Most organisms are chemoheterotrophs because they use organic molecules as both their electron and carbon sources .
summarizes this and the other classifications .
The transfer of electrons between molecules is important because most of the energy stored in atoms and used to fuel cell functions is in the form of high-energy electrons .
The transfer of energy in the form of electrons allows the cell to transfer and use energy incrementally ; that is , in small packages rather than a single , destructive burst .
Reactions that remove electrons from donor molecules , leaving them oxidized , are oxidation reactions ; those that add electrons to acceptor molecules , leaving them reduced , are reduction reactions .
Because electrons can move from one molecule to another , oxidation and reduction occur in tandem .
These pairs of reactions are called oxidation-reduction reactions , or redox reactions .
The energy released from the breakdown of the chemical bonds within nutrients can be stored either through the reduction of electron carriers or in the bonds of adenosine triphosphate ( ATP ) .
In living systems , a small class of compounds functions as mobile electron carriers , molecules that bind to and shuttle high-energy electrons between compounds in pathways .
The principal electron carriers we will consider originate from the B vitamin group and are derivatives of nucleotides ; they are nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide , nicotine adenine dinucleotide phosphate , and flavin adenine dinucleotide .
These compounds can be easily reduced or oxidized .
Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide ( NAD /NADH ) is the most common mobile electron carrier used in catabolism .
NAD is the oxidized form of the molecule ; NADH is the reduced form of the molecule .
Nicotine adenine dinucleotide phosphate ( NADP ) , the oxidized form of an NAD variant that contains an extra phosphate group , is another important electron carrier ; it forms NADPH when reduced .
The oxidized form of flavin adenine dinucleotide is FAD , and its reduced form is FADH .
Both NAD /NADH and FAD/FADH are extensively used in energy extraction from sugars during catabolism in chemoheterotrophs , whereas NADP /NADPH plays an important role in anabolic reactions and photosynthesis .
Collectively , FADH , NADH , and NADPH are often referred to as having reducing power due to their ability to donate electrons to various chemical reactions .
A living cell must be able to handle the energy released during catabolism in a way that enables the cell to store energy safely and release it for use only as needed .
Living cells accomplish this by using the compound adenosine triphosphate ( ATP ) .
ATP is often called the “ energy currency ” of the cell , and , like currency , this versatile compound can be used to fill any energy need of the cell .
At the heart of ATP is a molecule of adenosine monophosphate ( AMP ) , which is composed of an adenine molecule bonded to a ribose molecule and a single phosphate group .
Ribose is a five-carbon sugar found in RNA , and AMP is one of the nucleotides in RNA .
The addition of a second phosphate group to this core molecule results in the formation of adenosine diphosphate ( ADP ) ; the addition of a third phosphate group forms ATP .
Adding a phosphate group to a molecule , a process called phosphorylation , requires energy .
Phosphate groups are negatively charged and thus repel one another when they are arranged in series , as they are in ADP and ATP .
This repulsion makes the ADP and ATP molecules inherently unstable .
Thus , the bonds between phosphate groups ( one in ADP and two in ATP ) are called high-energy phosphate bonds .
When these highenergy bonds are broken to release one phosphate ( called inorganic phosphate [ P ] ) or two connected phosphate groups ( called pyrophosphate [ PP ] ) from ATP through a process called dephosphorylation , energy is released to drive endergonic reactions .
A substance that helps speed up a chemical reaction is a catalyst .
Catalysts are not used or changed during chemical reactions and , therefore , are reusable .
Whereas inorganic molecules may serve as catalysts for a wide range of chemical reactions , proteins called enzyme s serve as catalysts for biochemical reactions inside cells .
Enzymes thus play an important role in controlling cellular metabolism .
An enzyme functions by lowering the activation energy of a chemical reaction inside the cell .
Activation energy is the energy needed to form or break chemical bonds and convert reactants to products .
Enzymes lower the activation energy by binding to the reactant molecules and holding them in such a way as to speed up the reaction .
The chemical reactants to which an enzyme binds are called substrates , and the location within the enzyme where the substrate binds is called the enzyme ’ s active site .
The characteristics of the amino acids near the active site create a very specific chemical environment within the active site that induces suitability to binding , albeit briefly , to a specific substrate ( or substrates ) .
Due to this jigsaw puzzle-like match between an enzyme and its substrates , enzymes are known for their specificity .
This active-site modification in the presence of substrate , along with the simultaneous formation of the transition state , is called induced fit .
Overall , there is a specifically matched enzyme for each substrate and , thus , for each chemical reaction ; however , there is some flexibility as well .
Some enzymes have the ability to act on several different structurally related substrates .
Enzymes are subject to influences by local environmental conditions such as pH , substrate concentration , and temperature .
Although increasing the environmental temperature generally increases reaction rates , enzyme catalyzed or otherwise , increasing or decreasing the temperature outside of an optimal range can affect chemical bonds within the active site , making them less well suited to bind substrates .
High temperatures will eventually cause enzymes , like other biological molecules , to denature , losing their three-dimensional structure and function .
Enzymes are also suited to function best within a certain pH range , and , as with temperature , extreme environmental pH values ( acidic or basic ) can cause enzymes to denature .
Active-site amino-acid side chains have their own acidic or basic properties that are optimal for catalysis and , therefore , are sensitive to changes in pH .
Another factor that influences enzyme activity is substrate concentration : Enzyme activity is increased at higher concentrations of substrate until it reaches a saturation point at which the enzyme can bind no additional substrate .
Overall , enzymes are optimized to work best under the environmental conditions in which the organisms that produce them live .
For example , while microbes that inhabit hot springs have enzymes that work best at high temperatures , human pathogens have enzymes that work best at 37°C .
Similarly , while enzymes produced by most organisms work best at a neutral pH , microbes growing in acidic environments make enzymes optimized to low pH conditions , allowing for their growth at those conditions .
Many enzymes do not work optimally , or even at all , unless bound to other specific nonprotein helper molecules , either temporarily through ionic or hydrogen bonds or permanently through stronger covalent bonds .
Binding to these molecules promotes optimal conformation and function for their respective enzymes .
Two types of helper molecules are cofactor s and coenzyme s. Cofactors are inorganic ions such as iron ( Fe ) and magnesium ( Mg ) that help stabilize enzyme conformation and function .
One example of an enzyme that requires a metal ion as a cofactor is the enzyme that builds DNA molecules , DNA polymerase , which requires a bound zinc ion ( Zn ) to function .
Coenzymes are organic helper molecules that are required for enzyme action .
Like enzymes , they are not consumed and , hence , are reusable .
The most common sources of coenzymes are dietary vitamins .
Some vitamins are precursors to coenzymes and others act directly as coenzymes .
Some cofactors and coenzymes , like coenzyme A ( CoA ) , often bind to the enzyme ’ s active site , aiding in the chemistry of the transition of a substrate to a product .
In such cases , an enzyme lacking a necessary cofactor or coenzyme is called an apoenzyme and is inactive .
Conversely , an enzyme with the necessary associated cofactor or coenzyme is called a holoenzyme and is active .
NADH and ATP are also both examples of commonly used coenzymes that provide high-energy electrons or phosphate groups , respectively , which bind to enzymes , thereby activating them .
Enzymes can be regulated in ways that either promote or reduce their activity .
There are many different kinds of molecules that inhibit or promote enzyme function , and various mechanisms exist for doing so .
A competitive inhibitor is a molecule similar enough to a substrate that it can compete with the substrate for binding to the active site by simply blocking the substrate from binding .
For a competitive inhibitor to be effective , the inhibitor concentration needs to be approximately equal to the substrate concentration .
Sulfa drugs provide a good example of competitive competition .
They are used to treat bacterial infections because they bind to the active site of an enzyme within the bacterial folic acid synthesis pathway .
When present in a sufficient dose , a sulfa drug prevents folic acid synthesis , and bacteria are unable to grow because they can not synthesize DNA , RNA , and proteins .
Humans are unaffected because we obtain folic acid from our diets .
Because only one inhibitor molecule is needed per enzyme for effective inhibition , the concentration of inhibitors needed for noncompetitive inhibition is typically much lower than the substrate concentration .
In addition to allosteric inhibitors , there are allosteric activators that bind to locations on an enzyme away from the active site , inducing a conformational change that increases the affinity of the enzyme ’ s active site ( s ) for its substrate ( s ) .
Allosteric control is an important mechanism of regulation of metabolic pathways involved in both catabolism and anabolism .
In a most efficient and elegant way , cells have evolved also to use the products of their own metabolic reactions for feedback inhibition of enzyme activity .
Feedback inhibition involves the use of a pathway product to regulate its own further production .
The cell responds to the abundance of specific products by slowing production during anabolic or catabolic reactions .
Describe why glycolysis is not oxygen dependent Define and describe the net yield of three-carbon molecules , ATP , and NADH from glycolysis Explain how three-carbon pyruvate molecules are converted into two-carbon acetyl groups that can be funneled into the Krebs cycle .
Define and describe the net yield of CO , GTP/ATP , FADH , and NADH from the Krebs cycle Explain how intermediate carbon molecules of the Krebs cycle can be used in a cell Extensive enzyme pathways exist for breaking down carbohydrates to capture energy in ATP bonds .
In addition , many catabolic pathways produce intermediate molecules that are also used as building blocks for anabolism .
Understanding these processes is important for several reasons .
First , because the main metabolic processes involved are common to a wide range of chemoheterotrophic organisms , we can learn a great deal about human metabolism by studying metabolism in more easily manipulated bacteria like E. coli .
Last , learning specifically about the pathways involved in chemoheterotrophic metabolism also serves as a basis for comparing other more unusual metabolic strategies used by microbes .
Although the chemical source of electrons initiating electron transfer is different between chemoheterorophs and chemoautotrophs , many similar processes are used in both types of organisms .
The typical example used to introduce concepts of metabolism to students is carbohydrate catabolism .
For chemoheterotrophs , our examples of metabolism start with the catabolism of polysaccharides such as glycogen , starch , or cellulose .
Enzymes such as amylase , which breaks down glycogen or starch , and cellulases , which break down cellulose , can cause the hydrolysis of glycosidic bonds between the glucose monomers in these polymers , releasing glucose for further catabolism .
For bacteria , eukaryotes , and most archaea , glycolysis is the most common pathway for the catabolism of glucose ; it produces energy , reduced electron carriers , and precursor molecules for cellular metabolism .
Every living organism carries out some form of glycolysis , suggesting this mechanism is an ancient universal metabolic process .
The process itself does not use oxygen ; however , glycolysis can be coupled with additional metabolic processes that are either aerobic or anaerobic .
Glycolysis takes place in the cytoplasm of prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells .
It begins with a single six-carbon glucose molecule and ends with two molecules of a three-carbon sugar called pyruvate .
Pyruvate may be broken down further after glycolysis to harness more energy through aerobic or anaerobic respiration , but many organisms , including many microbes , may be unable to respire ; for these organisms , glycolysis may be their only source of generating ATP .
The type of glycolysis found in animals and that is most common in microbes is the Embden-Meyerhof-Parnas ( EMP ) pathway , named after Gustav Embden ( 1874–1933 ) , Otto Meyerhof ( 1884–1951 ) , and Jakub Parnas ( 1884–1949 ) .
Glycolysis using the EMP pathway consists of two distinct phases .
The first part of the pathway , called the energy investment phase , uses energy from two ATP molecules to modify a glucose molecule so that the six-carbon sugar molecule can be split evenly into two phosphorylated three-carbon molecules called glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate ( G3P ) .
The second part of the pathway , called the energy payoff phase , extracts energy by oxidizing G3P to pyruvate , producing four ATP molecules and reducing two molecules of NAD to two molecules of NADH , using electrons that originated from glucose .
( A discussion and illustration of the full EMP pathway with chemical structures and enzyme names appear in . )
The ATP molecules produced during the energy payoff phase of glycolysis are formed by substrate-level phosphorylation , one of two mechanisms for producing ATP .
In substrate-level phosphorylation , a phosphate group is removed from an organic molecule and is directly transferred to an available ADP molecule , producing ATP .
During glycolysis , high-energy phosphate groups from the intermediate molecules are added to ADP to make ATP .
Overall , in this process of glycolysis , the net gain from the breakdown of a single glucose molecule is : two ATP molecules two NADH molecule , and two pyruvate molecules .
When we refer to glycolysis , unless otherwise indicated , we are referring to the EMP pathway used by animals and many bacteria .
However , some prokaryotes use alternative glycolytic pathways .
One important alternative is the Entner-Doudoroff ( ED ) pathway , named after its discoverers Nathan Entner and Michael Doudoroff ( 1911–1975 ) .
Although some bacteria , including the opportunistic gram-negative pathogen Pseudomonas aeruginosa , contain only the ED pathway for glycolysis , other bacteria , like E. coli , have the ability to use either the ED pathway or the EMP pathway .
A third type of glycolytic pathway that occurs in all cells , which is quite different from the previous two pathways , is the pentose phosphate pathway ( PPP ) also called the phosphogluconate pathway or the hexose monophosphate shunt .
Evidence suggests that the PPP may be the most ancient universal glycolytic pathway .
The intermediates from the PPP are used for the biosynthesis of nucleotides and amino acids .
Therefore , this glycolytic pathway may be favored when the cell has need for nucleic acid and/or protein synthesis , respectively .
A discussion and illustration of the complete ED pathway and PPP with chemical structures and enzyme names appear in .
Glycolysis produces pyruvate , which can be further oxidized to capture more energy .
For pyruvate to enter the next oxidative pathway , it must first be decarboxylated by the enzyme complex pyruvate dehydrogenase to a two-carbon acetyl group in the transition reaction , also called the bridge reaction ( see and ) .
In the transition reaction , electrons are also transferred to NAD to form NADH .
To proceed to the next phase of this metabolic process , the comparatively tiny two-carbon acetyl must be attached to a very large carrier compound called coenzyme A ( CoA ) .
The transition reaction occurs in the mitochondrial matrix of eukaryotes ; in prokaryotes , it occurs in the cytoplasm because prokaryotes lack membrane-enclosed organelles .
The Krebs cycle transfers remaining electrons from the acetyl group produced during the transition reaction to electron carrier molecules , thus reducing them .
The Krebs cycle also occurs in the cytoplasm of prokaryotes along with glycolysis and the transition reaction , but it takes place in the mitochondrial matrix of eukaryotic cells where the transition reaction also occurs .
The Krebs cycle is named after its discoverer , British scientist Hans Adolf Krebs ( 1900–1981 ) and is also called the citric acid cycle , or the tricarboxylic acid cycle ( TCA ) because citric acid has three carboxyl groups in its structure .
Unlike glycolysis , the Krebs cycle is a closed loop : The last part of the pathway regenerates the compound used in the first step .
( A discussion and detailed illustration of the full Krebs cycle appear in . )
Most ATP , however , is generated during a separate process called oxidative phosphorylation , which occurs during cellular respiration .
Cellular respiration begins when electrons are transferred from NADH and FADH —made in glycolysis , the transition reaction , and the Krebs cycle—through a series of chemical reactions to a final inorganic electron acceptor ( either oxygen in aerobic respiration or non-oxygen inorganic molecules in anaerobic respiration ) .
These electron transfers take place on the inner part of the cell membrane of prokaryotic cells or in specialized protein complexes in the inner membrane of the mitochondria of eukaryotic cells .
The energy of the electrons is harvested to generate an electrochemical gradient across the membrane , which is used to make ATP by oxidative phosphorylation .
The electron transport system ( ETS ) is the last component involved in the process of cellular respiration ; it comprises a series of membrane-associated protein complexes and associated mobile accessory electron carriers .
Electron transport is a series of chemical reactions that resembles a bucket brigade in that electrons from NADH and FADH are passed rapidly from one ETS electron carrier to the next .
These carriers can pass electrons along in the ETS because of their redox potential .
For a protein or chemical to accept electrons , it must have a more positive redox potential than the electron donor .
Therefore , electrons move from electron carriers with more negative redox potential to those with more positive redox potential .
The four major classes of electron carriers involved in both eukaryotic and prokaryotic electron transport systems are the cytochromes , flavoproteins , iron-sulfur proteins , and the quinones .
In aerobic respiration , the final electron acceptor ( i.e. , the one having the most positive redox potential ) at the end of the ETS is an oxygen molecule ( O ) that becomes reduced to water ( H O ) by the final ETS carrier .
This electron carrier , cytochrome oxidase , differs between bacterial types and can be used to differentiate closely related bacteria for diagnoses .
There are many circumstances under which aerobic respiration is not possible , including any one or more of the following : The cell lacks genes encoding an appropriate cytochrome oxidase for transferring electrons to oxygen at the end of the electron transport system .
The cell lacks genes encoding enzymes to minimize the severely damaging effects of dangerous oxygen radicals produced during aerobic respiration , such as hydrogen peroxide ( H O ) or superoxide The cell lacks a sufficient amount of oxygen to carry out aerobic respiration .
One possible alternative to aerobic respiration is anaerobic respiration , using an inorganic molecule other than oxygen as a final electron acceptor .
There are many types of anaerobic respiration found in bacteria and archaea .
Denitrifiers are important soil bacteria that use nitrate as final electron acceptors , producing nitrogen gas ( N ) .
Many aerobically respiring bacteria , including E. coli , switch to using nitrate as a final electron acceptor and producing nitrite when oxygen levels have been depleted .
Microbes using anaerobic respiration commonly have an intact Krebs cycle , so these organisms can access the energy of the NADH and FADH molecules formed .
However , anaerobic respirers use altered ETS carriers encoded by their genomes , including distinct complexes for electron transfer to their final electron acceptors .
Smaller electrochemical gradients are generated from these electron transfer systems , so less ATP is formed through anaerobic respiration .
and nitrite In each transfer of an electron through the ETS , the electron loses energy , but with some transfers , the energy is stored as potential energy by using it to pump hydrogen ions ( H ) across a membrane .
In prokaryotic cells , H is pumped to the outside of the cytoplasmic membrane ( called the periplasmic space in gram-negative and gram-positive bacteria ) , and in eukaryotic cells , they are pumped from the mitochondrial matrix across the inner mitochondrial membrane into the intermembrane space .
There is an uneven distribution of H across the membrane that establishes an electrochemical gradient because H ions are positively charged ( electrical ) and there is a higher concentration ( chemical ) on one side of the membrane .
This electrochemical gradient formed by the accumulation of H ( also known as a proton ) on one side of the membrane compared with the other is referred to as the proton motive force ( PMF ) .
Because the ions involved are H , a pH gradient is also established , with the side of the membrane having the higher concentration of H being more acidic .
Beyond the use of the PMF to make ATP , as discussed in this chapter , the PMF can also be used to drive other energetically unfavorable processes , including nutrient transport and flagella rotation for motility .
The potential energy of this electrochemical gradient generated by the ETS causes the H to diffuse across a membrane ( the plasma membrane in prokaryotic cells and the inner membrane in mitochondria in eukaryotic cells ) .
This flow of hydrogen ions across the membrane , called chemiosmosis , must occur through a channel in the membrane via a membrane-bound enzyme complex called ATP synthase .
The tendency for movement in this way is much like water accumulated on one side of a dam , moving through the dam when opened .
In prokaryotic cells , H flows from the outside of the cytoplasmic membrane into the cytoplasm , whereas in eukaryotic mitochondria , H flows from the intermembrane space to the mitochondrial matrix .
The turning of the parts of this molecular machine regenerates ATP from ADP and inorganic phosphate ( P ) by oxidative phosphorylation , a second mechanism for making ATP that harvests the potential energy stored within an electrochemical gradient .
The number of ATP molecules generated from the catabolism of glucose varies .
For example , the number of hydrogen ions that the electron transport system complexes can pump through the membrane varies between different species of organisms .
Thus , the 10 NADH molecules made per glucose during glycolysis , the transition reaction , and the Krebs cycle carry enough energy to make 30 ATP molecules , whereas the two FADH molecules made per glucose during these processes provide enough energy to make four ATP molecules .
Overall , the theoretical maximum yield of ATP made during the complete aerobic respiration of glucose is 38 molecules , with four being made by substrate-level phosphorylation and 34 being made by oxidative phosphorylation .
summarizes the theoretical maximum yields of ATP from various processes during the complete aerobic respiration of one glucose molecule .
The cell lacks genes to make appropriate complexes and electron carriers in the electron transport system .
The cell lacks genes to make one or more enzymes in the Krebs cycle .
Whereas lack of an appropriate inorganic final electron acceptor is environmentally dependent , the other two conditions are genetically determined .
Thus , many prokaryotes , including members of the clinically important genus Streptococcus , are permanently incapable of respiration , even in the presence of oxygen .
If respiration does not occur , NADH must be reoxidized to NAD for reuse as an electron carrier for glycolysis , the cell ’ s only mechanism for producing any ATP , to continue .
Some living systems use an organic molecule ( commonly pyruvate ) as a final electron acceptor through a process called fermentation .
Fermentation does not involve an electron transport system and does not directly produce any additional ATP beyond that produced during glycolysis by substrate-level phosphorylation .
Organisms carrying out fermentation , called fermenters , produce a maximum of two ATP molecules per glucose during glycolysis .
compares the final electron acceptors and methods of ATP synthesis in aerobic respiration , anaerobic respiration , and fermentation .
Note that the number of ATP molecules shown for glycolysis assumes the Embden-Meyerhof-Parnas pathway .
The number of ATP molecules made by substrate-level phosphorylation ( SLP ) versus oxidative phosphorylation ( OP ) are indicated .
Microbial fermentation processes have been manipulated by humans and are used extensively in the production of various foods and other commercial products , including pharmaceuticals .
Microbial fermentation can also be useful for identifying microbes for diagnostic purposes .
Fermentation by some bacteria , like those in yogurt and other soured food products , and by animals in muscles during oxygen depletion , is lactic acid fermentation .
The chemical reaction of lactic acid fermentation is as follows : Bacteria of several gram-positive genera , including Lactobacillus , Leuconostoc , and Streptococcus , are collectively known as the lactic acid bacteria ( LAB ) , and various strains are important in food production .
During yogurt and cheese production , the highly acidic environment generated by lactic acid fermentation denatures proteins contained in milk , causing it to solidify .
When lactic acid is the only fermentation product , the process is said to be homolactic fermentation ; such is the case for Lactobacillus delbrueckii and S. thermophiles used in yogurt production .
However , many bacteria perform heterolactic fermentation , producing a mixture of lactic acid , ethanol and/or acetic acid , and CO as a result , because of their use of the branched pentose phosphate pathway instead of the EMP pathway for glycolysis .
One important heterolactic fermenter is Leuconostoc mesenteroides , which is used for souring vegetables like cucumbers and cabbage , producing pickles and sauerkraut , respectively .
Lactic acid bacteria are also important medically .
The production of low pH environments within the body inhibits the establishment and growth of pathogens in these areas .
For example , the vaginal microbiota is composed largely of lactic acid bacteria , but when these bacteria are reduced , yeast can proliferate , causing a yeast infection .
Additionally , lactic acid bacteria are important in maintaining the health of the gastrointestinal tract and , as such , are the primary component of probiotics .
Another familiar fermentation process is alcohol fermentation , which produces ethanol .
The ethanol fermentation reaction is shown in .
In the first reaction , the enzyme pyruvate decarboxylase removes a carboxyl group from pyruvate , releasing CO gas while producing the two-carbon molecule acetaldehyde .
The second reaction , catalyzed by the enzyme alcohol dehydrogenase , transfers an electron from NADH to acetaldehyde , producing ethanol and NAD .
The ethanol fermentation of pyruvate by the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae is used in the production of alcoholic beverages and also makes bread products rise due to CO production .
Outside of the food industry , ethanol fermentation of plant products is important in biofuel production .
Beyond lactic acid fermentation and alcohol fermentation , many other fermentation methods occur in prokaryotes , all for the purpose of ensuring an adequate supply of NAD for glycolysis .
Without these pathways , glycolysis would not occur and no ATP would be harvested from the breakdown of glucose .
It should be noted that most forms of fermentation besides homolactic fermentation produce gas , commonly CO and/or hydrogen gas .
Many of these different types of fermentation pathways are also used in food production and each results in the production of different organic acids , contributing to the unique flavor of a particular fermented food product .
The propionic acid produced during propionic acid fermentation contributes to the distinctive flavor of Swiss cheese , for example .
Several fermentation products are important commercially outside of the food industry .
For example , chemical solvents such as acetone and butanol are produced during acetone-butanol-ethanol fermentation .
Complex organic pharmaceutical compounds used in antibiotics ( e.g. , penicillin ) , vaccines , and vitamins are produced through mixed acid fermentation .
Fermentation products are used in the laboratory to differentiate various bacteria for diagnostic purposes .
For example , enteric bacteria are known for their ability to perform mixed acid fermentation , reducing the pH , which can be detected using a pH indicator .
Similarly , the bacterial production of acetoin during butanediol fermentation can also be detected .
Gas production from fermentation can also be seen in an inverted Durham tube that traps produced gas in a broth culture .
Microbes can also be differentiated according to the substrates they can ferment .
For example , E. coli can ferment lactose , forming gas , whereas some of its close gram-negative relatives can not .
The ability to ferment the sugar alcohol sorbitol is used to identify the pathogenic enterohemorrhagic O157 : H7 strain of E. coli because , unlike other E. coli strains , it is unable to ferment sorbitol .
Last , mannitol fermentation differentiates the mannitol-fermenting Staphylococcus aureus from other non–mannitol-fermenting staphylococci .
But microbes consume more than just carbohydrates for food .
In fact , the microbial world is known for its ability to degrade a wide range of molecules , both naturally occurring and those made by human processes , for use as carbon sources .
In this section , we will see that the pathways for both lipid and protein catabolism connect to those used for carbohydrate catabolism , eventually leading into glycolysis , the transition reaction , and the Krebs cycle pathways .
Metabolic pathways should be considered to be porous—that is , substances enter from other pathways , and intermediates leave for other pathways .
These pathways are not closed systems .
Many of the substrates , intermediates , and products in a particular pathway are reactants in other pathways .
Triglycerides are a form of long-term energy storage in animals .
They are made of glycerol and three fatty acids ( see ) .
Phospholipids compose the cell and organelle membranes of all organisms except the archaea .
Phospholipid structure is similar to triglycerides except that one of the fatty acids is replaced by a phosphorylated head group ( see ) .
Triglycerides and phospholipids are broken down first by releasing fatty acid chains ( and/or the phosphorylated head group , in the case of phospholipids ) from the three-carbon glycerol backbone .
The reactions breaking down triglycerides are catalyzed by lipases and those involving phospholipids are catalyzed by phospholipases .
These enzymes contribute to the virulence of certain microbes , such as the bacterium Staphylococcus aureus and the fungus Cryptococcus neoformans .
These microbes use phospholipases to destroy lipids and phospholipids in host cells and then use the catabolic products for energy ( see ) .
The resulting products of lipid catabolism , glycerol and fatty acids , can be further degraded .
Glycerol can be phosphorylated to glycerol-3-phosphate and easily converted to glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate , which continues through glycolysis .
Other types of lipids can also be degraded by certain microbes .
For example , the ability of certain pathogens , like Mycobacterium tuberculosis , to degrade cholesterol contributes to their virulence .
The side chains of cholesterol can be easily removed enzymatically , but degradation of the remaining fused rings is more problematic .
The four fused rings are sequentially broken in a multistep process facilitated by specific enzymes , and the resulting products , including pyruvate , can be further catabolized in the Krebs cycle .
Proteins are degraded through the concerted action of a variety of microbial protease enzymes .
Extracellular proteases cut proteins internally at specific amino acid sequences , breaking them down into smaller peptides that can then be taken up by cells .
Some clinically important pathogens can be identified by their ability to produce a specific type of extracellular protease .
For example , the production of the extracellular protease gelatinase by members of the genera Proteus and Serratia can be used to distinguish them from other gram-negative enteric bacteria .
Following inoculation and growth of microbes in gelatin broth , degradation of the gelatin protein due to gelatinase production prevents solidification of gelatin when refrigerated .
Other pathogens can be distinguished by their ability to degrade casein , the main protein found in milk .
When grown on skim milk agar , production of the extracellular protease caseinase causes degradation of casein , which appears as a zone of clearing around the microbial growth .
Caseinase production by the opportunist pathogen Pseudomonas aeruginosa can be used to distinguish it from other related gram-negative bacteria .
After extracellular protease degradation and uptake of peptides in the cell , the peptides can then be broken down further into individual amino acids by additional intracellular proteases , and each amino acid can be enzymatically deaminated to remove the amino group .
The remaining molecules can then enter the transition reaction or the Krebs cycle .
Many of these carbohydrates are produced by photosynthesis , the biochemical process by which phototrophic organisms convert solar energy ( sunlight ) into chemical energy .
Although photosynthesis is most commonly associated with plants , microbial photosynthesis is also a significant supplier of chemical energy , fueling many diverse ecosystems .
In this section , we will focus on microbial photosynthesis .
Photosynthesis takes place in two sequential stages : the light-dependent reactions and the light-independent reactions .
In the light-dependent reactions , energy from sunlight is absorbed by pigment molecules in photosynthetic membranes and converted into stored chemical energy .
In the light-independent reactions , the chemical energy produced by the light-dependent reactions is used to drive the assembly of sugar molecules using CO ; however , these reactions are still light dependent because the products of the light-dependent reactions necessary for driving them are short-lived .
The light-dependent reactions produce ATP and either NADPH or NADH to temporarily store energy .
These energy carriers are used in the light-independent reactions to drive the energetically unfavorable process of “ fixing ” inorganic CO in an organic form , sugar .
In all phototrophic eukaryotes , photosynthesis takes place inside a chloroplast , an organelle that arose in eukaryotes by endosymbiosis of a photosynthetic bacterium ( see ) .
These chloroplasts are enclosed by a double membrane with inner and outer layers .
Within the chloroplast is a third membrane that forms stacked , disc-shaped photosynthetic structures called thylakoids .
A stack of thylakoids is called a granum , and the space surrounding the granum within the chloroplast is called stroma .
Photosynthetic membranes in prokaryotes , by contrast , are not organized into distinct membrane-enclosed organelles ; rather , they are infolded regions of the plasma membrane .
In cyanobacteria , for example , these infolded regions are also referred to as thylakoids .
In either case , embedded within the thylakoid membranes or other photosynthetic bacterial membranes are photosynthetic pigment molecules organized into one or more photosystems , where light energy is actually converted into chemical energy .
Photosynthetic pigments within the photosynthetic membranes are organized into photosystems , each of which is composed of a light-harvesting ( antennae ) complex and a reaction center .
The light-harvesting complex consists of multiple proteins and associated pigments that each may absorb light energy and , thus , become excited .
This energy is transferred from one pigment molecule to another until eventually ( after about a millionth of a second ) it is delivered to the reaction center .
Up to this point , only energy—not electrons—has been transferred between molecules .
The reaction center contains a pigment molecule that can undergo oxidation upon excitation , actually giving up an electron .
It is at this step in photosynthesis that light energy is converted into an excited electron .
Different kinds of light-harvesting pigments absorb unique patterns of wavelengths ( colors ) of visible light .
Pigments reflect or transmit the wavelengths they can not absorb , making them appear the corresponding color .
Examples of photosynthetic pigments ( molecules used to absorb solar energy ) are bacteriochlorophylls ( green , purple , or red ) , carotenoids ( orange , red , or yellow ) , chlorophylls ( green ) , phycocyanins ( blue ) , and phycoerythrins ( red ) .
By having mixtures of pigments , an organism can absorb energy from more wavelengths .
Because photosynthetic bacteria commonly grow in competition for sunlight , each type of photosynthetic bacteria is optimized for harvesting the wavelengths of light to which it is commonly exposed , leading to stratification of microbial communities in aquatic and soil ecosystems by light quality and penetration .
Once the light harvesting complex transfers the energy to the reaction center , the reaction center delivers its high-energy electrons , one by one , to an electron carrier in an electron transport system , and electron transfer through the ETS is initiated .
The ETS is similar to that used in cellular respiration and is embedded within the photosynthetic membrane .
Ultimately , the electron is used to produce NADH or NADPH .
The electrochemical gradient that forms across the photosynthetic membrane is used to generate ATP by chemiosmosis through the process of photophosphorylation , another example of oxidative phosphorylation .
ions , respectively , as a result .
For photosynthesis to continue , the electron lost from the reaction center pigment must be replaced .
The source of this electron ( H A ) differentiates the oxygenic photosynthesis of plants and cyanobacteria from anoxygenic photosynthesis carried out by other types of bacterial phototrophs .
In oxygenic photosynthesis , H O is split and supplies the electron to the reaction center .
Because oxygen is generated as a byproduct and is released , this type of photosynthesis is referred to as oxygenic photosynthesis .
However , when other reduced compounds serve as the electron donor , oxygen is not generated ; these types of photosynthesis are called anoxygenic photosynthesis .
Hydrogen sulfide ( H S ) or thiosulfate can serve as the electron donor , generating elemental sulfur and sulfate Photosystems have been classified into two types : photosystem I ( PSI ) and photosystem II ( PSII ) .
Cyanobacteria and plant chloroplasts have both photosystems , whereas anoxygenic photosynthetic bacteria use only one of the photosystems .
Both photosystems are excited by light energy simultaneously .
If the cell requires both ATP and NADPH for biosynthesis , then it will carry out noncyclic photophosphorylation .
Upon passing of the PSII reaction center electron to the ETS that connects PSII and PSI , the lost electron from the PSII reaction center is replaced by the splitting of water .
The excited PSI reaction center electron is used to reduce NADP to NADPH and is replaced by the electron exiting the ETS .
The flow of electrons in this way is called the Z-scheme .
If a cell ’ s need for ATP is significantly greater than its need for NADPH , it may bypass the production of reducing power through cyclic photophosphorylation .
Only PSI is used during cyclic photophosphorylation ; the high-energy electron of the PSI reaction center is passed to an ETS carrier and then ultimately returns to the oxidized PSI reaction center pigment , thereby reducing it .
The carbon comes from CO , the gas that is a waste product of cellular respiration .
The Calvin-Benson cycle ( named for Melvin Calvin [ 1911–1997 ] and Andrew Benson [ 1917–2015 ] ) , the biochemical pathway used for fixation of CO , is located within the cytoplasm of photosynthetic bacteria and in the stroma of eukaryotic chloroplasts .
The light-independent reactions of the Calvin cycle can be organized into three basic stages : fixation , reduction , and regeneration ( see for a detailed illustration of the Calvin cycle ) .
Fixation : The enzyme ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase ( RuBisCO ) catalyzes the addition of a CO to ribulose bisphosphate ( RuBP ) .
This results in the production of 3-phosphoglycerate ( 3-PGA ) .
Reduction : Six molecules of both ATP and NADPH ( from the light-dependent reactions ) are used to convert 3-PGA into glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate ( G3P ) .
Some G3P is then used to build glucose .
Regeneration : The remaining G3P not used to synthesize glucose is used to regenerate RuBP , enabling the system to continue CO fixation .
Three more molecules of ATP are used in these regeneration reactions .
The Calvin cycle is used extensively by plants and photoautotrophic bacteria , and the enzyme RuBisCO is said to be the most plentiful enzyme on earth , composing 30 % –50 % of the total soluble protein in plant chloroplasts .
However , besides its prevalent use in photoautotrophs , the Calvin cycle is also used by many nonphotosynthetic chemoautotrophs to fix CO .
Additionally , other bacteria and archaea use alternative systems for CO fixation .
Although most bacteria using Calvin cycle alternatives are chemoautotrophic , certain green sulfur photoautotrophic bacteria have been also shown to use an alternative CO fixation pathway .
Define and describe the importance of microorganisms in the biogeochemical cycles of carbon , nitrogen , and sulfur Define and give an example of bioremediation Energy flows directionally through ecosystems , entering as sunlight for phototrophs or as inorganic molecules for chemoautotrophs .
The six most common elements associated with organic molecules—carbon , hydrogen , nitrogen , oxygen , phosphorus , and sulfur—take a variety of chemical forms and may exist for long periods in the atmosphere , on land , in water , or beneath earth ’ s surface .
Geologic processes , such as erosion , water drainage , the movement of the continental plates , and weathering , all are involved in the cycling of elements on earth .
Because geology and chemistry have major roles in the study of this process , the recycling of inorganic matter between living organisms and their nonliving environment is called a biogeochemical cycle .
Here , we will focus on the function of microorganisms in these cycles , which play roles at each step , most frequently interconverting oxidized versions of molecules with reduced ones .
Carbon is one of the most important elements to living organisms , as shown by its abundance and presence in all organic molecules .
The carbon cycle exemplifies the connection between organisms in various ecosystems .
Carbon is exchanged between heterotrophs and autotrophs within and between ecosystems primarily by way of atmospheric CO , a fully oxidized version of carbon that serves as the basic building block that autotrophs use to build multicarbon , high-energy organic molecules such as glucose .
Photoautotrophs and chemoautotrophs harness energy from the sun and from inorganic chemical compounds , respectively , to covalently bond carbon atoms together into reduced organic compounds whose energy can be later accessed through the processes of respiration and fermentation .
Overall , there is a constant exchange of CO between the heterotrophs ( which produce CO as a result of respiration or fermentation ) and the autotrophs ( which use the CO for fixation ) .
Autotrophs also respire or ferment , consuming the organic molecules they form ; they do not fix carbon for heterotrophs , but rather use it for their own metabolic needs .
Bacteria and archaea that use methane as their carbon source are called methanotrophs .
Reduced one-carbon compounds like methane accumulate in certain anaerobic environments when CO is used as a terminal electron acceptor in anaerobic respiration by archaea called methanogens .
Some methanogens also ferment acetate ( two carbons ) to produce methane and CO .
Methane accumulation due to methanogenesis occurs in both natural anaerobic soil and aquatic environments ; methane accumulation also occurs as a result of animal husbandry because methanogens are members of the normal microbiota of ruminants .
Environmental methane accumulation due to methanogenesis is of consequence because it is a strong greenhouse gas , and methanotrophs help to reduce atmospheric methane levels .
Many biological macromolecules , including proteins and nucleic acids , contain nitrogen ; however , getting nitrogen into living organisms is difficult .
Prokaryotes play essential roles in the nitrogen cycle , transforming nitrogen between various forms for their own needs , benefiting other organisms indirectly .
Plants and phytoplankton can not incorporate nitrogen from the atmosphere ( where it exists as tightly bonded , triple covalent N ) , even though this molecule composes approximately 78 % of the atmosphere .
Nitrogen enters the living world through freeliving and symbiotic bacteria , which incorporate nitrogen into their macromolecules through specialized biochemical pathways called nitrogen fixation .
Cyanobacteria in aquatic ecosystems fix inorganic nitrogen ( from nitrogen gas ) into ammonia ( NH ) that can be easily incorporated into biological macromolecules .
Rhizobium bacteria also fix nitrogen and live symbiotically in the root nodules of legumes ( such as beans , peanuts , and peas ) , providing them with needed organic nitrogen while receiving fixed carbon as sugar in exchange .
Free-living bacteria , such as members of the genus Azotobacter , are also able to fix nitrogen .
The nitrogen that enters living systems by nitrogen fixation is eventually converted from organic nitrogen back into nitrogen gas by microbes through three steps : ammonification , nitrification , and denitrification .
In terrestrial systems , then to nitrate the first step is the ammonification process , in which certain bacteria and fungi convert nitrogenous waste from living animals or from the remains of dead organisms into ammonia ( NH ) .
This ammonia is then oxidized to nitrite by nitrifying soil bacteria such as members of the genus Nitrosomonas , through the process of nitrification .
Last , the process of denitrification occurs , whereby soil bacteria , such as members of the genera Pseudomonas and Clostridium , use nitrate as a terminal electron acceptor in anaerobic respiration , converting it into nitrogen gas that reenters the atmosphere .
A similar process occurs in the marine nitrogen cycle , where these three processes are performed by marine bacteria and archaea .
Human activity releases nitrogen into the environment by the use of artificial fertilizers that contain nitrogen and phosphorus compounds , which are then washed into lakes , rivers , and streams by surface runoff .
A major effect from fertilizer runoff is saltwater and freshwater eutrophication , in which nutrient runoff causes the overgrowth and subsequent death of aquatic algae , making water sources anaerobic and inhospitable for the survival of aquatic organisms .
Sulfur is an essential element for the macromolecules of living organisms .
As part of the amino acids cysteine and methionine , it is involved in the formation of proteins .
It is also found in several vitamins necessary for the synthesis of important biological molecules like coenzyme A .
Several groups of microbes are responsible for carrying out processes involved in the sulfur cycle .
Many bacteria and plants can use sulfate as a sulfur source .
Decomposition dead organisms by fungi and bacteria remove sulfur groups from amino acids , producing hydrogen sulfide , returning inorganic sulfur to the environment .
Beyond their involvement in the carbon , nitrogen , and sulfur cycles , prokaryotes are involved in other biogeochemical cycles as well .
Several other elements undergo chemical cycles that do not involve redox chemistry .
Examples of these are phosphorus ( P ) , calcium ( Ca ) , and silica ( Si ) cycles .
The cycling of these elements is particularly important in oceans because large quantities of these elements are incorporated into the exoskeletons of marine organisms .
These biogeochemical cycles do not involve redox chemistry but instead involve fluctuations in the solubility of compounds containing calcium , phosphorous , and silica .
The overgrowth of naturally occurring microbial communities is typically limited by the availability of nitrogen ( as previously mentioned ) , phosphorus , and iron .
Human activities introducing excessive amounts of iron , nitrogen , or phosphorus ( typically from detergents ) may lead to eutrophication .
Microbial bioremediation leverages microbial metabolism to remove xenobiotics or other pollutants .
Xenobiotics are compounds synthesized by humans and introduced into the environment in much higher concentrations than would naturally occur .
Such environmental contamination may involve adhesives , dyes , flame retardants , lubricants , oil and petroleum products , organic solvents , pesticides , and products of the combustion of gasoline and oil .
Many xenobiotics resist breakdown , and some accumulate in the food chain after being consumed or absorbed by fish and wildlife , which , in turn , may be eaten by humans .
Of particular concern are contaminants like polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon ( PAH ) , a carcinogenic xenobiotic found in crude oil , and trichloroethylene ( TCE ) , a common groundwater contaminant .
Bioremediation processes can be categorized as in situ or ex situ .
Bioremediation conducted at the site of contamination is called in situ bioremediation and does not involve movement of contaminated material .
In contrast , ex situ bioremediation involves the removal of contaminated material from the original site so that it can be treated elsewhere , typically in a large , lined pit where conditions are optimized for degradation of the contaminant .
Some bioremediation processes rely on microorganisms that are indigenous to the contaminated site or material .
Enhanced bioremediation techniques , which may be applied to either in situ or ex situ processing , involve the addition of nutrients and/or air to encourage the growth of pollution-degrading microbes ; they may also involve the addition of non-native microbes known for their ability to degrade contaminants .
For example , certain bacteria of the genera Rhodococcus and Pseudomonas are known for their ability to degrade many environmental contaminants , including aromatic compounds like those found in oil , down to CO .
The genes encoding their degradatory enzymes are commonly found on plasmids .
Others , like Alcanivorax borkumensis , produce surfactants that are useful in the solubilization of the hydrophobic molecules found in oil , making them more accessible to other microbes for degradation .
We are all familiar with the slimy layer on a pond surface or that makes rocks slippery .
These are examples of biofilms—microorganisms embedded in thin layers of matrix material .
Biofilms were long considered random assemblages of cells and had little attention from researchers .
Recently , progress in visualization and biochemical methods has revealed that biofilms are an organized ecosystem within which many cells , usually of different species of bacteria , fungi , and algae , interact through cell signaling and coordinated responses .
The biofilm provides a protected environment in harsh conditions and aids colonization by microorganisms .
Biofilms also have clinical importance .
They form on medical devices , resist routine cleaning and sterilization , and cause health-acquired infections .
Within the body , biofilms form on the teeth as plaque , in the lungs of patients with cystic fibrosis , and on the cardiac tissue of patients with endocarditis .
The slime layer helps protect the cells from host immune defenses and antibiotic treatments .
Studying biofilms requires new approaches .
Because of the cells ’ adhesion properties , many of the methods for culturing and counting cells that are explored in this chapter are not easily applied to biofilms .
This is the beginning of a new era of challenges and rewarding insight into the ways that microorganisms grow and thrive in nature .
In prokaryotes , reproduction is always asexual , although extensive genetic recombination in the form of horizontal gene transfer takes place , as will be explored in a different chapter .
Most bacteria have a single circular chromosome ; however , some exceptions exist .
For example , Borrelia burgdorferi , the causative agent of Lyme disease , has a linear chromosome .
The most common mechanism of cell replication in bacteria is a process called binary fission , which is depicted in .
Before dividing , the cell grows and increases its number of cellular components .
Next , the replication of DNA starts at a location on the circular chromosome called the origin of replication , where the chromosome is attached to the inner cell membrane .
Replication continues in opposite directions along the chromosome until the terminus is reached .
The center of the enlarged cell constricts until two daughter cells are formed , each offspring receiving a complete copy of the parental genome and a division of the cytoplasm ( cytokinesis ) .
This process of cytokinesis and cell division is directed by a protein called FtsZ .
FtsZ assembles into a Z ring on the cytoplasmic membrane .
The Z ring is anchored by FtsZ-binding proteins and defines the division plane between the two daughter cells .
Additional proteins required for cell division are added to the Z ring to form a structure called the divisome .
The divisome activates to produce a peptidoglycan cell wall and build a septum that divides the two daughter cells .
The daughter cells are separated by the division septum , where all of the cells ’ outer layers ( the cell wall and outer membranes , if present ) must be remodeled to complete division .
For example , we know that specific enzymes break bonds between the monomers in peptidoglycans and allow addition of new subunits along the division septum .
In eukaryotic organisms , the generation time is the time between the same points of the life cycle in two successive generations .
For example , the typical generation time for the human population is 25 years .
This definition is not practical for bacteria , which may reproduce rapidly or remain dormant for thousands of years .
In prokaryotes ( Bacteria and Archaea ) , the generation time is also called the doubling time and is defined as the time it takes for the population to double through one round of binary fission .
Bacterial doubling times vary enormously .
Whereas Escherichia coli can double in as little as 20 minutes under optimal growth conditions in the laboratory , bacteria of the same species may need several days to double in especially harsh environments .
Most pathogens grow rapidly , like E. coli , but there are exceptions .
For example , Mycobacterium tuberculosis , the causative agent of tuberculosis , has a generation time of between 15 and 20 hours .
On the other hand , M. leprae , which causes Hansen ’ s disease ( leprosy ) , grows much more slowly , with a doubling time of 14 days .
Microorganisms grown in closed culture ( also known as a batch culture ) , in which no nutrients are added and most waste is not removed , follow a reproducible growth pattern referred to as the growth curve .
An example of a batch culture in nature is a pond in which a small number of cells grow in a closed environment .
The culture density is defined as the number of cells per unit volume .
In a closed environment , the culture density is also a measure of the number of cells in the population .
Infections of the body do not always follow the growth curve , but correlations can exist depending upon the site and type of infection .
When the number of live cells is plotted against time , distinct phases can be observed in the curve .
The beginning of the growth curve represents a small number of cells , referred to as an inoculum , that are added to a fresh culture medium , a nutritional broth that supports growth .
The initial phase of the growth curve is called the lag phase , during which cells are gearing up for the next phase of growth .
The number of cells does not change during the lag phase ; however , cells grow larger and are metabolically active , synthesizing proteins needed to grow within the medium .
If any cells were damaged or shocked during the transfer to the new medium , repair takes place during the lag phase .
The duration of the lag phase is determined by many factors , including the species and genetic make-up of the cells , the composition of the medium , and the size of the original inoculum .
In the logarithmic ( log ) growth phase , sometimes called exponential growth phase , the cells are actively dividing by binary fission and their number increases exponentially .
For any given bacterial species , the generation time under specific growth conditions ( nutrients , temperature , pH , and so forth ) is genetically determined , and this generation time is called the intrinsic growth rate .
During the log phase , the relationship between time and number of cells is not linear but exponential ; however , the growth curve is often plotted on a semilogarithmic graph , as shown in , which gives the appearance of a linear relationship .
Cells in the log phase show constant growth rate and uniform metabolic activity .
For this reason , cells in the log phase are preferentially used for industrial applications and research work .
The log phase is also the stage where bacteria are the most susceptible to the action of disinfectants and common antibiotics that affect protein , DNA , and cell-wall synthesis .
As the number of cells increases through the log phase , several factors contribute to a slowing of the growth rate .
Waste products accumulate and nutrients are gradually used up .
In addition , gradual depletion of oxygen begins to limit aerobic cell growth .
This combination of unfavorable conditions slows and finally stalls population growth .
The total number of live cells reaches a plateau referred to as the stationary phase .
In this phase , the number of new cells created by cell division is now equivalent to the number of cells dying ; thus , the total population of living cells is relatively stagnant .
The culture density in a stationary culture is constant .
The culture ’ s carrying capacity , or maximum culture density , depends on the types of microorganisms in the culture and the specific conditions of the culture ; however , carrying capacity is constant for a given organism grown under the same conditions .
During the stationary phase , cells switch to a survival mode of metabolism .
As growth slows , so too does the synthesis of peptidoglycans , proteins , and nucleic-acids ; thus , stationary cultures are less susceptible to antibiotics that disrupt these processes .
In bacteria capable of producing endospores , many cells undergo sporulation during the stationary phase .
Secondary metabolites , including antibiotics , are synthesized in the stationary phase .
In certain pathogenic bacteria , the stationary phase is also associated with the expression of virulence factors , products that contribute to a microbe ’ s ability to survive , reproduce , and cause disease in a host organism .
For example , quorum sensing in Staphylococcus aureus initiates the production of enzymes that can break down human tissue and cellular debris , clearing the way for bacteria to spread to new tissue where nutrients are more plentiful .
As a culture medium accumulates toxic waste and nutrients are exhausted , cells die in greater and greater numbers .
Soon , the number of dying cells exceeds the number of dividing cells , leading to an exponential decrease in the number of cells .
This is the aptly named death phase , sometimes called the decline phase .
Many cells lyse and release nutrients into the medium , allowing surviving cells to maintain viability and form endospores .
A few cells , the so-called persisters , are characterized by a slow metabolic rate .
Persister cells are medically important because they are associated with certain chronic infections , such as tuberculosis , that do not respond to antibiotic treatment .
The growth pattern shown in takes place in a closed environment ; nutrients are not added and waste and dead cells are not removed .
In many cases , though , it is advantageous to maintain cells in the logarithmic phase of growth .
One example is in industries that harvest microbial products .
A chemostat is used to maintain a continuous culture in which nutrients are supplied at a steady rate .
A controlled amount of air is mixed in for aerobic processes .
Bacterial suspension is removed at the same rate as nutrients flow in to maintain an optimal growth environment .
Estimating the number of bacterial cells in a sample , known as a bacterial count , is a common task performed by microbiologists .
The number of bacteria in a clinical sample serves as an indication of the extent of an infection .
Quality control of drinking water , food , medication , and even cosmetics relies on estimates of bacterial counts to detect contamination and prevent the spread of disease .
Two major approaches are used to measure cell number .
The direct methods involve counting cells , whereas the indirect methods depend on the measurement of cell presence or activity without actually counting individual cells .
Both direct and indirect methods have advantages and disadvantages for specific applications .
Direct cell count refers to counting the cells in a liquid culture or colonies on a plate .
It is a direct way of estimating how many organisms are present in a sample .
Let ’ s look first at a simple and fast method that requires only a specialized slide and a compound microscope .
The simplest way to count bacteria is called the direct microscopic cell count , which involves transferring a known volume of a culture to a calibrated slide and counting the cells under a light microscope .
The calibrated slide is called a Petroff-Hausser chamber and is similar to a hemocytometer used to count red blood cells .
The central area of the counting chamber is etched into squares of various sizes .
A sample of the culture suspension is added to the chamber under a coverslip that is placed at a specific height from the surface of the grid .
It is possible to estimate the concentration of cells in the original sample by counting individual cells in a number of squares and determining the volume of the sample observed .
The area of the squares and the height at which the coverslip is positioned are specified for the chamber .
The concentration must be corrected for dilution if the sample was diluted before enumeration .
Cells in several small squares must be counted and the average taken to obtain a reliable measurement .
The advantages of the chamber are that the method is easy to use , relatively fast , and inexpensive .
On the downside , the counting chamber does not work well with dilute cultures because there may not be enough cells to count .
Using a counting chamber does not necessarily yield an accurate count of the number of live cells because it is not always possible to distinguish between live cells , dead cells , and debris of the same size under the microscope .
However , newly developed fluorescence staining techniques make it possible to distinguish viable and dead bacteria .
These viability stains ( or live stains ) bind to nucleic acids , but the primary and secondary stains differ in their ability to cross the cytoplasmic membrane .
The primary stain , which fluoresces green , can penetrate intact cytoplasmic membranes , staining both live and dead cells .
The secondary stain , which fluoresces red , can stain a cell only if the cytoplasmic membrane is considerably damaged .
Thus , live cells fluoresce green because they only absorb the green stain , whereas dead cells appear red because the red stain displaces the green stain on their nucleic acids .
Another technique uses an electronic cell counting device ( Coulter counter ) to detect and count the changes in electrical resistance in a saline solution .
A glass tube with a small opening is immersed in an electrolyte solution .
A first electrode is suspended in the glass tube .
A second electrode is located outside of the tube .
As cells are drawn through the small aperture in the glass tube , they briefly change the resistance measured between the two electrodes and the change is recorded by an electronic sensor ; each resistance change represents a cell .
The method is rapid and accurate within a range of concentrations ; however , if the culture is too concentrated , more than one cell may pass through the aperture at any given time and skew the results .
This method also does not differentiate between live and dead cells .
Direct counts provide an estimate of the total number of cells in a sample .
However , in many situations , it is important to know the number of live , or viable , cells .
Counts of live cells are needed when assessing the extent of an infection , the effectiveness of antimicrobial compounds and medication , or contamination of food and water .
The viable plate count , or simply plate count , is a count of viable or live cells .
It is based on the principle that viable cells replicate and give rise to visible colonies when incubated under suitable conditions for the specimen .
The results are usually expressed as colony-forming unit s per milliliter ( CFU/mL ) rather than cells per milliliter because more than one cell may have landed on the same spot to give rise to a single colony .
Furthermore , samples of bacteria that grow in clusters or chains are difficult to disperse and a single colony may represent several cells .
Some cells are described as viable but nonculturable and will not form colonies on solid media .
For all these reasons , the viable plate count is considered a low estimate of the actual number of live cells .
These limitations do not detract from the usefulness of the method , which provides estimates of live bacterial numbers .
Microbiologists typically count plates with 30–300 colonies .
Samples with too few colonies ( < 30 ) do not give statistically reliable numbers , and overcrowded plates ( > 300 colonies ) make it difficult to accurately count individual colonies .
Also , counts in this range minimize occurrences of more than one bacterial cell forming a single colony .
Thus , the calculated CFU is closer to the true number of live bacteria in the population .
There are two common approaches to inoculating plates for viable counts : the pour plate and the spread plate methods .
Although the final inoculation procedure differs between these two methods , they both start with a serial dilution of the culture .
The serial dilution of a culture is an important first step before proceeding to either the pour plate or spread plate method .
The goal of the serial dilution process is to obtain plates with CFUs in the range of 30–300 , and the process usually involves several dilutions in multiples of 10 to simplify calculation .
The number of serial dilutions is chosen according to a preliminary estimate of the culture density .
illustrates the serial dilution method .
A fixed volume of the original culture , 1.0 mL , is added to and thoroughly mixed with the first dilution tube solution , which contains 9.0 mL of sterile broth .
This step represents a dilution factor of 10 , or 1:10 , compared with the original culture .
From this first dilution , the same volume , 1.0 mL , is withdrawn and mixed with a fresh tube of 9.0 mL of dilution solution .
The dilution factor is now 1:100 compared with the original culture .
This process continues until a series of dilutions is produced that will bracket the desired cell concentration for accurate counting .
From each tube , a sample is plated on solid medium using either the pour plate method or the spread plate method .
The plates are incubated until colonies appear .
Two to three plates are usually prepared from each dilution and the numbers of colonies counted on each plate are averaged .
In all cases , thorough mixing of samples with the dilution medium ( to ensure the cell distribution in the tube is random ) is paramount to obtaining reliable results .
The dilution factor is used to calculate the number of cells in the original cell culture .
In our example , an average of 50 colonies was counted on the plates obtained from the 1:10,000 dilution .
Because only 0.1 mL of suspension was pipetted on the plate , the multiplier required to reconstitute the original concentration is 10 × 10,000 .
The number of CFU per mL is equal to 50 × 10 × 10,000 = 5,000,000 .
The number of bacteria in the culture is estimated as 5 million cells/mL .
The colony count obtained from the 1:1000 dilution was 389 , well below the expected 500 for a 10-fold difference in dilutions .
This highlights the issue of inaccuracy when colony counts are greater than 300 and more than one bacterial cell grows into a single colony .
A very dilute sample—drinking water , for example—may not contain enough organisms to use either of the plate count methods described .
In such cases , the original sample must be concentrated rather than diluted before plating .
This can be accomplished using a modification of the plate count technique called the membrane filtration technique .
Known volumes are vacuum-filtered aseptically through a membrane with a pore size small enough to trap microorganisms .
The membrane is transferred to a Petri plate containing an appropriate growth medium .
Colonies are counted after incubation .
Calculation of the cell density is made by dividing the cell count by the volume of filtered liquid .
The number of microorganisms in dilute samples is usually too low to be detected by the plate count methods described thus far .
For these specimens , microbiologists routinely use the most probable number ( MPN ) method , a statistical procedure for estimating of the number of viable microorganisms in a sample .
Often used for water and food samples , the MPN method evaluates detectable growth by observing changes in turbidity or color due to metabolic activity .
A typical application of MPN method is the estimation of the number of coliforms in a sample of pond water .
Coliforms are gram-negative rod bacteria that ferment lactose .
The presence of coliforms in water is considered a sign of contamination by fecal matter .
The lactose broth tubes contain a pH indicator that changes color from red to yellow when the lactose is fermented .
After inoculation and incubation , the tubes are examined for an indication of coliform growth by a color change in media from red to yellow .
The numbers 5 , 2 , and 0 are compared with in , which has been constructed using a probability model of the sampling procedure .
The foremost approach is to measure the turbidity ( cloudiness ) of a sample of bacteria in a liquid suspension .
The laboratory instrument used to measure turbidity is called a spectrophotometer .
As the numbers of bacteria in a suspension increase , the turbidity also increases and causes less light to reach the detector .
The decrease in light passing through the sample and reaching the detector is associated with a decrease in percent transmission and increase in absorbance measured by the spectrophotometer .
Measuring turbidity is a fast method to estimate cell density as long as there are enough cells in a sample to produce turbidity .
It is possible to correlate turbidity readings to the actual number of cells by performing a viable plate count of samples taken from cultures having a range of absorbance values .
Using these values , a calibration curve is generated by plotting turbidity as a function of cell density .
Once the calibration curve has been produced , it can be used to estimate cell counts for all samples obtained or cultured under similar conditions and with densities within the range of values used to construct the curve .
Measuring dry weight of a culture sample is another indirect method of evaluating culture density without directly measuring cell counts .
The cell suspension used for weighing must be concentrated by filtration or centrifugation , washed , and then dried before the measurements are taken .
The degree of drying must be standardized to account for residual water content .
This method is especially useful for filamentous microorganisms , which are difficult to enumerate by direct or viable plate count .
As we have seen , methods to estimate viable cell numbers can be labor intensive and take time because cells must be grown .
Recently , indirect ways of measuring live cells have been developed that are both fast and easy to implement .
These methods measure cell activity by following the production of metabolic products or disappearance of reactants .
Adenosine triphosphate ( ATP ) formation , biosynthesis of proteins and nucleic acids , and consumption of oxygen can all be monitored to estimate the number of cells .
Binary fission is the most common pattern of cell division in prokaryotes , but it is not the only one .
Other mechanisms usually involve asymmetrical division ( as in budding ) or production of spores in aerial filaments .
In some cyanobacteria , many nucleoids may accumulate in an enlarged round cell or along a filament , leading to the generation of many new cells at once .
The new cells often split from the parent filament and float away in a process called fragmentation .
Fragmentation is commonly observed in the Actinomycetes , a group of gram-positive , anaerobic bacteria commonly found in soil .
Another curious example of cell division in prokaryotes , reminiscent of live birth in animals , is exhibited by the giant bacterium Epulopiscium .
Several daughter cells grow fully in the parent cell , which eventually disintegrates , releasing the new cells to the environment .
Other species may form a long narrow extension at one pole in a process called budding .
The tip of the extension swells and forms a smaller cell , the bud that eventually detaches from the parent cell .
Budding is most common in yeast , but it is also observed in prosthecate bacteria and some cyanobacteria .
The soil bacteria Actinomyces grow in long filaments divided by septa , similar to the mycelia seen in fungi , resulting in long cells with multiple nucleoids .
Environmental signals , probably related to low nutrient availability , lead to the formation of aerial filaments .
Within these aerial filaments , elongated cells divide simultaneously .
The new cells , which contain a single nucleoid , develop into spores that give rise to new colonies .
In nature , microorganisms grow mainly in biofilms , complex and dynamic ecosystems that form on a variety of environmental surfaces , from industrial conduits and water treatment pipelines to rocks in river beds .
Biofilms are not restricted to solid surface substrates , however .
Almost any surface in a liquid environment containing some minimal nutrients will eventually develop a biofilm .
Microbial mats that float on water , for example , are biofilms that contain large populations of photosynthetic microorganisms .
Biofilms found in the human mouth may contain hundreds of bacterial species .
Regardless of the environment where they occur , biofilms are not random collections of microorganisms ; rather , they are highly structured communities that provide a selective advantage to their constituent microorganisms .
Observations using confocal microscopy have shown that environmental conditions influence the overall structure of biofilms .
Filamentous biofilms called streamers form in rapidly flowing water , such as freshwater streams , eddies , and specially designed laboratory flow cells that replicate growth conditions in fast-moving fluids .
The streamers are anchored to the substrate by a “ head ” and the “ tail ” floats downstream in the current .
In still or slow-moving water , biofilms mainly assume a mushroom-like shape .
The structure of biofilms may also change with other environmental conditions such as nutrient availability .
Detailed observations of biofilms under confocal laser and scanning electron microscopes reveal clusters of microorganisms embedded in a matrix interspersed with open water channels .
The extracellular matrix consists of extracellular polymeric substances ( EPS ) secreted by the organisms in the biofilm .
The extracellular matrix represents a large fraction of the biofilm , accounting for 50 % –90 % of the total dry mass .
The properties of the EPS vary according to the resident organisms and environmental conditions .
EPS is a hydrated gel composed primarily of polysaccharides and containing other macromolecules such as proteins , nucleic acids , and lipids .
It plays a key role in maintaining the integrity and function of the biofilm .
Channels in the EPS allow movement of nutrients , waste , and gases throughout the biofilm .
This keeps the cells hydrated , preventing desiccation .
EPS also shelters organisms in the biofilm from predation by other microbes or cells ( e.g. , protozoans , white blood cells in the human body ) .
Free-floating microbial cells that live in an aquatic environment are called planktonic cells .
The formation of a biofilm essentially involves the attachment of planktonic cells to a substrate , where they become sessile ( attached to a surface ) .
This occurs in stages , as depicted in .
The first stage involves the attachment of planktonic cells to a surface coated with a conditioning film of organic material .
At this point , attachment to the substrate is reversible , but as cells express new phenotypes that facilitate the formation of EPS , they transition from a planktonic to a sessile lifestyle .
The biofilm develops characteristic structures , including an extensive matrix and water channels .
Appendages such as fimbriae , pili , and flagella interact with the EPS , and microscopy and genetic analysis suggest that such structures are required for the establishment of a mature biofilm .
In the last stage of the biofilm life cycle , cells on the periphery of the biofilm revert to a planktonic lifestyle , sloughing off the mature biofilm to colonize new sites .
This stage is referred to as dispersal .
Within a biofilm , different species of microorganisms establish metabolic collaborations in which the waste product of one organism becomes the nutrient for another .
For example , aerobic microorganisms consume oxygen , creating anaerobic regions that promote the growth of anaerobes .
This occurs in many polymicrobial infections that involve both aerobic and anaerobic pathogens .
The mechanism by which cells in a biofilm coordinate their activities in response to environmental stimuli is called quorum sensing .
Quorum sensing—which can occur between cells of different species within a biofilm—enables microorganisms to detect their cell density through the release and binding of small , diffusible molecules called autoinducers .
When the cell population reaches a critical threshold ( a quorum ) , these autoinducers initiate a cascade of reactions that activate genes associated with cellular functions that are beneficial only when the population reaches a critical density .
For example , in some pathogens , synthesis of virulence factors only begins when enough cells are present to overwhelm the immune defenses of the host .
Although mostly studied in bacterial populations , quorum sensing takes place between bacteria and eukaryotes and between eukaryotic cells such as the fungus Candida albicans , a common member of the human microbiota that can cause infections in immunocompromised individuals .
The signaling molecules in quorum sensing belong to two major classes .
Gram-negative bacteria communicate mainly using N-acylated homoserine lactones , whereas gram-positive bacteria mostly use small peptides .
In all cases , the first step in quorum sensing consists of the binding of the autoinducer to its specific receptor only when a threshold concentration of signaling molecules is reached .
Once binding to the receptor takes place , a cascade of signaling events leads to changes in gene expression .
The result is the activation of biological responses linked to quorum sensing , notably an increase in the production of signaling molecules themselves , hence the term autoinducer .
The human body harbors many types of biofilms , some beneficial and some harmful .
For example , the layers of normal microbiota lining the intestinal and respiratory mucosa play a role in warding off infections by pathogens .
However , other biofilms in the body can have a detrimental effect on health .
For example , the plaque that forms on teeth is a biofilm that can contribute to dental and periodontal disease .
Biofilms can also form in wounds , sometimes causing serious infections that can spread .
The bacterium Pseudomonas aeruginosa often colonizes biofilms in the airways of patients with cystic fibrosis , causing chronic and sometimes fatal infections of the lungs .
Biofilms can also form on medical devices used in or on the body , causing infections in patients with in-dwelling catheters , artificial joints , or contact lenses .
Pathogens embedded within biofilms exhibit a higher resistance to antibiotics than their free-floating counterparts .
Several hypotheses have been proposed to explain why .
Cells in the deep layers of a biofilm are metabolically inactive and may be less susceptible to the action of antibiotics that disrupt metabolic activities .
The EPS may also slow the diffusion of antibiotics and antiseptics , preventing them from reaching cells in the deeper layers of the biofilm .
Phenotypic changes may also contribute to the increased resistance exhibited by bacterial cells in biofilms .
For example , the increased production of efflux pumps , membrane-embedded proteins that actively extrude antibiotics out of bacterial cells , have been shown to be an important mechanism of antibiotic resistance among biofilm-associated bacteria .
Finally , biofilms provide an ideal environment for the exchange of extrachromosomal DNA , which often includes genes that confer antibiotic resistance .
Few would argue about the need for water , but what about oxygen ?
Can there be life without oxygen ?
The answer is that molecular oxygen ( O ) is not always needed .
The earliest signs of life are dated to a period when conditions on earth were highly reducing and free oxygen gas was essentially nonexistent .
Only after cyanobacteria started releasing oxygen as a byproduct of photosynthesis and the capacity of iron in the oceans for taking up oxygen was exhausted did oxygen levels increase in the atmosphere .
This event , often referred to as the Great Oxygenation Event or the Oxygen Revolution , caused a massive extinction .
Most organisms could not survive the powerful oxidative properties of reactive oxygen species ( ROS ) , highly unstable ions and molecules derived from partial reduction of oxygen that can damage virtually any macromolecule or structure with which they come in contact .
Singlet oxygen ( O • ) , superoxide peroxides ( H O ) , hydroxyl radical ( OH• ) , and hypochlorite ion ( OCl ) , the active ingredient of household bleach , are all examples of ROS .
The organisms that were able to detoxify reactive oxygen species harnessed the high electronegativity of oxygen to produce free energy for their metabolism and thrived in the new environment .
Many ecosystems are still free of molecular oxygen .
Some are found in extreme locations , such as deep in the ocean or in earth ’ s crust ; others are part of our everyday landscape , such as marshes , bogs , and sewers .
Within the bodies of humans and other animals , regions with little or no oxygen provide an anaerobic environment for microorganisms .
We can easily observe different requirements for molecular oxygen by growing bacteria in thioglycolate tube culture s. A test-tube culture starts with autoclaved thioglycolate medium containing a low percentage of agar to allow motile bacteria to move throughout the medium .
Thioglycolate has strong reducing properties and autoclaving flushes out most of the oxygen .
The tubes are inoculated with the bacterial cultures to be tested and incubated at an appropriate temperature .
Over time , oxygen slowly diffuses throughout the thioglycolate tube culture from the top .
Bacterial density increases in the area where oxygen concentration is best suited for the growth of that particular organism .
The growth of bacteria with varying oxygen requirements in thioglycolate tubes is illustrated in .
In tube A , all the growth is seen at the top of the tube .
The bacteria are obligate ( strict ) aerobe s that can not grow without an abundant supply of oxygen .
Tube B looks like the opposite of tube A. Bacteria grow at the bottom of tube B .
Those are obligate anaerobe s , which are killed by oxygen .
The aerotolerant anaerobe s in tube D are indifferent to the presence of oxygen .
They do not use oxygen because they usually have a fermentative metabolism , but they are not harmed by the presence of oxygen as obligate anaerobes are .
Tube E on the right shows a “ Goldilocks ” culture .
The oxygen level has to be just right for growth , not too much and not too little .
These microaerophile s are bacteria that require a minimum level of oxygen for growth , about 1 % –10 % , well below the 21 % found in the atmosphere .
Examples of obligate aerobes are Mycobacterium tuberculosis , the causative agent of tuberculosis and Micrococcus luteus , a gram-positive bacterium that colonizes the skin .
Neisseria meningitidis , the causative agent of severe bacterial meningitis , and N. gonorrhoeae , the causative agent of sexually transmitted gonorrhea , are also obligate aerobes .
Many obligate anaerobes are found in the environment where anaerobic conditions exist , such as in deep sediments of soil , still waters , and at the bottom of the deep ocean where there is no photosynthetic life .
Anaerobic conditions also exist naturally in the intestinal tract of animals .
Obligate anaerobes , mainly Bacteroidetes , represent a large fraction of the microbes in the human gut .
Transient anaerobic conditions exist when tissues are not supplied with blood circulation ; they die and become an ideal breeding ground for obligate anaerobes .
Another type of obligate anaerobe encountered in the human body is the gram-positive , rod-shaped Clostridium spp .
Their ability to form endospores allows them to survive in the presence of oxygen .
One of the major causes of health-acquired infections is C. difficile , known as C. diff .
Prolonged use of antibiotics for other infections increases the probability of a patient developing a secondary C. difficile infection .
Antibiotic treatment disrupts the balance of microorganisms in the intestine and allows the colonization of the gut by C. difficile , causing a significant inflammation of the colon .
Other clostridia responsible for serious infections include C. tetani , the agent of tetanus , and C. perfringens , which causes gas gangrene .
In both cases , the infection starts in necrotic tissue ( dead tissue that is not supplied with oxygen by blood circulation ) .
This is the reason that deep puncture wounds are associated with tetanus .
When tissue death is accompanied by lack of circulation , gangrene is always a danger .
The study of obligate anaerobes requires special equipment .
Obligate anaerobic bacteria must be grown under conditions devoid of oxygen .
The most common approach is culture in an anaerobic jar .
Anaerobic jars include chemical packs that remove oxygen and release carbon dioxide ( CO ) .
An anaerobic chamber is an enclosed box from which all oxygen is removed .
Gloves sealed to openings in the box allow handling of the cultures without exposing the culture to air .
Staphylococci and Enterobacteriaceae are examples of facultative anaerobes .
Staphylococci are found on the skin and upper respiratory tract .
Enterobacteriaceae are found primarily in the gut and upper respiratory tract but can sometimes spread to the urinary tract , where they are capable of causing infections .
It is not unusual to see mixed bacterial infections in which the facultative anaerobes use up the oxygen , creating an environment for the obligate anaerobes to flourish .
Examples of aerotolerant anaerobes include lactobacilli and streptococci , both found in the oral microbiota .
Campylobacter jejuni , which causes gastrointestinal infections , is an example of a microaerophile and is grown under low-oxygen conditions .
The optimum oxygen concentration , as the name implies , is the ideal concentration of oxygen for a particular microorganism .
The lowest concentration of oxygen that allows growth is called the minimum permissive oxygen concentration .
The highest tolerated concentration of oxygen is the maximum permissive oxygen concentration .
The organism will not grow outside the range of oxygen levels found between the minimum and maximum permissive oxygen concentrations .
Aerobic respiration constantly generates reactive oxygen species ( ROS ) , byproducts that must be detoxified .
Even organisms that do not use aerobic respiration need some way to break down some of the ROS that may form from atmospheric oxygen .
Three main enzymes break down those toxic byproducts : superoxide dismutase , peroxidase , and catalase .
Each one catalyzes a different reaction .
Reactions of type seen in Reaction 1 are catalyzed by peroxidase s. In these reactions , an electron donor ( reduced compound ; e.g. , reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide [ NADH ] ) oxidizes hydrogen peroxide , or other peroxides , to water .
The enzymes play an important role by limiting the damage caused by peroxidation of membrane lipids .
Reaction 2 is mediated by the enzyme superoxide dismutase ( SOD ) and breaks down the powerful superoxide anions generated by aerobic metabolism : The enzyme catalase converts hydrogen peroxide to water and oxygen as shown in Reaction 3 .
Obligate anaerobes usually lack all three enzymes .
Aerotolerant anaerobes do have SOD but no catalase .
Reaction 3 , shown occurring in , is the basis of a useful and rapid test to distinguish streptococci , which are aerotolerant and do not possess catalase , from staphylococci , which are facultative anaerobes .
A sample of culture rapidly mixed in a drop of 3 % hydrogen peroxide will release bubbles if the culture is catalase positive .
Bacteria that grow best in a higher concentration of CO and a lower concentration of oxygen than present in the atmosphere are called capnophiles .
One common approach to grow capnophiles is to use a candle jar .
A candle jar consists of a jar with a tight-fitting lid that can accommodate the cultures and a candle .
After the cultures are added to the jar , the candle is lit and the lid closed .
As the candle burns , it consumes most of the oxygen present and releases CO .
Recall that acidity is a function of the concentration of hydrogen ions [ H ] and is measured as pH .
Environments with pH values below 7.0 are considered acidic , whereas those with pH values above 7.0 are considered basic .
Extreme pH affects the structure of all macromolecules .
The hydrogen bonds holding together strands of DNA break up at high pH .
Lipids are hydrolyzed by an extremely basic pH .
The proton motive force responsible for production of ATP in cellular respiration depends on the concentration gradient of H across the plasma membrane ( see ) .
If H ions are neutralized by hydroxide ions , the concentration gradient collapses and impairs energy production .
But the component most sensitive to pH in the cell is its workhorse , the protein .
Moderate changes in pH modify the ionization of amino-acid functional groups and disrupt hydrogen bonding , which , in turn , promotes changes in the folding of the molecule , promoting denaturation and destroying activity .
The optimum growth pH is the most favorable pH for the growth of an organism .
The lowest pH value that an organism can tolerate is called the minimum growth pH and the highest pH is the maximum growth pH .
These values can cover a wide range , which is important for the preservation of food and to microorganisms ’ survival in the stomach .
For example , the optimum growth pH of Salmonella spp .
is 7.0–7.5 , but the minimum growth pH is closer to 4.2 .
Most bacteria are neutrophile s , meaning they grow optimally at a pH within one or two pH units of the neutral pH of 7 ( see ) .
Most familiar bacteria , like Escherichia coli , staphylococci , and Salmonella spp .
are neutrophiles and do not fare well in the acidic pH of the stomach .
However , there are pathogenic strains of E. coli , S. typhi , and other species of intestinal pathogens that are much more resistant to stomach acid .
In comparison , fungi thrive at slightly acidic pH values of 5.0–6.0 .
Microorganisms that grow optimally at pH less than 5.55 are called acidophile s. For example , the sulfur-oxidizing Sulfolobus spp .
isolated from sulfur mud fields and hot springs in Yellowstone National Park are extreme acidophiles .
These archaea survive at pH values of 2.5–3.5 .
Species of the archaean genus Ferroplasma live in acid mine drainage at pH values of 0–2.9 .
The vagina ’ s acidity plays an important role in inhibiting other microbes that are less tolerant of acidity .
Acidophilic microorganisms display a number of adaptations to survive in strong acidic environments .
For example , proteins show increased negative surface charge that stabilizes them at low pH .
Pumps actively eject H ions out of the cells .
The changes in the composition of membrane phospholipids probably reflect the need to maintain membrane fluidity at low pH .
At the other end of the spectrum are alkaliphile s , microorganisms that grow best at pH between 8.0 and 10.5 .
Vibrio cholerae , the pathogenic agent of cholera , grows best at the slightly basic pH of 8.0 ; it can survive pH values of 11.0 but is inactivated by the acid of the stomach .
When it comes to survival at high pH , the bright pink archaean Natronobacterium , found in the soda lakes of the African Rift Valley , may hold the record at a pH of 10.5 .
Extreme alkaliphiles have adapted to their harsh environment through evolutionary modification of lipid and protein structure and compensatory mechanisms to maintain the proton motive force in an alkaline environment .
For example , the alkaliphile Bacillus firmus derives the energy for transport reactions and motility from a Na ion gradient rather than a proton motive force .
Many enzymes from alkaliphiles have a higher isoelectric point , due to an increase in the number of basic amino acids , than homologous enzymes from neutrophiles .
Constant subzero temperatures and lack of obvious sources of nutrients did not seem to be conditions that would support a thriving ecosystem .
To their surprise , the samples retrieved from the lake showed abundant microbial life .
In a different but equally harsh setting , bacteria grow at the bottom of the ocean in sea vents , where temperatures can reach 340 °C ( 700 °F ) .
Microbes can be roughly classified according to the range of temperature at which they can grow .
The growth rates are the highest at the optimum growth temperature for the organism .
The lowest temperature at which the organism can survive and replicate is its minimum growth temperature .
The highest temperature at which growth can occur is its maximum growth temperature .
The following ranges of permissive growth temperatures are approximate only and can vary according to other environmental factors .
Organisms categorized as mesophile s ( “ middle loving ” ) are adapted to moderate temperatures , with optimal growth temperatures ranging from room temperature ( about 20 °C ) to about 45 °C .
As would be expected from the core temperature of the human body , 37 °C ( 98.6 °F ) , normal human microbiota and pathogens ( e.g. , E. coli , Salmonella spp. , and Lactobacillus spp . )
Organisms called psychrotrophs , also known as psychrotolerant , prefer cooler environments , from a high temperature of 25 °C to refrigeration temperature about 4 °C .
They are found in many natural environments in temperate climates .
They are also responsible for the spoilage of refrigerated food .
The organisms retrieved from arctic lakes such as Lake Whillans are considered extreme psychrophiles ( cold loving ) .
Psychrophiles are microorganisms that can grow at 0 °C and below , have an optimum growth temperature close to 15 °C , and usually do not survive at temperatures above 20 °C .
They are found in permanently cold environments such as the deep waters of the oceans .
Because they are active at low temperature , psychrophiles and psychrotrophs are important decomposers in cold climates .
Organisms that grow at optimum temperatures of 50 °C to a maximum of 80 °C are called thermophiles ( “ heat loving ” ) .
They do not multiply at room temperature .
Thermophiles are widely distributed in hot springs , geothermal soils , and manmade environments such as garden compost piles where the microbes break down kitchen scraps and vegetal material .
Examples of thermophiles include Thermus aquaticus and Geobacillus spp .
Higher up on the extreme temperature scale we find the hyperthermophiles , which are characterized by growth ranges from 80 °C to a maximum of 110 °C , with some extreme examples that survive temperatures above 121 °C , the average temperature of an autoclave .
The hydrothermal vents at the bottom of the ocean are a prime example of extreme environments , with temperatures reaching an estimated 340 °C .
Microbes isolated from the vents achieve optimal growth at temperatures higher than 100 °C .
Noteworthy examples are Pyrobolus and Pyrodictium , archaea that grow at 105 °C and survive autoclaving .
shows the typical skewed curves of temperature-dependent growth for the categories of microorganisms we have discussed .
Life in extreme environments raises fascinating questions about the adaptation of macromolecules and metabolic processes .
Very low temperatures affect cells in many ways .
Membranes lose their fluidity and are damaged by ice crystal formation .
Chemical reactions and diffusion slow considerably .
Proteins become too rigid to catalyze reactions and may undergo denaturation .
At the opposite end of the temperature spectrum , heat denatures proteins and nucleic acids .
Increased fluidity impairs metabolic processes in membranes .
Some of the practical applications of the destructive effects of heat on microbes are sterilization by steam , pasteurization , and incineration of inoculating loops .
Proteins in psychrophiles are , in general , rich in hydrophobic residues , display an increase in flexibility , and have a lower number of secondary stabilizing bonds when compared with homologous proteins from mesophiles .
Antifreeze proteins and solutes that decrease the freezing temperature of the cytoplasm are common .
The lipids in the membranes tend to be unsaturated to increase fluidity .
Growth rates are much slower than those encountered at moderate temperatures .
Under appropriate conditions , mesophiles and even thermophiles can survive freezing .
Liquid cultures of bacteria are mixed with sterile glycerol solutions and frozen to −80 °C for long-term storage as stocks .
Cultures can withstand freeze drying ( lyophilization ) and then be stored as powders in sealed ampules to be reconstituted with broth when needed .
Macromolecules in thermophiles and hyperthermophiles show some notable structural differences from what is observed in the mesophiles .
The ratio of saturated to polyunsaturated lipids increases to limit the fluidity of the cell membranes .
Their DNA sequences show a higher proportion of guanine–cytosine nitrogenous bases , which are held together by three hydrogen bonds in contrast to adenine and thymine , which are connected in the double helix by two hydrogen bonds .
Additional secondary ionic and covalent bonds , as well as the replacement of key amino acids to stabilize folding , contribute to the resistance of proteins to denaturation .
The so-called thermoenzymes purified from thermophiles have important practical applications .
For example , amplification of nucleic acids in the polymerase chain reaction ( PCR ) depends on the thermal stability of Taq polymerase , an enzyme isolated from T. aquaticus .
Degradation enzymes from thermophiles are added as ingredients in hot-water detergents , increasing their effectiveness .
We also find microorganisms adapted to varying levels of salinity , barometric pressure , humidity , and light .
Most natural environments tend to have lower solute concentrations than the cytoplasm of most microorganisms .
Rigid cell walls protect the cells from bursting in a dilute environment .
Not much protection is available against high osmotic pressure .
In this case , water , following its concentration gradient , flows out of the cell .
This results in plasmolysis ( the shrinking of the protoplasm away from the intact cell wall ) and cell death .
This fact explains why brines and layering meat and fish in salt are time-honored methods of preserving food .
Microorganisms called halophiles ( “ salt loving ” ) actually require high salt concentrations for growth .
These organisms are found in marine environments where salt concentrations hover at 3.5 % .
counters the tremendous osmotic pressure of the environment with a high cytoplasmic concentration of glycerol and by actively pumping out salt ions .
accumulates large concentrations of K and other ions in its cytoplasm .
Its proteins are designed for high salt concentrations and lose activity at salt concentrations below 1–2 M. Although most halotolerant organisms , for example Halomonas spp .
in salt marshes , do not need high concentrations of salt for growth , they will survive and divide in the presence of high salt .
Not surprisingly , the staphylococci , micrococci , and corynebacteria that colonize our skin tolerate salt in their environment .
Halotolerant pathogens are an important cause of food-borne illnesses because they survive and multiply in salty food .
For example , the halotolerant bacteria S. aureus , Bacillus cereus , and V. cholerae produce dangerous enterotoxins and are major causes of food poisoning .
Microorganisms depend on available water to grow .
Available moisture is measured as water activity ( a ) , which is the ratio of the vapor pressure of the medium of interest to the vapor pressure of pure distilled water ; therefore , the a of water is equal to 1.0 .
Bacteria require high a ( 0.97–0.99 ) , whereas fungi can tolerate drier environments ; for example , the range of a for growth of Aspergillus spp .
Decreasing the water content of foods by drying , as in jerky , or through freeze-drying or by increasing osmotic pressure , as in brine and jams , are common methods of preventing spoilage .
Microorganisms that require high atmospheric pressure for growth are called barophiles .
The bacteria that live at the bottom of the ocean must be able to withstand great pressures .
Because it is difficult to retrieve intact specimens and reproduce such growth conditions in the laboratory , the characteristics of these microorganisms are largely unknown .
Photoautotrophs , such as cyanobacteria or green sulfur bacteria , and photoheterotrophs , such as purple nonsulfur bacteria , depend on sufficient light intensity at the wavelengths absorbed by their pigments to grow and multiply .
Energy from light is captured by pigments and converted into chemical energy that drives carbon fixation and other metabolic processes .
The portion of the electromagnetic spectrum that is absorbed by these organisms is defined as photosynthetically active radiation ( PAR ) .
It lies within the visible light spectrum ranging from 400 to 700 nanometers ( nm ) and extends in the near infrared for some photosynthetic bacteria .
A number of accessory pigments , such as fucoxanthin in brown algae and phycobilins in cyanobacteria , widen the useful range of wavelengths for photosynthesis and compensate for the low light levels available at greater depths of water .
Other microorganisms , such as the archaea of the class Halobacteria , use light energy to drive their proton and sodium pumps .
The light is absorbed by a pigment protein complex called bacteriorhodopsin , which is similar to the eye pigment rhodopsin .
Photosynthetic bacteria are present not only in aquatic environments but also in soil and in symbiosis with fungi in lichens .
The peculiar watermelon snow is caused by a microalga Chlamydomonas nivalis , a green alga rich in a secondary red carotenoid pigment ( astaxanthin ) which gives the pink hue to the snow where the alga grows .
Culturing many microorganisms is challenging because of highly specific nutritional and environmental requirements and the diversity of these requirements among different species .
The number of available media to grow bacteria is considerable .
Some media are considered general all-purpose media and support growth of a large variety of organisms .
A prime example of an all-purpose medium is tryptic soy broth ( TSB ) .
Specialized media are used in the identification of bacteria and are supplemented with dyes , pH indicators , or antibiotics .
One type , enriched media , contains growth factors , vitamins , and other essential nutrients to promote the growth of fastidious organisms , organisms that can not make certain nutrients and require them to be added to the medium .
When the complete chemical composition of a medium is known , it is called a chemically defined medium .
For example , in EZ medium , all individual chemical components are identified and the exact amounts of each is known .
In complex media , which contain extracts and digests of yeasts , meat , or plants , the precise chemical composition of the medium is not known .
Amounts of individual components are undetermined and variable .
Nutrient broth , tryptic soy broth , and brain heart infusion , are all examples of complex media .
Media that inhibit the growth of unwanted microorganisms and support the growth of the organism of interest by supplying nutrients and reducing competition are called selective media .
An example of a selective medium is MacConkey agar .
It contains bile salts and crystal violet , which interfere with the growth of many gram-positive bacteria and favor the growth of gram-negative bacteria , particularly the Enterobacteriaceae .
These species are commonly named enterics , reside in the intestine , and are adapted to the presence of bile salts .
The enrichment culture s foster the preferential growth of a desired microorganism that represents a fraction of the organisms present in an inoculum .
For example , if we want to isolate bacteria that break down crude oil , hydrocarbonoclastic bacteria , sequential subculturing in a medium that supplies carbon only in the form of crude oil will enrich the cultures with oil-eating bacteria .
The differential media make it easy to distinguish colonies of different bacteria by a change in the color of the colonies or the color of the medium .
Color changes are the result of end products created by interaction of bacterial enzymes with differential substrates in the medium or , in the case of hemolytic reactions , the lysis of red blood cells in the medium .
In , the differential fermentation of lactose can be observed on MacConkey agar .
The lactose fermenters produce acid , which turns the medium and the colonies of strong fermenters hot pink .
The medium is supplemented with the pH indicator neutral red , which turns to hot pink at low pH .
Selective and differential media can be combined and play an important role in the identification of bacteria by biochemical methods .
Children inherit some characteristics from each parent .
Siblings typically look similar to each other , but not exactly the same—except in the case of identical twins .
How can we explain these phenomena ?
The answers lie in heredity ( the transmission of traits from one generation to the next ) and genetics ( the science of heredity ) .
Because humans reproduce sexually , 50 % of a child ’ s genes come from the mother ’ s egg cell and the remaining 50 % from the father ’ s sperm cell .
Sperm and egg are formed through the process of meiosis , where DNA recombination occurs .
Thus , there is no predictable pattern as to which 50 % comes from which parent .
Thus , siblings have only some genes , and their associated characteristics , in common .
Identical twins are the exception , because they are genetically identical .
Genetic differences among related microbes also dictate many observed biochemical and virulence differences .
For example , some strains of the bacterium Escherichia coli are harmless members of the normal microbiota in the human gastrointestinal tract .
Other strains of the same species have genes that give them the ability to cause disease .
In bacteria , such genes are not inherited via sexual reproduction , as in humans .
Often , they are transferred via plasmids , small circular pieces of double-stranded DNA that can be exchanged between prokaryotes .
In fact , much of the research was dismissed until the mid-20th century .
Offspring appear to be a “ blend ” of their parents ’ traits when we look at characteristics that exhibit continuous variation .
The blending theory of inheritance asserted that the original parental traits were lost or absorbed by the blending in the offspring , but we now know that this is not the case .
Two separate lines of research , begun in the mid to late 1800s , ultimately led to the discovery and characterization of DNA and the foundations of genetics , the science of heredity .
These lines of research began to converge in the 1920s , and research using microbial systems ultimately resulted in significant contributions to elucidating the molecular basis of genetics .
Modern understanding of DNA has evolved from the discovery of nucleic acid to the development of the doublehelix model .
In the 1860s , Friedrich Miescher ( 1844–1895 ) , a physician by profession , was the first person to isolate phosphorus-rich chemicals from leukocytes ( white blood cells ) from the pus on used bandages from a local surgical clinic .
He named these chemicals ( which would eventually be known as RNA and DNA ) “ nuclein ” because they were isolated from the nuclei of the cells .
His student Richard Altmann ( 1852–1900 ) subsequently termed it “ nucleic acid ” 20 years later when he discovered the acidic nature of nuclein .
In the last two decades of the 19th century , German biochemist Albrecht Kossel ( 1853–1927 ) isolated and characterized the five different nucleotide bases composing nucleic acid .
These are adenine , guanine , cytosine , thymine ( in DNA ) , and uracil ( in RNA ) .
Kossell received the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1910 for his work on nucleic acids and for his considerable work on proteins , including the discovery of histidine .
Despite the discovery of DNA in the late 1800s , scientists did not make the association with heredity for many more decades .
To make this connection , scientists , including a number of microbiologists , performed many experiments on plants , animals , and bacteria .
While Miescher was isolating and discovering DNA in the 1860s , Austrian monk and botanist Johann Gregor Mendel ( 1822–1884 ) was experimenting with garden peas , demonstrating and documenting basic patterns of inheritance , now known as Mendel ’ s laws .
In 1856 , Mendel began his decade-long research into inheritance patterns .
He used the diploid garden pea , Pisum sativum , as his primary model system because it naturally self-fertilizes and is highly inbred , producing “ truebreeding ” pea plant lines—plants that always produce offspring that look like the parent .
By experimenting with true-breeding pea plants , Mendel avoided the appearance of unexpected traits in offspring that might occur if he used plants that were not true-breeding .
In 1865 , Mendel presented the results of his experiments with nearly 30,000 pea plants to the local natural history society .
He demonstrated that traits are transmitted faithfully from parents to offspring independently of other traits .
In 1866 , he published his work , “ Experiments in Plant Hybridization , ” in the Proceedings of the Natural History Society of Bru nn .
Mendel ’ s work went virtually unnoticed by the scientific community , which believed , incorrectly , in the theory of blending of traits in continuous variation .
He was not recognized for his extraordinary scientific contributions during his lifetime .
In fact , it was not until 1900 that his work was rediscovered , reproduced , and revitalized by scientists on the brink of discovering the chromosomal basis of heredity .
Mendel carried out his experiments long before chromosomes were visualized under a microscope .
However , with the improvement of microscopic techniques during the late 1800s , cell biologists could stain and visualize subcellular structures with dyes and observe their actions during meiosis .
They were able to observe chromosomes replicating , condensing from an amorphous nuclear mass into distinct X-shaped bodies and migrating to separate cellular poles .
The speculation that chromosomes might be the key to understanding heredity led several scientists to examine Mendel ’ s publications and re-evaluate his model in terms of the behavior of chromosomes during mitosis and meiosis .
In 1902 , Theodor Boveri ( 1862–1915 ) observed that in sea urchins , nuclear components ( chromosomes ) determined proper embryonic development .
That same year , Walter Sutton ( 1877–1916 ) observed the separation of chromosomes into daughter cells during meiosis .
Together , these observations led to the development of the Chromosomal Theory of Inheritance , which identified chromosomes as the genetic material responsible for Mendelian inheritance .
Despite compelling correlations between the behavior of chromosomes during meiosis and Mendel ’ s observations , the Chromosomal Theory of Inheritance was proposed long before there was any direct evidence that traits were carried on chromosomes .
Thomas Hunt Morgan ( 1866–1945 ) and his colleagues spent several years carrying out crosses with the fruit fly , Drosophila melanogaster .
They performed meticulous microscopic observations of fly chromosomes and correlated these observations with resulting fly characteristics .
Their work provided the first experimental evidence to support the Chromosomal Theory of Inheritance in the early 1900s .
In 1915 , Morgan and his “ Fly Room ” colleagues published The Mechanism of Mendelian Heredity , which identified chromosomes as the cellular structures responsible for heredity .
For his many significant contributions to genetics , Morgan received the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1933 .
In the late 1920s , Barbara McClintock ( 1902–1992 ) developed chromosomal staining techniques to visualize and differentiate between the different chromosomes of maize ( corn ) .
In the 1940s and 1950s , she identified a breakage event on chromosome 9 , which she named the dissociation locus ( Ds ) .
Ds could change position within the chromosome .
She also identified an activator locus ( Ac ) .
Ds chromosome breakage could be activated by an Ac element ( transposase enzyme ) .
At first , McClintock ’ s finding of these jumping genes , which we now call transposons , was not accepted by the scientific community .
It wasn ’ t until the 1960s and later that transposons were discovered in bacteriophages , bacteria , and Drosophila .
Today , we know that transposons are mobile segments of DNA that can move within the genome of an organism .
They can regulate gene expression , protein expression , and virulence ( ability to cause disease ) .
Microbiologists have also played a crucial part in our understanding of genetics .
Experimental organisms such as Mendel ’ s garden peas , Morgan ’ s fruit flies , and McClintock ’ s corn had already been used successfully to pave the way for an understanding of genetics .
In addition , because of their structural simplicity , microbes and viruses are more readily manipulated genetically .
This biochemical continuity makes microbes excellent models to use for genetic studies .
In a clever set of experiments in the 1930s and 1940s , German scientist Joachim Hämmerling ( 1901–1980 ) , using the single-celled alga Acetabularia as a microbial model , established that the genetic information in a eukaryotic cell is housed within the nucleus .
are unusually large algal cells that grow asymmetrically , forming a “ foot ” containing the nucleus , which is used for substrate attachment ; a stalk ; and an umbrella-like cap—structures that can all be easily seen with the naked eye .
In an early set of experiments , Hämmerling removed either the cap or the foot of the cells and observed whether new caps or feet were regenerated .
He found that when the foot of these cells was removed , new feet did not grow ; however , when caps were removed from the cells , new caps were regenerated .
This suggested that the hereditary information was located in the nucleus-containing foot of each cell .
In another set of experiments , Hämmerling used two species of Acetabularia that have different cap morphologies , A. crenulata and A. mediterranea .
He cut the caps from both types of cells and then grafted the stalk from an A. crenulata onto an A. mediterranea foot , and vice versa .
Over time , he observed that the grafted cell with the A. crenulata foot and A. mediterranea stalk developed a cap with the A. crenulata morphology .
Conversely , the grafted cell with the A. mediterranea foot and A. crenulata stalk developed a cap with the A. mediterranea morphology .
He microscopically confirmed the presence of nuclei in the feet of these cells and attributed the development of these cap morphologies to the nucleus of each grafted cell .
Thus , he showed experimentally that the nucleus was the location of genetic material that dictated a cell ’ s properties .
Another microbial model , the red bread mold Neurospora crassa , was used by George Beadle and Edward Tatum to demonstrate the relationship between genes and the proteins they encode .
Beadle had worked with fruit flies in Morgan ’ s laboratory but found them too complex to perform certain types of experiments .
N. crassa , on the other hand , is a simpler organism and has the ability to grow on a minimal medium because it contains enzymatic pathways that allow it to use the medium to produce its own vitamins and amino acids .
Beadle and Tatum irradiated the mold with X-rays to induce changes to a sequence of nucleic acids , called mutations .
They mated the irradiated mold spores and attempted to grow them on both a complete medium and a minimal medium .
They looked for mutants that grew on a complete medium , supplemented with vitamins and amino acids , but did not grow on the minimal medium lacking these supplements .
Such molds theoretically contained mutations in the genes that encoded biosynthetic pathways .
Upon finding such mutants , they systematically tested each to determine which vitamin or amino acid it was unable to produce and published this work in 1941 .
Subsequent work by Beadle , Tatum , and colleagues showed that they could isolate different classes of mutants that required a particular supplement , like the amino acid arginine .
With some knowledge of the arginine biosynthesis pathway , they identified three classes of arginine mutants by supplementing the minimal medium with intermediates ( citrulline or ornithine ) in the pathway .
The three mutants differed in their abilities to grow in each of the media , which led the group of scientists to propose , in 1945 , that each type of mutant had a defect in a different gene in the arginine biosynthesis pathway .
This led to the so-called one gene–one enzyme hypothesis , which suggested that each gene encodes one enzyme .
Subsequent knowledge about the processes of transcription and translation led scientists to revise this to the “ one gene–one polypeptide ” hypothesis .
Although there are some genes that do not encode polypeptides ( but rather encode for transfer RNAs [ tRNAs ] or ribosomal RNAs [ rRNAs ] , which we will discuss later ) , the one gene–one enzyme hypothesis is true in many cases , especially in microbes .
Beadle and Tatum ’ s discovery of the link between genes and corresponding characteristics earned them the 1958 Nobel Prize in Physiology and Medicine and has since become the basis for modern molecular genetics .
By the beginning of the 20th century , a great deal of work had already been done on characterizing DNA and establishing the foundations of genetics , including attributing heredity to chromosomes found within the nucleus .
Despite all of this research , it was not until well into the 20th century that these lines of research converged and scientists began to consider that DNA could be the genetic material that offspring inherited from their parents .
DNA , containing only four different nucleotides , was thought to be structurally too simple to encode such complex genetic information .
Instead , protein was thought to have the complexity required to serve as cellular genetic information because it is composed of 20 different amino acids that could be combined in a huge variety of combinations .
Microbiologists played a pivotal role in the research that determined that DNA is the molecule responsible for heredity .
British bacteriologist Frederick Griffith ( 1879–1941 ) was perhaps the first person to show that hereditary information could be transferred from one cell to another “ horizontally ” ( between members of the same generation ) , rather than “ vertically ” ( from parent to offspring ) .
In 1928 , he reported the first demonstration of bacterial transformation , a process in which external DNA is taken up by a cell , thereby changing its characteristics .
He was working with two strains of Streptococcus pneumoniae , a bacterium that causes pneumonia : a rough ( R ) strain and a smooth ( S ) strain .
The R strain is nonpathogenic and lacks a capsule on its outer surface ; as a result , colonies from the R strain appear rough when grown on plates .
The S strain is pathogenic and has a capsule outside its cell wall , allowing it to escape phagocytosis by the host immune system .
The capsules cause colonies from the S strain to appear smooth when grown on plates .
In a series of experiments , Griffith analyzed the effects of live R , live S , and heat-killed S strains of S. pneumoniae on live mice .
When mice were injected with the live S strain , the mice died .
When he injected the mice with the live R strain or the heat-killed S strain , the mice survived .
But when he injected the mice with a mixture of live R strain and heat-killed S strain , the mice died .
Upon isolating the live bacteria from the dead mouse , he only recovered the S strain of bacteria .
When he then injected this isolated S strain into fresh mice , the mice died .
Griffith concluded that something had passed from the heat-killed S strain into the live R strain and “ transformed ” it into the pathogenic S strain ; he called this the “ transforming principle. ” These experiments are now famously known as Griffith ’ s transformation experiments .
In 1944 , Oswald Avery , Colin MacLeod , and Maclyn McCarty were interested in exploring Griffith ’ s transforming principle further .
They isolated the S strain from infected dead mice , heat-killed it , and inactivated various components of the S extract , conducting a systematic elimination study .
They used enzymes that specifically degraded proteins , RNA , and DNA and mixed the S extract with each of these individual enzymes .
Then , they tested each extract/enzyme combination ’ s resulting ability to transform the R strain , as observed by the diffuse growth of the S strain in culture media and confirmed visually by growth on plates .
They found that when DNA was degraded , the resulting mixture was no longer able to transform the R strain bacteria , whereas no other enzymatic treatment was able to prevent transformation .
This led them to conclude that DNA was the transforming principle .
Despite their results , many scientists did not accept their conclusion , instead believing that there were protein contaminants within their extracts .
Alfred Hershey and Martha Chase performed their own experiments in 1952 and were able to provide confirmatory evidence that DNA , not protein , was the genetic material .
Hershey and Chase were studying a bacteriophage , a virus that infects bacteria .
Viruses typically have a simple structure : a protein coat , called the capsid , and a nucleic acid core that contains the genetic material , either DNA or RNA ( see ) .
The particular bacteriophage they were studying was the T2 bacteriophage , which infects E. coli cells .
As we now know today , T2 attaches to the surface of the bacterial cell and then it injects its nucleic acids inside the cell .
The phage DNA makes multiple copies of itself using the host machinery , and eventually the host cell bursts , releasing a large number of bacteriophages .
Hershey and Chase labeled the protein coat in one batch of phage using radioactive sulfur , S , because sulfur is found in the amino acids methionine and cysteine but not in nucleic acids .
They labeled the DNA in another batch using radioactive phosphorus , P , because phosphorus is found in DNA and RNA but not typically in protein .
Each batch of phage was allowed to infect the cells separately .
After infection , Hershey and Chase put each phage bacterial suspension in a blender , which detached the phage coats from the host cell , and spun down the resulting suspension in a centrifuge .
The heavier bacterial cells settled down and formed a pellet , whereas the lighter phage particles stayed in the supernatant .
In the tube with the protein labeled , the radioactivity remained only in the supernatant .
In the tube with the DNA labeled , the radioactivity was detected only in the bacterial cells .
Hershey and Chase concluded that it was the phage DNA that was injected into the cell that carried the information to produce more phage particles , thus proving that DNA , not proteins , was the source of the genetic material .
As a result of their work , the scientific community more broadly accepted DNA as the molecule responsible for heredity .
By the time Hershey and Chase published their experiment in the early 1950s , microbiologists and other scientists had been researching heredity for over 80 years .
Building on one another ’ s research during that time culminated in the general agreement that DNA was the genetic material responsible for heredity .
This knowledge set the stage for the age of molecular biology to come and the significant advancements in biotechnology and systems biology that we are experiencing today .
Identify the base pairs used in the synthesis of deoxyribonucleotides Describe the biochemical structure of deoxyribonucleotides Explain why the double helix of DNA is described as antiparallel In , we discussed three classes of macromolecules : proteins , lipids , and carbohydrates .
In this chapter , we will discuss a fourth class of macromolecules : nucleic acids .
Like other macromolecules , nucleic acid s are composed of monomers , called nucleotide s , which are polymerized to form large strands .
Each nucleic acid strand contains certain nucleotides that appear in a certain order within the strand , called its base sequence .
The base sequence of deoxyribonucleic acid ( DNA ) is responsible for carrying and retaining the hereditary information in a cell .
In , we will discuss in detail the ways in which DNA uses its own base sequence to direct its own synthesis , as well as the synthesis of RNA and proteins , which , in turn , gives rise to products with diverse structure and function .
In this section , we will discuss the basic structure and function of DNA .
called The building blocks of nucleic deoxyribonucleotides .
The three components of a deoxyribonucleotide are a five-carbon sugar called deoxyribose , a phosphate group , and a nitrogenous base , a nitrogen-containing ring structure that is responsible for complementary base pairing between nucleic acid strands .
The carbon atoms of the five-carbon deoxyribose are numbered 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , and 5 ( 1 is read as “ one prime ” ) .
A nucleoside comprises the five-carbon sugar and are nucleotides .
Nucleotides compose DNA are acids that nitrogenous base .
The deoxyribonucleotide is named according to the nitrogenous bases .
The nitrogenous bases adenine ( A ) and guanine ( G ) are the purines ; they have a double-ring structure with a six-carbon ring fused to a five-carbon ring .
The pyrimidines , cytosine ( C ) and thymine ( T ) , are smaller nitrogenous bases that have only a sixcarbon ring structure .
Phosphodiester bonding between nucleotides forms the sugar-phosphate backbone , the alternating sugar-phosphate structure composing the framework of a nucleic acid strand .
During the polymerization process , deoxynucleotide triphosphates ( dNTP ) are used .
To construct the sugar-phosphate backbone , the two terminal phosphates are released from the dNTP as a pyrophosphate .
The resulting strand of nucleic acid has a free phosphate group at the 5 carbon end and a free hydroxyl group at the 3 carbon end .
The two unused phosphate groups from the nucleotide triphosphate are released as pyrophosphate during phosphodiester bond formation .
Pyrophosphate is subsequently hydrolyzed , releasing the energy used to drive nucleotide polymerization .
By the early 1950s , considerable evidence had accumulated indicating that DNA was the genetic material of cells , and now the race was on to discover its three-dimensional structure .
Other scientists were also actively exploring this field during the mid-20th century .
In 1952 , American scientist Linus Pauling ( 1901–1994 ) was the world ’ s leading structural chemist and odds-on favorite to solve the structure of DNA .
Pauling had earlier discovered the structure of protein α helices , using X-ray diffraction , and , based upon X-ray diffraction images of DNA made in his laboratory , he proposed a triple-stranded model of DNA .
At the same time , British researchers Rosalind Franklin ( 1920–1958 ) and her graduate student R.G .
Gosling were also using X-ray diffraction to understand the structure of DNA .
It was Franklin ’ s scientific expertise that resulted in the production of more well-defined X-ray diffraction images of DNA that would clearly show the overall doublehelix structure of DNA .
James Watson ( 1928– ) , an American scientist , and Francis Crick ( 1916–2004 ) , a British scientist , were working together in the 1950s to discover DNA ’ s structure .
They used Chargaff ’ s rules and Franklin and Wilkins ’ X-ray diffraction images of DNA fibers to piece together the purine-pyrimidine pairing of the double helical DNA molecule .
In April 1953 , Watson and Crick published their model of the DNA double helix in Nature .
The same issue additionally included papers by Wilkins and colleagues , as well as by Franklin and Gosling , each describing different aspects of the molecular structure of DNA .
In 1962 , James Watson , Francis Crick , and Maurice Wilkins were awarded the Nobel Prize in Physiology and Medicine .
Unfortunately , by then Franklin had died , and Nobel prizes at the time were not awarded posthumously .
Work continued , however , on learning about the structure of DNA .
In 1973 , Alexander Rich ( 1924–2015 ) and colleagues were able to analyze DNA crystals to confirm and further elucidate DNA structure .
Watson and Crick proposed that DNA is made up of two strands that are twisted around each other to form a righthanded helix .
The two DNA strands are antiparallel , such that the 3 end of one strand faces the 5 end of the other .
The 3 end of each strand has a free hydroxyl group , while the 5 end of each strand has a free phosphate group .
The sugar and phosphate of the polymerized nucleotides form the backbone of the structure , whereas the nitrogenous bases are stacked inside .
These nitrogenous bases on the interior of the molecule interact with each other , base pairing .
Analysis of the diffraction patterns of DNA has determined that there are approximately 10 bases per turn in DNA .
The asymmetrical spacing of the sugar-phosphate backbones generates major grooves ( where the backbone is far apart ) and minor grooves ( where the backbone is close together ) .
These grooves are locations where proteins can bind to DNA .
The binding of these proteins can alter the structure of DNA , regulate replication , or regulate transcription of DNA into RNA .
Base pairing takes place between a purine and pyrimidine .
In DNA , adenine ( A ) and thymine ( T ) are complementary base pairs , and cytosine ( C ) and guanine ( G ) are also complementary base pairs , explaining Chargaff ’ s rules .
The base pairs are stabilized by hydrogen bonds ; adenine and thymine form two hydrogen bonds between them , whereas cytosine and guanine form three hydrogen bonds between them .
In the laboratory , exposing the two DNA strands of the double helix to high temperatures or to certain chemicals can break the hydrogen bonds between complementary bases , thus separating the strands into two separate single strands of DNA ( single-stranded DNA [ ssDNA ] ) .
This process is called DNA denaturation and is analogous to protein denaturation , as described in .
The ssDNA strands can also be put back together as double-stranded DNA ( dsDNA ) , through reannealing or renaturing by cooling or removing the chemical denaturants , allowing these hydrogen bonds to reform .
The ability to artificially manipulate DNA in this way is the basis for several important techniques in biotechnology .
Because of the additional hydrogen bonding between the C = G base pair , DNA with a high GC content is more difficult to denature than DNA with a lower GC content .
DNA stores the information needed to build and control the cell .
The transmission of this information from mother to daughter cells is called vertical gene transfer and it occurs through the process of DNA replication .
DNA is replicated when a cell makes a duplicate copy of its DNA , then the cell divides , resulting in the correct distribution of one DNA copy to each resulting cell .
DNA can also be enzymatically degraded and used as a source of nucleosides and nucleotides for the cell .
Unlike other macromolecules , DNA does not serve a structural role in cells .
However , whereas DNA molecules are typically long and double stranded , RNA molecules are much shorter and are typically single stranded .
RNA molecules perform a variety of roles in the cell but are mainly involved in the process of protein synthesis ( translation ) and its regulation .
RNA is typically single stranded and is made of ribonucleotides that are linked by phosphodiester bonds .
A ribonucleotide in the RNA chain contains ribose ( the pentose sugar ) , one of the four nitrogenous bases ( A , U , G , and C ) , and a phosphate group .
The subtle structural difference between the sugars gives DNA added stability , making DNA more suitable for storage of genetic information , whereas the relative instability of RNA makes it more suitable for its more short-term functions .
The RNA-specific pyrimidine uracil forms a complementary base pair with adenine and is used instead of the thymine used in DNA .
Even though RNA is single stranded , most types of RNA molecules show extensive intramolecular base pairing between complementary sequences within the RNA strand , creating a predictable three-dimensional structure essential for their function ( and ) .
Cells access the information stored in DNA by creating RNA to direct the synthesis of proteins through the process of translation .
Proteins within a cell have many functions , including building cellular structures and serving as enzyme catalysts for cellular chemical reactions that give cells their specific characteristics .
The three main types of RNA directly involved in protein synthesis are messenger RNA ( mRNA ) , ribosomal RNA ( rRNA ) , and transfer RNA ( tRNA ) .
In 1961 , French scientists François Jacob and Jacques Monod hypothesized the existence of an intermediary between DNA and its protein products , which they called messenger RNA .
Evidence supporting their hypothesis was gathered soon afterwards showing that information from DNA is transmitted to the ribosome for protein synthesis using mRNA .
If DNA serves as the complete library of cellular information , mRNA serves as a photocopy of specific information needed at a particular point in time that serves as the instructions to make a protein .
The mRNA carries the message from the DNA , which controls all of the cellular activities in a cell .
If a cell requires a certain protein to be synthesized , the gene for this product is “ turned on ” and the mRNA is synthesized through the process of transcription ( see ) .
The mRNA then interacts with ribosomes and other cellular machinery to direct the synthesis of the protein it encodes during the process of translation ( see ) .
mRNA is relatively unstable and short-lived in the cell , especially in prokaryotic cells , ensuring that proteins are only made when needed .
rRNA and tRNA are stable types of RNA .
In prokaryotes and eukaryotes , tRNA and rRNA are encoded in the DNA , then copied into long RNA molecules that are cut to release smaller fragments containing the individual mature RNA species .
In eukaryotes , synthesis , cutting , and assembly of rRNA into ribosomes takes place in the nucleolus region of the nucleus , but these activities occur in the cytoplasm of prokaryotes .
Neither of these types of RNA carries instructions to direct the synthesis of a polypeptide , but they play other important roles in protein synthesis .
Ribosomes are composed of rRNA and protein .
As its name suggests , rRNA is a major constituent of ribosomes , composing up to about 60 % of the ribosome by mass and providing the location where the mRNA binds .
The rRNA ensures the proper alignment of the mRNA , tRNA , and the ribosomes ; the rRNA of the ribosome also has an enzymatic activity ( peptidyl transferase ) and catalyzes the formation of the peptide bonds between two aligned amino acids during protein synthesis .
Although rRNA had long been thought to serve primarily a structural role , its catalytic role within the ribosome was proven in 2000 .
Scientists in the laboratories of Thomas Steitz ( 1940– ) and Peter Moore ( 1939– ) at Yale University were able to crystallize the ribosome structure from Haloarcula marismortui , a halophilic archaeon isolated from the Dead Sea .
Because of the importance of this work , Steitz shared the 2009 Nobel Prize in Chemistry with other scientists who made significant contributions to the understanding of ribosome structure .
Transfer RNA is the third main type of RNA and one of the smallest , usually only 70–90 nucleotides long .
It carries the correct amino acid to the site of protein synthesis in the ribosome .
It is the base pairing between the tRNA and mRNA that allows for the correct amino acid to be inserted in the polypeptide chain being synthesized .
Any mutations in the tRNA or rRNA can result in global problems for the cell because both are necessary for proper protein synthesis .
Although RNA does not serve as the hereditary information in most cells , RNA does hold this function for many viruses that do not contain DNA .
Thus , RNA clearly does have the additional capacity to serve as genetic information .
Although RNA is typically single stranded within cells , there is significant diversity in viruses .
Rhinoviruses , which cause the common cold ; influenza viruses ; and the Ebola virus are single-stranded RNA viruses .
Rotaviruses , which cause severe gastroenteritis in children and other immunocompromised individuals , are examples of double-stranded RNA viruses .
Because double-stranded RNA is uncommon in eukaryotic cells , its presence serves as an indicator of viral infection .
The implications for a virus having an RNA genome instead of a DNA genome are discussed in more detail in .
Define gene and genotype and differentiate genotype from phenotype Describe chromosome structure and packaging Compare prokaryotic and eukaryotic chromosomes Explain why extrachromosomal DNA is important in a cell Thus far , we have discussed the structure and function of individual pieces of DNA and RNA .
In this section , we will discuss how all of an organism ’ s genetic material—collectively referred to as its genome —is organized inside of the cell .
Since an organism ’ s genetics to a large extent dictate its characteristics , it should not be surprising that organisms differ in the arrangement of their DNA and RNA .
All cellular activities are encoded within a cell ’ s DNA .
The sequence of bases within a DNA molecule represents the genetic information of the cell .
Segments of DNA molecules are called gene s , and individual genes contain the instructional code necessary for synthesizing various proteins , enzymes , or stable RNA molecules .
The full collection of genes that a cell contains within its genome is called its genotype .
However , a cell does not express all of its genes simultaneously .
Instead , it turns on ( expresses ) or turns off certain genes when necessary .
The set of genes being expressed at any given point in time determines the cell ’ s activities and its observable characteristics , referred to as its phenotype .
Genes that are always expressed are known as constitutive genes ; some constitutive genes are known as housekeeping genes because they are necessary for the basic functions of the cell .
While the genotype of a cell remains constant , the phenotype may change in response to environmental signals ( e.g. , changes in temperature or nutrient availability ) that affect which nonconstitutive genes are expressed .
Thus , while the genotype of S. mutans is constant , its phenotype changes depending on the presence and absence of sugar in its environment .
Temperature can also regulate gene expression .
For example , the gram-negative bacterium Serratia marcescens , a pathogen frequently associated with hospital-acquired infections , produces a red pigment at 28 °C but not at 37 °C , the normal internal temperature of the human body .
The vast majority of an organism ’ s genome is organized into the cell ’ s chromosomes , which are discrete DNA structures within cells that control cellular activity .
Recall that while eukaryotic chromosomes are housed in the membrane-bound nucleus , most prokaryotes contain a single , circular chromosome that is found in an area of the cytoplasm called the nucleoid ( see ) .
A chromosome may contain several thousand genes .
Chromosome structure differs somewhat between eukaryotic and prokaryotic cells .
Eukaryotic chromosomes are typically linear , and eukaryotic cells contain multiple distinct chromosomes .
Many eukaryotic cells contain two copies of each chromosome and , therefore , are diploid .
The length of a chromosome greatly exceeds the length of the cell , so a chromosome needs to be packaged into a very small space to fit within the cell .
For example , the combined length of all of the 3 billion base pairs of DNA of the human genome would measure approximately 2 meters if completely stretched out , and some eukaryotic genomes are many times larger than the human genome .
DNA supercoiling refers to the process by which DNA is twisted to fit inside the cell .
Supercoiling may result in DNA that is either underwound ( less than one turn of the helix per 10 base pairs ) or overwound ( more than one turn per 10 base pairs ) from its normal relaxed state .
Proteins known to be involved in supercoiling include topoisomerases ; these enzymes help maintain the structure of supercoiled chromosomes , preventing overwinding of DNA during certain cellular processes like DNA replication .
During DNA packaging , DNA-binding proteins called histones perform various levels of DNA wrapping and attachment to scaffolding proteins .
The combination of DNA with these attached proteins is referred to as chromatin .
In eukaryotes , the packaging of DNA by histones may be influenced by environmental factors that affect the presence of methyl groups on certain cytosine nucleotides of DNA .
The influence of environmental factors on DNA packaging is called epigenetics .
Epigenetics is another mechanism for regulating gene expression without altering the sequence of nucleotides .
Epigenetic changes can be maintained through multiple rounds of cell division and , therefore , can be heritable .
Chromosomes in bacteria and archaea are usually circular , and a prokaryotic cell typically contains only a single chromosome within the nucleoid .
Because the chromosome contains only one copy of each gene , prokaryotes are haploid .
As in eukaryotic cells , DNA supercoiling is necessary for the genome to fit within the prokaryotic cell .
The DNA in the bacterial chromosome is arranged in several supercoiled domains .
As with eukaryotes , topoisomerases are involved in supercoiling DNA .
DNA gyrase is a type of topoisomerase , found in bacteria and some archaea , that helps prevent the overwinding of DNA .
( Some antibiotics kill bacteria by targeting DNA gyrase . )
In addition , histonelike proteins bind DNA and aid in DNA packaging .
Other proteins bind to the origin of replication , the location in the chromosome where DNA replication initiates .
Because different regions of DNA are packaged differently , some regions of chromosomal DNA are more accessible to enzymes and thus may be used more readily as templates for gene expression .
Interestingly , several bacteria , including Helicobacter pylori and Shigella flexneri , have been shown to induce epigenetic changes in their hosts upon infection , leading to chromatin remodeling that may cause long-term effects on host immunity .
In addition to genes , a genome also contains many regions of noncoding DNA that do not encode proteins or stable RNA products .
Noncoding DNA is commonly found in areas prior to the start of coding sequences of genes as well as in intergenic regions ( i.e. , DNA sequences located between genes ) .
Prokaryotes appear to use their genomes very efficiently , with only an average of 12 % of the genome being taken up by noncoding sequences .
In contrast , noncoding DNA can represent about 98 % of the genome in eukaryotes , as seen in humans , but the percentage of noncoding DNA varies between species .
Although scientists may not fully understand the roles of all noncoding regions of DNA , it is generally believed that they do have purposes within the cell .
Although most DNA is contained within a cell ’ s chromosomes , many cells have additional molecules of DNA outside the chromosomes , called extrachromosomal DNA , that are also part of its genome .
The genomes of eukaryotic cells would also include the chromosomes from any organelles such as mitochondria and/or chloroplasts that these cells maintain .
The maintenance of circular chromosomes in these organelles is a vestige of their prokaryotic origins and supports the endosymbiotic theory ( see ) .
In some cases , genomes of certain DNA viruses can also be maintained independently in host cells during latent viral infection .
In these cases , these viruses are another form of extrachromosomal DNA .
For example , the human papillomavirus ( HPV ) may be maintained in infected cells in this way .
Besides chromosomes , some prokaryotes also have smaller loops of DNA called plasmids that may contain one or a few genes not essential for normal growth .
Bacteria can exchange these plasmids with other bacteria in a process known as horizontal gene transfer HGT ) .
The exchange of genetic material on plasmids sometimes provides microbes with new genes beneficial for growth and survival under special conditions .
In some cases , genes obtained from plasmids may have clinical implications , encoding virulence factors that give a microbe the ability to cause disease or make a microbe resistant to certain antibiotics .
Plasmids are also used heavily in genetic engineering and biotechnology as a way to move genes from one cell to another .
The role of plasmids in horizontal gene transfer and biotechnology will be discussed further in and .
Viral genomes exhibit significant diversity in structure .
Some viruses have genomes that consist of DNA as their genetic material .
This DNA may be single stranded , as exemplified by human parvoviruses , or double stranded , as seen in the herpesviruses and poxviruses .
Additionally , although all cellular life uses DNA as its genetic material , some viral genomes are made of either single-stranded or double-stranded RNA molecules , as we have discussed .
Viral genomes are typically smaller than most bacterial genomes , encoding only a few genes , because they rely on their hosts to carry out many of the functions required for their replication .
The diversity of viral genome structures and their implications for viral replication life cycles are discussed in more detail in .
Since Monod ’ s famous statement , we have learned a great deal about the mechanisms of gene regulation , expression , and replication in living cells .
All cells use DNA for information storage , share the same genetic code , and use similar mechanisms to replicate and express it .
Although many aspects of genetics are universally shared , variations do exist among contemporary genetic systems .
We now know that within the shared overall theme of the genetic mechanism , there are significant differences among the three domains of life : Eukarya , Archaea , and Bacteria .
Additionally , viruses , cellular parasites but not themselves living cells , show dramatic variation in their genetic material and the replication and gene expression processes .
Some of these differences have allowed us to engineer clinical tools such as antibiotics and antiviral drugs that specifically inhibit the reproduction of pathogens yet are harmless to their hosts .
Explain the two functions of the genome Explain the meaning of the central dogma of molecular biology Differentiate between genotype and phenotype and explain how environmental factors influence phenotype DNA serves two essential functions that deal with cellular information .
First , DNA is the genetic material responsible for inheritance and is passed from parent to offspring for all life on earth .
To preserve the integrity of this genetic information , DNA must be replicated with great accuracy , with minimal errors that introduce changes to the DNA sequence .
A genome contains the full complement of DNA within a cell and is organized into smaller , discrete units called genes that are arranged on chromosomes and plasmids .
The second function of DNA is to direct and regulate the construction of the proteins necessary to a cell for growth and reproduction in a particular cellular environment .
A gene is composed of DNA that is “ read ” or transcribed to produce an RNA molecule during the process of transcription .
One major type of RNA molecule , called messenger RNA ( mRNA ) , provides the information for the ribosome to catalyze protein synthesis in a process called translation .
The processes of transcription and translation are collectively referred to as gene expression .
Gene expression is the synthesis of a specific protein with a sequence of amino acids that is encoded in the gene .
The flow of genetic information from DNA to RNA to protein is described by the central dogma .
This central dogma of molecular biology further elucidates the mechanism behind Beadle and Tatum ’ s “ one gene-one enzyme ” hypothesis ( see ) .
Each of the processes of replication , transcription , and translation includes the stages of 1 ) initiation , 2 ) elongation ( polymerization ) , and 3 ) termination .
These stages will be described in more detail in this chapter .
A cell ’ s genotype is the full collection of genes it contains , whereas its phenotype is the set of observable characteristics that result from those genes .
The phenotype is the product of the array of proteins being produced by the cell at a given time , which is influenced by the cell ’ s genotype as well as interactions with the cell ’ s environment .
Genes code for proteins that have functions in the cell .
Production of a specific protein encoded by an individual gene often results in a distinct phenotype for the cell compared with the phenotype without that protein .
For this reason , it is also common to refer to the genotype of an individual gene and its phenotype .
Although a cell ’ s genotype remains constant , not all genes are used to direct the production of their proteins simultaneously .
Cells carefully regulate expression of their genes , only using genes to make specific proteins when those proteins are needed .
Separating the strands of the double helix would provide two templates for the synthesis of new complementary strands , but exactly how new DNA molecules were constructed was still unclear .
There were two competing models also suggested : conservative and dispersive , which are shown in .
Matthew Meselson ( 1930– ) and Franklin Stahl ( 1929– ) devised an experiment in 1958 to test which of these models correctly represents DNA replication .
They grew E. coli for several generations in a medium containing a “ heavy ” isotope of nitrogen ( N ) that was incorporated into nitrogenous bases and , eventually , into the DNA .
This labeled the parental DNA .
The E. coli culture was then shifted into a medium containing N and allowed to grow for one generation .
The cells were harvested and the DNA was isolated .
The DNA was separated by ultracentrifugation , during which the DNA formed bands according to its density .
Some cells were allowed to grow for one more generation in N and spun again .
The DNA harvested from cells grown for two generations in N formed two bands : one DNA band was at the intermediate position between N and N , and the other corresponded to the band of N DNA .
These results could only be explained if DNA replicates in a semiconservative manner .
Therefore , the other two models were ruled out .
As a result of this experiment , we now know that during DNA replication , each of the two strands that make up the double helix serves as a template from which new strands are copied .
The new strand will be complementary to the parental or “ old ” strand .
The resulting DNA molecules have the same sequence and are divided equally into the two daughter cells .
DNA replication has been well studied in bacteria primarily because of the small size of the genome and the mutants that are available .
E. coli has 4.6 million base pairs ( Mbp ) in a single circular chromosome and all of it is replicated in approximately 42 minutes , starting from a single origin of replication and proceeding around the circle bidirectionally ( i.e. , in both directions ) .
This means that approximately 1000 nucleotides are added per second .
The process is quite rapid and occurs with few errors .
DNA replication uses a large number of proteins and enzymes .
One of the key players is the enzyme DNA polymerase , also known as DNA pol .
In bacteria , three main types of DNA polymerases are known : DNA pol I , DNA pol II , and DNA pol III .
It is now known that DNA pol III is the enzyme required for DNA synthesis ; DNA pol I and DNA pol II are primarily required for repair .
DNA pol III adds deoxyribonucleotides each complementary to a nucleotide on the template strand , one by one to the 3 ’ -OH group of the growing DNA chain .
The addition of these nucleotides requires energy .
This energy is present in the bonds of three phosphate groups attached to each nucleotide ( a triphosphate nucleotide ) , similar to how energy is stored in the phosphate bonds of adenosine triphosphate ( ATP ) .
When the bond between the phosphates is broken and diphosphate is released , the energy released allows for the formation of a covalent phosphodiester bond by dehydration synthesis between the incoming nucleotide and the free 3 ’ -OH group on the growing DNA strand .
The initiation of replication occurs at specific nucleotide sequence called the origin of replication , where various proteins bind to begin the replication process .
E. coli has a single origin of replication ( as do most prokaryotes ) , called oriC , on its one chromosome .
The origin of replication is approximately 245 base pairs long and is rich in adeninethymine ( AT ) sequences .
Some of the proteins that bind to the origin of replication are important in making single-stranded regions of DNA accessible for replication .
Chromosomal DNA is typically wrapped around histones ( in eukaryotes and archaea ) or histone-like proteins ( in bacteria ) , and is supercoiled , or extensively wrapped and twisted on itself .
This packaging makes the information in the DNA molecule inaccessible .
However , enzymes called topoisomerases change the shape and supercoiling of the chromosome .
For bacterial DNA replication to begin , the supercoiled chromosome is relaxed by topoisomerase II , also called DNA gyrase .
An enzyme called helicase then separates the DNA strands by breaking the hydrogen bonds between the nitrogenous base pairs .
Recall that AT sequences have fewer hydrogen bonds and , hence , have weaker interactions than guanine-cytosine ( GC ) sequences .
These enzymes require ATP hydrolysis .
As the DNA opens up , Y-shaped structures called replication forks are formed .
Two replication forks are formed at the origin of replication , allowing for bidirectional replication and formation of a structure that looks like a bubble when viewed with a transmission electron microscope ; as a result , this structure is called a replication bubble .
The DNA near each replication fork is coated with single-stranded binding proteins to prevent the singlestranded DNA from rewinding into a double helix .
Once single-stranded DNA is accessible at the origin of replication , DNA replication can begin .
However , DNA pol III is able to add nucleotides only in the 5 ’ to 3 ’ direction ( a new DNA strand can be only extended in this direction ) .
This is because DNA polymerase requires a free 3 ’ -OH group to which it can add nucleotides by forming a covalent phosphodiester bond between the 3 ’ -OH end and the 5 ’ phosphate of the next nucleotide .
This also means that it can not add nucleotides if a free 3 ’ -OH group is not available , which is the case for a single strand of DNA .
The problem is solved with the help of an RNA sequence that provides the free 3 ’ -OH end .
Because this sequence allows the start of DNA synthesis , it is appropriately called the primer .
The primer is five to 10 nucleotides long and complementary to the parental or template DNA .
It is synthesized by RNA primase , which is an RNA polymerase .
Unlike DNA polymerases , RNA polymerases do not need a free 3 ’ -OH group to synthesize an RNA molecule .
Now that the primer provides the free 3 ’ -OH group , DNA polymerase III can now extend this RNA primer , adding DNA nucleotides one by one that are complementary to the template strand .
During elongation in DNA replication , the addition of nucleotides occurs at its maximal rate of about 1000 nucleotides per second .
DNA polymerase III can only extend in the 5 ’ to 3 ’ direction , which poses a problem at the replication fork .
The DNA double helix is antiparallel ; that is , one strand is oriented in the 5 ’ to 3 ’ direction and the other is oriented in the 3 ’ to 5 ’ direction ( see ) .
During replication , one strand , which is complementary to the 3 ’ to 5 ’ parental DNA strand , is synthesized continuously toward the replication fork because polymerase can add nucleotides in this direction .
This continuously synthesized strand is known as the leading strand .
It does so until it bumps into the previously synthesized strand and then it moves back again .
These steps produce small DNA sequence fragments known as Okazaki fragments , each separated by RNA primer .
Okazaki fragments are named after the Japanese research team and married couple Reiji and Tsuneko Okazaki , who first discovered them in 1966 .
The strand with the Okazaki fragments is known as the lagging strand , and its synthesis is said to be discontinuous .
The leading strand can be extended from one primer alone , whereas the lagging strand needs a new primer for each of the short Okazaki fragments .
The overall direction of the lagging strand will be 3 ’ to 5 ’ , and that of the leading strand 5 ’ to 3 ’ .
A protein called the sliding clamp holds the DNA polymerase in place as it continues to add nucleotides .
The sliding clamp is a ring-shaped protein that binds to the DNA and holds the polymerase in place .
Beyond its role in initiation , topoisomerase also prevents the overwinding of the DNA double helix ahead of the replication fork as the DNA is opening up ; it does so by causing temporary nicks in the DNA helix and then resealing it .
As synthesis proceeds , the RNA primers are replaced by DNA .
The primers are removed by the exonuclease activity of DNA polymerase I , and the gaps are filled in .
Once the complete chromosome has been replicated , termination of DNA replication must occur .
Although much is known about initiation of replication , less is known about the termination process .
Following replication , the resulting complete circular genomes of prokaryotes are concatenated , meaning that the circular DNA chromosomes are interlocked and must be separated from each other .
This is accomplished through the activity of bacterial topoisomerase IV , which introduces double-stranded breaks into DNA molecules , allowing them to separate from each other ; the enzyme then reseals the circular chromosomes .
The resolution of concatemers is an issue unique to prokaryotic DNA replication because of their circular chromosomes .
Because both bacterial DNA gyrase and topoisomerase IV are distinct from their eukaryotic counterparts , these enzymes serve as targets for a class of antimicrobial drugs called quinolones .
Eukaryotic genomes are much more complex and larger than prokaryotic genomes and are typically composed of multiple linear chromosomes .
The human genome , for example , has 3 billion base pairs per haploid set of chromosomes , and 6 billion base pairs are inserted during replication .
There are multiple origins of replication on each eukaryotic chromosome ; the human genome has 30,000 to 50,000 origins of replication .
The rate of replication is approximately 100 nucleotides per second—10 times slower than prokaryotic replication .
The essential steps of replication in eukaryotes are the same as in prokaryotes .
Before replication can start , the DNA has to be made available as a template .
Eukaryotic DNA is highly supercoiled and packaged , which is facilitated by many proteins , including histones ( see ) .
At the origin of replication , a prereplication complex composed of several proteins , including helicase , forms and recruits other enzymes involved in the initiation of replication , including topoisomerase to relax supercoiling , single-stranded binding protein , RNA primase , and DNA polymerase .
Following initiation of replication , in a process similar to that found in prokaryotes , elongation is facilitated by eukaryotic DNA polymerases .
The leading strand is continuously synthesized by the eukaryotic polymerase enzyme pol δ , while the lagging strand is synthesized by pol ε .
A sliding clamp protein holds the DNA polymerase in place so that it does not fall off the DNA .
The enzyme ribonuclease H ( RNase H ) , instead of a DNA polymerase as in bacteria , removes the RNA primer , which is then replaced with DNA nucleotides .
The gaps that remain are sealed by DNA ligase .
Because eukaryotic chromosomes are linear , one might expect that their replication would be more straightforward .
As in prokaryotes , the eukaryotic DNA polymerase can add nucleotides only in the 5 ’ to 3 ’ direction .
In the leading strand , synthesis continues until it reaches either the end of the chromosome or another replication fork progressing in the opposite direction .
On the lagging strand , DNA is synthesized in short stretches , each of which is initiated by a separate primer .
When the replication fork reaches the end of the linear chromosome , there is no place to make a primer for the DNA fragment to be copied at the end of the chromosome .
These ends thus remain unpaired and , over time , they may get progressively shorter as cells continue to divide .
The ends of the linear chromosomes are known as telomere s and consist of noncoding repetitive sequences .
The telomeres protect coding sequences from being lost as cells continue to divide .
In humans , a six base-pair sequence , TTAGGG , is repeated 100 to 1000 times to form the telomere .
The discovery of the enzyme telomerase clarified our understanding of how chromosome ends are maintained .
Telomerase contains a catalytic part and a built-in RNA template .
It attaches to the end of the chromosome , and complementary bases to the RNA template are added on the 3 ’ end of the DNA strand .
Once the 3 ’ end of the lagging strand template is sufficiently elongated , DNA polymerase can add the nucleotides complementary to the ends of the chromosomes .
In this way , the ends of the chromosomes are replicated .
In humans , telomerase is typically active in germ cells and adult stem cells ; it is not active in adult somatic cells and may be associated with the aging of these cells .
Eukaryotic microbes including fungi and protozoans also produce telomerase to maintain chromosomal integrity .
For her discovery of telomerase and its action , Elizabeth Blackburn ( 1948– ) received the Nobel Prize for Medicine or Physiology in 2009 .
To copy their nucleic acids , plasmids and viruses frequently use variations on the pattern of DNA replication described for prokaryote genomes .
For more information on the wide range of viral replication strategies , see .
Whereas many bacterial plasmids ( see ) replicate by a process similar to that used to copy the bacterial chromosome , other plasmids , several bacteriophages , and some viruses of eukaryotes use rolling circle replication .
The circular nature of plasmids and the circularization of some viral genomes on infection make this possible .
Rolling circle replication begins with the enzymatic nicking of one strand of the double-stranded circular molecule at the double-stranded origin ( dso ) site .
In bacteria , DNA polymerase III binds to the 3 ’ -OH group of the nicked strand and begins to unidirectionally replicate the DNA using the un-nicked strand as a template , displacing the nicked strand as it does so .
Completion of DNA replication at the site of the original nick results in full displacement of the nicked strand , which may then recircularize into a singlestranded DNA molecule .
RNA primase then synthesizes a primer to initiate DNA replication at the single-stranded origin ( sso ) site of the single-stranded DNA ( ssDNA ) molecule , resulting in a double-stranded DNA ( dsDNA ) molecule identical to the other circular DNA molecule .
Explain how RNA is synthesized using DNA as a template Distinguish between transcription in prokaryotes and eukaryotes During the process of transcription , the information encoded within the DNA sequence of one or more genes is transcribed into a strand of RNA , also called an RNA transcript .
The resulting single-stranded RNA molecule , composed of ribonucleotides containing the bases adenine ( A ) , cytosine ( C ) , guanine ( G ) , and uracil ( U ) , acts as a mobile molecular copy of the original DNA sequence .
Transcription in prokaryotes and in eukaryotes requires the DNA double helix to partially unwind in the region of RNA synthesis .
The unwound region is called a transcription bubble .
Transcription of a particular gene always proceeds from one of the two DNA strands that acts as a template , the so-called antisense strand .
The RNA product is complementary to the template strand of DNA and is almost identical to the nontemplate DNA strand , or the sense strand .
The only difference is that in RNA , all of the T nucleotides are replaced with U nucleotides ; during RNA synthesis , U is incorporated when there is an A in the complementary antisense strand .
Bacteria use the same RNA polymerase to transcribe all of their genes .
Like DNA polymerase , RNA polymerase adds nucleotides one by one to the 3 ’ -OH group of the growing nucleotide chain .
One critical difference in activity between DNA polymerase and RNA polymerase is the requirement for a 3 ’ -OH onto which to add nucleotides : DNA polymerase requires such a 3 ’ -OH group , thus necessitating a primer , whereas RNA polymerase does not .
During transcription , a ribonucleotide complementary to the DNA template strand is added to the growing RNA strand and a covalent phosphodiester bond is formed by dehydration synthesis between the new nucleotide and the last one added .
In E. coli , RNA polymerase comprises six polypeptide subunits , five of which compose the polymerase core enzyme responsible for adding RNA nucleotides to a growing strand .
The sixth subunit is known as sigma ( σ ) .
The σ factor enables RNA polymerase to bind to a specific promoter , thus allowing for the transcription of various genes .
There are various σ factors that allow for transcription of various genes .
The initiation of transcription begins at a promoter , a DNA sequence onto which the transcription machinery binds and initiates transcription .
The nucleotide pair in the DNA double helix that corresponds to the site from which the first 5 ’ RNA nucleotide is transcribed is the initiation site .
Nucleotides preceding the initiation site are designated “ upstream , ” whereas nucleotides following the initiation site are called “ downstream ” nucleotides .
In most cases , promoters are located just upstream of the genes they regulate .
Although promoter sequences vary among bacterial genomes , a few elements are conserved .
At the –10 and –35 positions within the DNA prior to the initiation site ( designated +1 ) , there are two promoter consensus sequences , or regions that are similar across all promoters and across various bacterial species .
The –10 consensus sequence , called the TATA box , is TATAAT .
The –35 sequence is recognized and bound by σ .
The elongation in transcription phase begins when the σ subunit dissociates from the polymerase , allowing the core enzyme to synthesize RNA complementary to the DNA template in a 5 ’ to 3 ’ direction at a rate of approximately 40 nucleotides per second .
As elongation proceeds , the DNA is continuously unwound ahead of the core enzyme and rewound behind it .
Once a gene is transcribed , the bacterial polymerase must dissociate from the DNA template and liberate the newly made RNA .
This is referred to as termination of transcription .
The DNA template includes repeated nucleotide sequences that act as termination signals , causing RNA polymerase to stall and release from the DNA template , freeing the RNA transcript .
Prokaryotes and eukaryotes perform fundamentally the same process of transcription , with a few significant differences ( see ) .
Eukaryotes use three different polymerases , RNA polymerases I , II , and III , all structurally distinct from the bacterial RNA polymerase .
Each transcribes a different subset of genes .
Interestingly , archaea contain a single RNA polymerase that is more closely related to eukaryotic RNA polymerase II than to its bacterial counterpart .
Eukaryotic mRNAs are also usually monocistronic , meaning that they each encode only a single polypeptide , whereas prokaryotic mRNAs of bacteria and archaea are commonly polycistronic , meaning that they encode multiple polypeptides .
The most important difference between prokaryotes and eukaryotes is the latter ’ s membrane-bound nucleus , which influences the ease of use of RNA molecules for protein synthesis .
With the genes bound in a nucleus , the eukaryotic cell must transport protein-encoding RNA molecules to the cytoplasm to be translated .
Protein-encoding primary transcript s , the RNA molecules directly synthesized by RNA polymerase , must undergo several processing steps to protect these RNA molecules from degradation during the time they are transferred from the nucleus to the cytoplasm and translated into a protein .
For example , eukaryotic mRNAs may last for several hours , whereas the typical prokaryotic mRNA lasts no more than 5 seconds .
The primary transcript ( also called pre-mRNA ) is first coated with RNA-stabilizing proteins to protect it from degradation while it is processed and exported out of the nucleus .
The first type of processing begins while the primary transcript is still being synthesized ; a special 7-methylguanosine nucleotide , called the 5 ’ cap , is added to the 5 ’ end of the growing transcript .
In addition to preventing degradation , factors involved in subsequent protein synthesis recognize the cap , which helps initiate translation by ribosomes .
Once elongation is complete , another processing enzyme then adds a string of approximately 200 adenine nucleotides to the 3 ’ end , called the poly-A tail .
This modification further protects the pre-mRNA from degradation and signals to cellular factors that the transcript needs to be exported to the cytoplasm .
Eukaryotic genes that encode polypeptides are composed of coding sequences called exon s ( ex -on signifies that they are ex pressed ) and intervening sequences called intron s ( int -ron denotes their int ervening role ) .
Transcribed RNA sequences corresponding to introns do not encode regions of the functional polypeptide and are removed from the premRNA during processing .
It is essential that all of the intron-encoded RNA sequences are completely and precisely removed from a pre-mRNA before protein synthesis so that the exon-encoded RNA sequences are properly joined together to code for a functional polypeptide .
If the process errs by even a single nucleotide , the sequences of the rejoined exons would be shifted , and the resulting polypeptide would be nonfunctional .
The process of removing intron-encoded RNA sequences and reconnecting those encoded by exons is called RNA splicing and is facilitated by the action of a spliceosome containing small nuclear ribonucleo proteins ( snRNPs ) .
Intron-encoded RNA sequences are removed from the pre-mRNA while it is still in the nucleus .
Although they are not translated , introns appear to have various functions , including gene regulation and mRNA transport .
On completion of these modifications , the mature transcript , the mRNA that encodes a polypeptide , is transported out of the nucleus , destined for the cytoplasm for translation .
Introns can be spliced out differently , resulting in various exons being included or excluded from the final mRNA product .
This process is known as alternative splicing .
The advantage of alternative splicing is that different types of mRNA transcripts can be generated , all derived from the same DNA sequence .
In recent years , it has been shown that some archaea also have the ability to splice their pre-mRNA .
In turn , proteins account for more mass than any other macromolecule of living organisms .
They perform virtually every function of a cell , serving as both functional ( e.g. , enzymes ) and structural elements .
The process of translation , or protein synthesis , the second part of gene expression , involves the decoding by a ribosome of an mRNA message into a polypeptide product .
Translation of the mRNA template converts nucleotide-based genetic information into the “ language ” of amino acids to create a protein product .
A protein sequence consists of 20 commonly occurring amino acids .
Each amino acid is defined within the mRNA by a triplet of nucleotides called a codon .
The relationship between an mRNA codon and its corresponding amino acid is called the genetic code .
The three-nucleotide code means that there is a total of 64 possible combinations ( 4 , with four different nucleotides possible at each of the three different positions within the codon ) .
This number is greater than the number of amino acids and a given amino acid is encoded by more than one codon .
This redundancy in the genetic code is called degeneracy .
Typically , whereas the first two positions in a codon are important for determining which amino acid will be incorporated into a growing polypeptide , the third position , called the wobble position , is less critical .
In some cases , if the nucleotide in the third position is changed , the same amino acid is still incorporated .
Whereas 61 of the 64 possible triplets code for amino acids , three of the 64 codons do not code for an amino acid ; they terminate protein synthesis , releasing the polypeptide from the translation machinery .
These are called stop codons or nonsense codons .
Another codon , AUG , also has a special function .
In addition to specifying the amino acid methionine , it also typically serves as the start codon to initiate translation .
The reading frame , the way nucleotides in mRNA are grouped into codons , for translation is set by the AUG start codon near the 5 ’ end of the mRNA .
Each set of three nucleotides following this start codon is a codon in the mRNA message .
The genetic code is nearly universal .
With a few exceptions , virtually all species use the same genetic code for protein synthesis , which is powerful evidence that all extant life on earth shares a common origin .
However , unusual amino acids such as selenocysteine and pyrrolysine have been observed in archaea and bacteria .
In the case of selenocysteine , the codon used is UGA ( normally a stop codon ) .
However , UGA can encode for selenocysteine using a stem-loop structure ( known as the selenocysteine insertion sequence , or SECIS element ) , which is found at the 3 ’ untranslated region of the mRNA .
Pyrrolysine uses a different stop codon , UAG .
The incorporation of pyrrolysine requires the pylS gene and a unique transfer RNA ( tRNA ) with a CUA anticodon .
In addition to the mRNA template , many molecules and macromolecules contribute to the process of translation .
The composition of each component varies across taxa ; for instance , ribosomes may consist of different numbers of ribosomal RNAs ( rRNAs ) and polypeptides depending on the organism .
However , the general structures and functions of the protein synthesis machinery are comparable from bacteria to human cells .
Translation requires the input of an mRNA template , ribosomes , tRNAs , and various enzymatic factors .
A ribosome is a complex macromolecule composed of catalytic rRNAs ( called ribozymes ) and structural rRNAs , as well as many distinct polypeptides .
Mature rRNAs make up approximately 50 % of each ribosome .
Prokaryotes have 70S ribosomes , whereas eukaryotes have 80S ribosomes in the cytoplasm and rough endoplasmic reticulum , and 70S ribosomes in mitochondria and chloroplasts .
Ribosomes dissociate into large and small subunits when they are not synthesizing proteins and reassociate during the initiation of translation .
Eukaryote ribosomes have a small 40S subunit ( which contains the 18S rRNA subunit ) and a large 60S subunit ( which contains the 5S , 5.8S and 28S rRNA subunits ) , for a total of 80S .
The small subunit is responsible for binding the mRNA template , whereas the large subunit binds tRNAs ( discussed in the next subsection ) .
Each mRNA molecule is simultaneously translated by many ribosomes , all synthesizing protein in the same direction : reading the mRNA from 5 ’ to 3 ’ and synthesizing the polypeptide from the N terminus to the C terminus .
The complete structure containing an mRNA with multiple associated ribosomes is called a polyribosome ( or polysome ) .
In both bacteria and archaea , before transcriptional termination occurs , each protein-encoding transcript is already being used to begin synthesis of numerous copies of the encoded polypeptide ( s ) because the processes of transcription and translation can occur concurrently , forming polyribosomes .
The reason why transcription and translation can occur simultaneously is because both of these processes occur in the same 5 ’ to 3 ’ direction , they both occur in the cytoplasm of the cell , and because the RNA transcript is not processed once it is transcribed .
This allows a prokaryotic cell to respond to an environmental signal requiring new proteins very quickly .
In contrast , in eukaryotic cells , simultaneous transcription and translation is not possible .
Although polyribosomes also form in eukaryotes , they can not do so until RNA synthesis is complete and the RNA molecule has been modified and transported out of the nucleus .
Transfer RNAs ( tRNAs ) are structural RNA molecules and , depending on the species , many different types of tRNAs exist in the cytoplasm .
Bacterial species typically have between 60 and 90 types .
Serving as adaptors , each tRNA type binds to a specific codon on the mRNA template and adds the corresponding amino acid to the polypeptide chain .
Therefore , tRNAs are the molecules that actually “ translate ” the language of RNA into the language of proteins .
As the adaptor molecules of translation , it is surprising that tRNAs can fit so much specificity into such a small package .
The tRNA molecule interacts with three factors : aminoacyl tRNA synthetases , ribosomes , and mRNA .
Mature tRNAs take on a three-dimensional structure when complementary bases exposed in the single-stranded RNA molecule hydrogen bond with each other .
This shape positions the amino-acid binding site , called the CCA amino acid binding end , which is a cytosine-cytosine-adenine sequence at the 3 ’ end of the tRNA , and the anticodon at the other end .
The anticodon is a three-nucleotide sequence that bonds with an mRNA codon through complementary base pairing .
During this process , the amino acid is first activated by the addition of adenosine monophosphate ( AMP ) and then transferred to the tRNA , making it a charged tRNA , and AMP is released .
Translation is similar in prokaryotes and eukaryotes .
Here we will explore how translation occurs in E. coli , a representative prokaryote , and specify any differences between bacterial and eukaryotic translation .
The initiation of protein synthesis begins with the formation of an initiation complex .
The initiator tRNA interacts with the start codon AUG of the mRNA and carries a formylated methionine ( fMet ) .
Because of its involvement in initiation , fMet is inserted at the beginning ( N terminus ) of every polypeptide chain synthesized by E. coli .
In E. coli mRNA , a leader sequence upstream of the first AUG codon , called the Shine-Dalgarno sequence ( also known as the ribosomal binding site AGGAGG ) , interacts through complementary base pairing with the rRNA molecules that compose the ribosome .
This interaction anchors the 30S ribosomal subunit at the correct location on the mRNA template .
At this point , the 50S ribosomal subunit then binds to the initiation complex , forming an intact ribosome .
At this point , the 60S subunit binds to the complex of Met-tRNAi , mRNA , and the 40S subunit .
In prokaryotes and eukaryotes , the basics of elongation of translation are the same .
In E. coli , the binding of the 50S ribosomal subunit to produce the intact ribosome forms three functionally important ribosomal sites : The A ( aminoacyl ) site binds incoming charged aminoacyl tRNAs .
The P ( peptidyl ) site binds charged tRNAs carrying amino acids that have formed peptide bonds with the growing polypeptide chain but have not yet dissociated from their corresponding tRNA .
The E ( exit ) site releases dissociated tRNAs so that they can be recharged with free amino acids .
During each translocation event , the charged tRNAs enter at the A site , then shift to the P site , and then finally to the E site for removal .
Ribosomal movements , or steps , are induced by conformational changes that advance the ribosome by three bases in the 3 ’ direction .
Peptide bonds form between the amino group of the amino acid attached to the A-site tRNA and the carboxyl group of the amino acid attached to the P-site tRNA .
The formation of each peptide bond is catalyzed by peptidyl transferase , an RNA-based ribozyme that is integrated into the 50S ribosomal subunit .
The amino acid bound to the P-site tRNA is also linked to the growing polypeptide chain .
As the ribosome steps across the mRNA , the former P-site tRNA enters the E site , detaches from the amino acid , and is expelled .
Several of the steps during elongation , including binding of a charged aminoacyl tRNA to the A site and translocation , require energy derived from GTP hydrolysis , which is catalyzed by specific elongation factors .
Amazingly , the E. coli translation apparatus takes only 0.05 seconds to add each amino acid , meaning that a 200 amino-acid protein can be translated in just 10 seconds .
The termination of translation occurs when a nonsense codon ( UAA , UAG , or UGA ) is encountered for which there is no complementary tRNA .
On aligning with the A site , these nonsense codons are recognized by release factors in prokaryotes and eukaryotes that result in the P-site amino acid detaching from its tRNA , releasing the newly made polypeptide .
The small and large ribosomal subunits dissociate from the mRNA and from each other ; they are recruited almost immediately into another translation initiation complex .
In summary , there are several key features that distinguish prokaryotic gene expression from that seen in eukaryotes .
These are illustrated in and listed in .
During and after translation , polypeptides may need to be modified before they are biologically active .
The resulting organism , called a mutant , may have a recognizable change in phenotype compared to the wild type , which is the phenotype most commonly observed in nature .
A change in the DNA sequence is conferred to mRNA through transcription , and may lead to an altered amino acid sequence in a protein on translation .
Because proteins carry out the vast majority of cellular functions , a change in amino acid sequence in a protein may lead to an altered phenotype for the cell and organism .
There are several types of mutations that are classified according to how the DNA molecule is altered .
One type , called a point mutation , affects a single base and most commonly occurs when one base is substituted or replaced by another .
Mutations also result from the addition of one or more bases , known as an insertion , or the removal of one or more bases , known as a deletion .
Point mutations may have a wide range of effects on protein function .
As a consequence of the degeneracy of the genetic code , a point mutation will commonly result in the same amino acid being incorporated into the resulting polypeptide despite the sequence change .
This change would have no effect on the protein ’ s structure , and is thus called a silent mutation .
A missense mutation results in a different amino acid being incorporated into the resulting polypeptide .
The effect of a missense mutation depends on how chemically different the new amino acid is from the wild-type amino acid .
The location of the changed amino acid within the protein also is important .
For example , if the changed amino acid is part of the enzyme ’ s active site , then the effect of the missense mutation may be significant .
Many missense mutations result in proteins that are still functional , at least to some degree .
Sometimes the effects of missense mutations may be only apparent under certain environmental conditions ; such missense mutations are called conditional mutation s. Rarely , a missense mutation may be beneficial .
Under the right environmental conditions , this type of mutation may give the organism that harbors it a selective advantage .
Yet another type of point mutation , called a nonsense mutation , converts a codon encoding an amino acid ( a sense codon ) into a stop codon ( a nonsense codon ) .
Nonsense mutations result in the synthesis of proteins that are shorter than the wild type and typically not functional .
Deletions and insertions also cause various effects .
Because codons are triplets of nucleotides , insertions or deletions in groups of three nucleotides may lead to the insertion or deletion of one or more amino acids and may not cause significant effects on the resulting protein ’ s functionality .
However , frameshift mutation s , caused by insertions or deletions of a number of nucleotides that are not a multiple of three are extremely problematic because a shift in the reading frame results .
Because ribosomes read the mRNA in triplet codons , frameshift mutations can change every amino acid after the point of the mutation .
The new reading frame may also include a stop codon before the end of the coding sequence .
Consequently , proteins made from genes containing frameshift mutations are nearly always nonfunctional .
Mistakes in the process of DNA replication can cause spontaneous mutations to occur .
The error rate of DNA polymerase is one incorrect base per billion base pairs replicated .
Exposure to mutagens can cause induced mutations , which are various types of chemical agents or radiation .
Exposure to a mutagen can increase the rate of mutation more than 1000-fold .
Mutagens are often also carcinogens , agents that cause cancer .
However , whereas nearly all carcinogens are mutagenic , not all mutagens are necessarily carcinogens .
Various types of chemical mutagens interact directly with DNA either by acting as nucleoside analogs or by modifying nucleotide bases .
Chemicals called nucleoside analogs are structurally similar to normal nucleotide bases and can be incorporated into DNA during replication .
These base analogs induce mutations because they often have different base-pairing rules than the bases they replace .
Other chemical mutagens can modify normal DNA bases , resulting in different base-pairing rules .
For example , nitrous acid deaminates cytosine , converting it to uracil .
Uracil then pairs with adenine in a subsequent round of replication , resulting in the conversion of a GC base pair to an AT base pair .
Nitrous acid also deaminates adenine to hypoxanthine , which base pairs with cytosine instead of thymine , resulting in the conversion of a TA base pair to a CG base pair .
Chemical mutagens known as intercalating agents work differently .
These molecules slide between the stacked nitrogenous bases of the DNA double helix , distorting the molecule and creating atypical spacing between nucleotide base pairs .
As a result , during DNA replication , DNA polymerase may either skip replicating several nucleotides ( creating a deletion ) or insert extra nucleotides ( creating an insertion ) .
Either outcome may lead to a frameshift mutation .
Combustion products like polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons are particularly dangerous intercalating agents that can lead to mutation-caused cancers .
The intercalating agents ethidium bromide and acridine orange are commonly used in the laboratory to stain DNA for visualization and are potential mutagens .
Exposure to either ionizing or nonionizing radiation can each induce mutations in DNA , although by different mechanisms .
Strong ionizing radiation like X-rays and gamma rays can cause singleand double-stranded breaks in the DNA backbone through the formation of hydroxyl radicals on radiation exposure .
Ionizing radiation can also modify bases ; for example , the deamination of cytosine to uracil , analogous to the action of nitrous acid .
Ionizing radiation exposure is used to kill microbes to sterilize medical devices and foods , because of its dramatic nonspecific effect in damaging DNA , proteins , and other cellular components ( see ) .
Nonionizing radiation , like ultraviolet light , is not energetic enough to initiate these types of chemical changes .
However , nonionizing radiation can induce dimer formation between two adjacent pyrimidine bases , commonly two thymines , within a nucleotide strand .
During thymine dimer formation , the two adjacent thymines become covalently linked and , if left unrepaired , both DNA replication and transcription are stalled at this point .
DNA polymerase may proceed and replicate the dimer incorrectly , potentially leading to frameshift or point mutations .
The process of DNA replication is highly accurate , but mistakes can occur spontaneously or be induced by mutagens .
Uncorrected mistakes can lead to serious consequences for the phenotype .
Cells have developed several repair mechanisms to minimize the number of mutations that persist .
Most of the mistakes introduced during DNA replication are promptly corrected by most DNA polymerases through a function called proofreading .
In proofreading , the DNA polymerase reads the newly added base , ensuring that it is complementary to the corresponding base in the template strand before adding the next one .
If an incorrect base has been added , the enzyme makes a cut to release the wrong nucleotide and a new base is added .
Some errors introduced during replication are corrected shortly after the replication machinery has moved .
This mechanism is called mismatch repair .
The enzymes involved in this mechanism recognize the incorrectly added nucleotide , excise it , and replace it with the correct base .
One example is the methyl-directed mismatch repair in E. coli .
The DNA is hemimethylated .
This means that the parental strand is methylated while the newly synthesized daughter strand is not .
It takes several minutes before the new strand is methylated .
Proteins MutS , MutL , and MutH bind to the hemimethylated site where the incorrect nucleotide is found .
MutH cuts the nonmethylated strand ( the new strand ) .
An exonuclease removes a portion of the strand ( including the incorrect nucleotide ) .
The gap formed is then filled in by DNA pol III and ligase .
Because the production of thymine dimers is common ( many organisms can not avoid ultraviolet light ) , mechanisms have evolved to repair these lesions .
In nucleotide excision repair ( also called dark repair ) , enzymes remove the pyrimidine dimer and replace it with the correct nucleotides .
In E. coli , the DNA is scanned by an enzyme complex .
If a distortion in the double helix is found that was introduced by the pyrimidine dimer , the enzyme complex cuts the sugar-phosphate backbone several bases upstream and downstream of the dimer , and the segment of DNA between these two cuts is then enzymatically removed .
DNA pol I replaces the missing nucleotides with the correct ones and DNA ligase seals the gap in the sugar-phosphate backbone .
The direct repair ( also called light repair ) of thymine dimers occurs through the process of photoreactivation in the presence of visible light .
An enzyme called photolyase recognizes the distortion in the DNA helix caused by the thymine dimer and binds to the dimer .
Then , in the presence of visible light , the photolyase enzyme changes conformation and breaks apart the thymine dimer , allowing the thymines to again correctly base pair with the adenines on the complementary strand .
Photoreactivation appears to be present in all organisms , with the exception of placental mammals , including humans .
Photoreactivation is particularly important for organisms chronically exposed to ultraviolet radiation , like plants , photosynthetic bacteria , algae , and corals , to prevent the accumulation of mutations caused by thymine dimer formation .
One common technique used to identify bacterial mutants is called replica plating .
This technique is used to detect nutritional mutants , called auxotroph s , which have a mutation in a gene encoding an enzyme in the biosynthesis pathway of a specific nutrient , such as an amino acid .
As a result , whereas wild-type cells retain the ability to grow normally on a medium lacking the specific nutrient , auxotrophs are unable to grow on such a medium .
During replica plating , a population of bacterial cells is mutagenized and then plated as individual cells on a complex nutritionally complete plate and allowed to grow into colonies .
Cells from these colonies are removed from this master plate , often using sterile velvet .
This velvet , containing cells , is then pressed in the same orientation onto plates of various media .
At least one plate should also be nutritionally complete to ensure that cells are being properly transferred between the plates .
The other plates lack specific nutrients , allowing the researcher to discover various auxotrophic mutants unable to produce specific nutrients .
Cells from the corresponding colony on the nutritionally complete plate can be used to recover the mutant for further study .
The Ames test , developed by Bruce Ames ( 1928– ) in the 1970s , is a method that uses bacteria for rapid , inexpensive screening of the carcinogenic potential of new chemical compounds .
The test measures the mutation rate associated with exposure to the compound , which , if elevated , may indicate that exposure to this compound is associated with greater cancer risk .
The Ames test uses as the test organism a strain of Salmonella typhimurium that is a histidine auxotroph , unable to synthesize its own histidine because of a mutation in an essential gene required for its synthesis .
After exposure to a potential mutagen , these bacteria are plated onto a medium lacking histidine , and the number of mutants regaining the ability to synthesize histidine is recorded and compared with the number of such mutants that arise in the absence of the potential mutagen .
Chemicals that are more mutagenic will bring about more mutants with restored histidine synthesis in the Ames test .
Because many chemicals are not directly mutagenic but are metabolized to mutagenic forms by liver enzymes , rat liver extract is commonly included at the start of this experiment to mimic liver metabolism .
After the Ames test is conducted , compounds identified as mutagenic are further tested for their potential carcinogenic properties by using other models , including animal models like mice and rats .
Vertical gene transfer is by far the main mode of transmission of genetic information in all cells .
In sexually reproducing organisms , crossing-over events and independent assortment of individual chromosomes during meiosis contribute to genetic diversity in the population .
Genetic diversity is also introduced during sexual reproduction , when the genetic information from two parents , each with different complements of genetic information , are combined , producing new combinations of parental genotypes in the diploid offspring .
The occurrence of mutations also contributes to genetic diversity in a population .
Genetic diversity of offspring is useful in changing or inconsistent environments and may be one reason for the evolutionary success of sexual reproduction .
When prokaryotes and eukaryotes reproduce asexually , they transfer a nearly identical copy of their genetic material to their offspring through vertical gene transfer .
Although asexual reproduction produces more offspring more quickly , any benefits of diversity among those offspring are lost .
How then do organisms whose dominant reproductive mode is asexual create genetic diversity ?
In prokaryotes , horizontal gene transfer ( HGT ) , the introduction of genetic material from one organism to another organism within the same generation , is an important way to introduce genetic diversity .
HGT allows even distantly related species to share genes , influencing their phenotypes .
It is thought that HGT is more prevalent in prokaryotes but that only a small fraction of the prokaryotic genome may be transferred by this type of transfer at any one time .
As the phenomenon is investigated more thoroughly , it may be revealed to be even more common .
Many scientists believe that HGT and mutation are significant sources of genetic variation , the raw material for the process of natural selection , in prokaryotes .
Although HGT is more common among evolutionarily related organisms , it may occur between any two species that live together in a natural community .
In 1928 , he showed that live , nonpathogenic Streptococcus pneumoniae bacteria could be transformed into pathogenic bacteria through exposure to a heat-killed pathogenic strain .
He concluded that some sort of agent , which he called the “ transforming principle , ” had been passed from the dead pathogenic bacteria to the live , nonpathogenic bacteria .
In 1944 , Oswald Avery ( 1877–1955 ) , Colin MacLeod ( 1909–1972 ) , and Maclyn McCarty ( 1911–2005 ) demonstrated that the transforming principle was DNA ( see ) .
In transformation , the prokaryote takes up naked DNA found in its environment and that is derived from other cells that have lysed on death and released their contents , including their genome , into the environment .
Many bacteria are naturally competent , meaning that they actively bind to environmental DNA , transport it across their cell envelopes into their cytoplasm , and make it single stranded .
Typically , double-stranded foreign DNA within cells is destroyed by nucleases as a defense against viral infection .
However , these nucleases are usually ineffective against singlestranded DNA , so this single-stranded DNA within the cell has the opportunity to recombine into the bacterial genome .
A molecule of DNA that contains fragments of DNA from different organisms is called recombinant DNA .
( Recombinant DNA will be discussed in more detail in . )
If the bacterium incorporates the new DNA into its own genome through recombination , the bacterial cell may gain new phenotypic properties .
For example , if a nonpathogenic bacterium takes up DNA for a toxin gene from a pathogen and then incorporates it into its chromosome , it , too , may become pathogenic .
Plasmid DNA may also be taken up by competent bacteria and confer new properties to the cell .
Overall , transformation in nature is a relatively inefficient process because environmental DNA levels are low because of the activity of nucleases that are also released during cellular lysis .
Additionally , genetic recombination is inefficient at incorporating new DNA sequences into the genome .
In nature , bacterial transformation is an important mechanism for the acquisition of genetic elements encoding virulence factors and antibiotic resistance .
Genes encoding resistance to antimicrobial compounds have been shown to be widespread in nature , even in environments not influenced by humans .
These genes , which allow microbes living in mixed communities to compete for limited resources , can be transferred within a population by transformation , as well as by the other processes of HGT .
In the laboratory , we can exploit the natural process of bacterial transformation for genetic engineering to make a wide variety of medicinal products , as discussed in .
Viruses that infect bacteria ( bacteriophages ) may also move short pieces of chromosomal DNA from one bacterium to another in a process called transduction ( see ) .
Recall that in generalized transduction , any piece of chromosomal DNA may be transferred to a new host cell by accidental packaging of chromosomal DNA into a phage head during phage assembly .
By contrast , specialized transduction results from the imprecise excision of a lysogenic prophage from the bacterial chromosome such that it carries with it a piece of the bacterial chromosome from either side of the phage ’ s integration site to a new host cell .
As a result , the host may acquire new properties .
This process is called lysogenic conversion .
Of medical significance , a lysogenic phage may carry with it a virulence gene to its new host .
Once inserted into the new host ’ s chromosome , the new host may gain pathogenicity .
Archaea have their own viruses that translocate genetic material from one individual to another .
In conjugation , DNA is directly transferred from one prokaryote to another by means of a conjugation pilus , which brings the organisms into contact with one another .
In E. coli , the genes encoding the ability to conjugate are located on a bacterial plasmid called the F plasmid , also known as the fertility factor , and the conjugation pilus is called the F pilus .
The F-plasmid genes encode both the proteins composing the F pilus and those involved in rolling circle replication of the plasmid .
Cells containing the F plasmid , capable of forming an F pilus , are called F cell s or donor cells , and those lacking an F plasmid are called F cell s or recipient cells .
During typical conjugation in E. coli , the F pilus of an F cell comes into contact with an F cell and retracts , bringing the two cell envelopes into contact .
Then a cytoplasmic bridge forms between the two cells at the site of the conjugation pilus .
As rolling circle replication of the F plasmid occurs in the F cell , a single-stranded copy of the F plasmid is transferred through the cytoplasmic bridge to the F cell , which then synthesizes the complementary strand , making it double stranded .
The F cell now becomes an F cell capable of making its own conjugation pilus .
Eventually , in a mixed bacterial population containing both F and F cells , all cells will become F cells .
Genes on the E. coli F plasmid also encode proteins preventing conjugation between F cells .
Although typical conjugation in E. coli results in the transfer of the F-plasmid DNA only , conjugation may also transfer chromosomal DNA .
This is because the F plasmid occasionally integrates into the bacterial chromosome through recombination between the plasmid and the chromosome , forming an Hfr cell .
“ Hfr ” refers to the high frequency of recombination seen when recipient F cells receive genetic information from Hfr cells through conjugation .
Similar to the imprecise excision of a prophage during specialized transduction , the integrated F plasmid may also be imprecisely excised from the chromosome , producing an F ’ plasmid that carries with it some chromosomal DNA adjacent to the integration site .
On conjugation , this DNA is introduced to the recipient cell and may be either maintained as part of the F ’ plasmid or be recombined into the recipient cell ’ s bacterial chromosome .
Hfr cells may also treat the bacterial chromosome like an enormous F plasmid and attempt to transfer a copy of it to a recipient F cell .
Because the bacterial chromosome is so large , transfer of the entire chromosome takes a long time .
However , contact between bacterial cells during conjugation is transient , so it is unusual for the entire chromosome to be transferred .
Host chromosomal DNA near the integration site of the F plasmid , displaced by the unidirectional process of rolling circle replication , is more likely to be transferred and recombined into a recipient cell ’ s chromosome than host genes farther away .
Thus , the relative location of bacterial genes on the Hfr cell ’ s genome can be mapped based on when they are transferred through conjugation .
As a result , prior to the age of widespread bacterial genome sequencing , distances on prokaryotic genome maps were often measured in minutes .
Plasmids are an important type of extrachromosomal DNA element in bacteria and , in those cells that harbor them , are considered to be part of the bacterial genome .
From a clinical perspective , plasmids often code for genes involved in virulence .
For example , genes encoding proteins that make a bacterial cell resistant to a particular antibiotic are encoded on R plasmids .
R plasmids , in addition to their genes for antimicrobial resistance , contain genes that control conjugation and transfer of the plasmid .
R plasmids are able to transfer between cells of the same species and between cells of different species .
Single R plasmids commonly contain multiple genes conferring resistance to multiple antibiotics .
Genes required for the production of various toxins and molecules important for colonization during infection may also be found encoded on plasmids .
For example , verotoxin-producing strains of E. coli ( VTEC ) appear to have acquired the genes encoding the Shiga toxin from its gram-negative relative Shigella dysenteriae through the acquisition of a large plasmid encoding this toxin .
VTEC causes severe diarrheal disease that may result in hemolytic uremic syndrome ( HUS ) , which may be lead to kidney failure and death .
In nonclinical settings , bacterial genes that encode metabolic enzymes needed to degrade specialized atypical compounds like polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons ( PAHs ) are also frequently encoded on plasmids .
Additionally , certain plasmids have the ability to move from bacterial cells to other cell types , like those of plants and animals , through mechanisms distinct from conjugation .
Such mechanisms and their use in genetic engineering are covered in .
Genetic elements called transposons ( transposable elements ) , or “ jumping genes , ” are molecules of DNA that include special inverted repeat sequences at their ends and a gene encoding the enzyme transposase .
Transposons allow the entire sequence to independently excise from one location in a DNA molecule and integrate into the DNA elsewhere through a process called transposition .
Transposons were originally discovered in maize ( corn ) by American geneticist Barbara McClintock ( 1902–1992 ) in the 1940s .
Transposons have since been found in all types of organisms , both prokaryotes and eukaryotes .
Thus , unlike the three previous mechanisms discussed , transposition is not prokaryote-specific .
Most transposons are nonreplicative , meaning they move in a “ cut-and-paste ” fashion .
Some may be replicative , however , retaining their location in the DNA while making a copy to be inserted elsewhere ( “ copy and paste ” ) .
Because transposons can move within a DNA molecule , from one DNA molecule to another , or even from one cell to another , they have the ability to introduce genetic diversity .
Movement within the same DNA molecule can alter phenotype by inactivating or activating a gene .
Transposons may carry with them additional genes , moving these genes from one location to another with them .
For example , bacterial transposons can relocate antibiotic resistance genes , moving them from chromosomes to plasmids .
This mechanism has been shown to be responsible for the colocalization of multiple antibiotic resistance genes on a single R plasmid in Shigella strains causing bacterial dysentery .
Such an R plasmid can then be easily transferred among a bacterial population through the process of conjugation .
summarizes the processes discussed in this section .
Watson and Crick ’ s identification of the structure of DNA in 1953 was the seminal event in the field of genetic engineering .
Since the 1970s , there has been a veritable explosion in scientists ’ ability to manipulate DNA in ways that have revolutionized the fields of biology , medicine , diagnostics , forensics , and industrial manufacturing .
Many of the molecular tools discovered in recent decades have been produced using prokaryotic microbes .
In this chapter , we will explore some of those tools , especially as they relate to applications in medicine and health care .
As an example , the thermal cycler in is used to perform a diagnostic technique called the polymerase chain reaction ( PCR ) , which relies on DNA polymerase enzymes from thermophilic bacteria .
Other molecular tools , such as restriction enzymes and plasmids obtained from microorganisms , allow scientists to insert genes from humans or other organisms into microorganisms .
The microorganisms are then grown on an industrial scale to synthesize products such as insulin , vaccines , and biodegradable polymers .
These are just a few of the numerous applications of microbial genetics that we will explore in this chapter .
Technically speaking , the domestication of plants and animals through farming and breeding practices is a type of biotechnology .
However , in a contemporary sense , we associate biotechnology with the direct alteration of an organism ’ s genetics to achieve desirable traits through the process of genetic engineering .
Genetic engineering involves the use of recombinant DNA technology , the process by which a DNA sequence is manipulated in vitro , thus creating recombinant DNA molecules that have new combinations of genetic material .
The recombinant DNA is then introduced into a host organism .
If the DNA that is introduced comes from a different species , the host organism is now considered to be transgenic .
One example of a transgenic microorganism is the bacterial strain that produces human insulin .
The insulin gene from humans was inserted into a plasmid .
This recombinant DNA plasmid was then inserted into bacteria .
As a result , these transgenic microbes are able to produce and secrete human insulin .
Many prokaryotes are able to acquire foreign DNA and incorporate functional genes into their own genome through “ mating ” with other cells ( conjugation ) , viral infection ( transduction ) , and taking up DNA from the environment ( transformation ) .
Recall that these mechanisms are examples of horizontal gene transfer—the transfer of genetic material between cells of the same generation .
Herbert Boyer and Stanley Cohen first demonstrated the complete molecular cloning process in 1973 when they successfully cloned genes from the African clawed frog ( Xenopus laevis ) into a bacterial plasmid that was then introduced into the bacterial host Escherichia coli .
Molecular cloning is a set of methods used to construct recombinant DNA and incorporate it into a host organism ; it makes use of a number of molecular tools that are derived from microorganisms .
In recombinant DNA technology , DNA molecules are manipulated using naturally occurring enzymes derived mainly from bacteria and viruses .
The creation of recombinant DNA molecules is possible due to the use of naturally occurring restriction endonucleases ( restriction enzymes ) , bacterial enzymes produced as a protection mechanism to cut and destroy foreign cytoplasmic DNA that is most commonly a result of bacteriophage infection .
Stewart Linn and Werner Arber discovered restriction enzymes in their 1960s studies of how E. coli limits bacteriophage replication on infection .
Today , we use restriction enzymes extensively for cutting DNA fragments that can then be spliced into another DNA molecule to form recombinant molecules .
Each restriction enzyme cuts DNA at a characteristic recognition site , a specific , usually palindromic , DNA sequence typically between four to six base pairs in length .
A palindrome is a sequence of letters that reads the same forward as backward .
( The word “ level ” is an example of a palindrome . )
Palindromic DNA sequences contain the same base sequences in the 5 to 3 direction on one strand as in the 5 to 3 direction on the complementary strand .
A restriction enzyme recognizes the DNA palindrome and cuts each backbone at identical positions in the palindrome .
Some restriction enzymes cut to produce molecules that have complementary overhangs ( sticky ends ) while others cut without generating such overhangs , instead producing blunt ends .
Molecules with complementary sticky ends can easily anneal , or form hydrogen bonds between complementary bases , at their sticky ends .
The annealing step allows hybridization of the single-stranded overhangs .
Hybridization refers to the joining together of two complementary single strands of DNA .
Blunt ends can also attach together , but less efficiently than sticky ends due to the lack of complementary overhangs facilitating the process .
In either case , ligation by DNA ligase can then rejoin the two sugar-phosphate backbones of the DNA through covalent bonding , making the molecule a continuous double strand .
In 1972 , Paul Berg , a Stanford biochemist , was the first to produce a recombinant DNA molecule using this technique , combining the SV40 monkey virus with E. coli bacteriophage lambda to create a hybrid .
After restriction digestion , genes of interest are commonly inserted into plasmids , small pieces of typically circular , double-stranded DNA that replicate independently of the bacterial chromosome ( see ) .
In recombinant DNA technology , plasmids are often used as vectors , DNA molecules that carry DNA fragments from one organism to another .
Plasmids used as vectors can be genetically engineered by researchers and scientific supply companies to have specialized properties , as illustrated by the commonly used plasmid vector pUC19 .
Some plasmid vectors contain genes that confer antibiotic resistance ; these resistance genes allow researchers to easily find plasmid-containing colonies by plating them on media containing the corresponding antibiotic .
The antibiotic kills all host cells that do not harbor the desired plasmid vector , but those that contain the vector are able to survive and grow .
Plasmid vectors used for cloning typically have a polylinker site , or multiple cloning site ( MCS ) .
A polylinker site is a short sequence containing multiple unique restriction enzyme recognition sites that are used for inserting DNA into the plasmid after restriction digestion of both the DNA and the plasmid .
Having these multiple restriction enzyme recognition sites within the polylinker site makes the plasmid vector versatile , so it can be used for many different cloning experiments involving different restriction enzymes .
This polylinker site is often found within a reporter gene , another gene sequence artificially engineered into the plasmid that encodes a protein that allows for visualization of DNA insertion .
The reporter gene allows a researcher to distinguish host cells that contain recombinant plasmids with cloned DNA fragments from host cells that only contain the non-recombinant plasmid vector .
The most common reporter gene used in plasmid vectors is the bacterial lacZ gene encoding beta-galactosidase , an enzyme that naturally degrades lactose but can also degrade a colorless synthetic analog X-gal , thereby producing blue colonies on X-gal–containing media .
The lacZ reporter gene is disabled when the recombinant DNA is spliced into the plasmid .
Because the LacZ protein is not produced when the gene is disabled , X-gal is not degraded and white colonies are produced , which can then be isolated .
This blue-white screening method is described later and shown in .
In addition to these features , some plasmids come pre-digested and with an enzyme linked to the linearized plasmid to aid in ligation after the insertion of foreign DNA fragments .
The most commonly used mechanism for introducing engineered plasmids into a bacterial cell is transformation , a process in which bacteria take up free DNA from their surroundings .
In nature , free DNA typically comes from other lysed bacterial cells ; in the laboratory , free DNA in the form of recombinant plasmids is introduced to the cell ’ s surroundings .
Some bacteria , such as Bacillus spp. , are naturally competent , meaning they are able to take up foreign DNA .
However , not all bacteria are naturally competent .
In most cases , bacteria must be made artificially competent in the laboratory by increasing the permeability of the cell membrane .
This can be achieved through chemical treatments that neutralize charges on the cell membrane or by exposing the bacteria to an electric field that creates microscopic pores in the cell membrane .
These methods yield chemically competent or electrocompetent bacteria , respectively .
Following the transformation protocol , bacterial cells are plated onto an antibiotic-containing medium to inhibit the growth of the many host cells that were not transformed by the plasmid conferring antibiotic resistance .
A technique called blue-white screening is then used for lacZ -encoding plasmid vectors such as pUC19 .
Blue colonies have a functional beta-galactosidase enzyme because the lacZ gene is uninterrupted , with no foreign DNA inserted into the polylinker site .
These colonies typically result from the digested , linearized plasmid religating to itself .
However , white colonies lack a functional beta-galactosidase enzyme , indicating the insertion of foreign DNA within the polylinker site of the plasmid vector , thus disrupting the lacZ gene .
Thus , white colonies resulting from this bluewhite screening contain plasmids with an insert and can be further screened to characterize the foreign DNA .
To be sure the correct DNA was incorporated into the plasmid , the DNA insert can then be sequenced .
The bacterial process of conjugation ( see ) can also be manipulated for molecular cloning .
F plasmids , or fertility plasmids , are transferred between bacterial cells through the process of conjugation .
Recombinant DNA can be transferred by conjugation when bacterial cells containing a recombinant F plasmid are mixed with compatible bacterial cells lacking the plasmid .
F plasmids encode a surface structure called an F pilus that facilitates contact between a cell containing an F plasmid and one without an F plasmid .
On contact , a cytoplasmic bridge forms between the two cells and the F-plasmid-containing cell replicates its plasmid , transferring a copy of the recombinant F plasmid to the recipient cell .
Once it has received the recombinant F plasmid , the recipient cell can produce its own F pilus and facilitate transfer of the recombinant F plasmid to an additional cell .
The use of conjugation to transfer recombinant F plasmids to recipient cells is another effective way to introduce recombinant DNA molecules into host cells .
Alternatively , bacteriophages can be used to introduce recombinant DNA into host bacterial cells through a manipulation of the transduction process ( see ) .
In the laboratory , DNA fragments of interest can be engineered into phagemids , which are plasmids that have phage sequences that allow them to be packaged into bacteriophages .
Bacterial cells can then be infected with these bacteriophages so that the recombinant phagemids can be introduced into the bacterial cells .
Depending on the type of phage , the recombinant DNA may be integrated into the host bacterial genome ( lysogeny ) , or it may exist as a plasmid in the host ’ s cytoplasm .
Molecular cloning may also be used to generate a genomic library .
The library is a complete ( or nearly complete ) copy of an organism ’ s genome contained as recombinant DNA plasmids engineered into unique clones of bacteria .
Having such a library allows a researcher to create large quantities of each fragment by growing the bacterial host for that fragment .
These fragments can be used to determine the sequence of the DNA and the function of any genes present .
One method for generating a genomic library is to ligate individual restriction enzyme-digested genomic fragments into plasmid vectors cut with the same restriction enzyme .
After transformation into a bacterial host , each transformed bacterial cell takes up a single recombinant plasmid and grows into a colony of cells .
All of the cells in this colony are identical clones and carry the same recombinant plasmid .
The resulting library is a collection of colonies , each of which contains a fragment of the original organism ’ s genome , that are each separate and distinct and can each be used for further study .
This makes it possible for researchers to screen these different clones to discover the one containing a gene of interest from the original organism ’ s genome .
To construct a genomic library using larger fragments of genomic DNA , an E. coli bacteriophage , such as lambda , can be used as a host .
Genomic DNA can be sheared or enzymatically digested and ligated into a predigested bacteriophage lambda DNA vector .
Then , these recombinant phage DNA molecules can be packaged into phage particles and used to infect E. coli host cells on a plate .
During infection within each cell , each recombinant phage will make many copies of itself and lyse the E. coli lawn , forming a plaque .
Thus , each plaque from a phage library represents a unique recombinant phage containing a distinct genomic DNA fragment .
Plaques can then be screened further to look for genes of interest .
One advantage to producing a library using phages instead of plasmids is that a phage particle holds a much larger insert of foreign DNA compared with a plasmid vector , thus requiring a much smaller number of cultures to fully represent the entire genome of the original organism .
To focus on the expressed genes in an organism or even a tissue , researchers construct libraries using the organism ’ s messenger RNA ( mRNA ) rather than its genomic DNA .
Whereas all cells in a single organism will have the same genomic DNA , different tissues express different genes , producing different complements of mRNA .
For example , all human cells ’ genomic DNA contains the gene for insulin , but only cells in the pancreas express mRNA directing the production of insulin .
Because mRNA can not be cloned directly , in the laboratory mRNA must be used as a template by the retroviral enzyme reverse transcriptase to make complementary DNA ( cDNA ) .
A cell ’ s full complement of mRNA can be reverse-transcribed into cDNA molecules , which can be used as a template for DNA polymerase to make double-stranded DNA copies ; these fragments can subsequently be ligated into either plasmid vectors or bacteriophage to produce a cDNA library .
The benefit of a cDNA library is that it contains DNA from only the expressed genes in the cell .
This means that the introns , control sequences such as promoters , and DNA not destined to be translated into proteins are not represented in the library .
The focus on translated sequences means that the library can not be used to study the sequence and structure of the genome in its entirety .
The construction of a cDNA genomic library is shown in .
The use of bacterial hosts for genetic engineering laid the foundation for recombinant DNA technology ; however , researchers have also had great interest in genetically engineering eukaryotic cells , particularly those of plants and animals .
The introduction of recombinant DNA molecules into eukaryotic hosts is called transfection .
Genetically engineered plants , called transgenic plants , are of significant interest for agricultural and pharmaceutical purposes .
The first transgenic plant sold commercially was the Flavr Savr delayed-ripening tomato , which came to market in 1994 .
Genetically engineered livestock have also been successfully produced , resulting , for example , in pigs with increased nutritional value and goats that secrete pharmaceutical products in their milk .
Compared to bacterial cells , eukaryotic cells tend to be less amenable as hosts for recombinant DNA molecules .
Because eukaryotes are typically neither competent to take up foreign DNA nor able to maintain plasmids , transfection of eukaryotic hosts is far more challenging and requires more intrusive techniques for success .
One method used for transfecting cells in cell culture is called electroporation .
A brief electric pulse induces the formation of transient pores in the phospholipid bilayers of cells through which the gene can be introduced .
At the same time , the electric pulse generates a short-lived positive charge on one side of the cell ’ s interior and a negative charge on the opposite side ; the charge difference draws negatively charged DNA molecules into the cell .
An alternative method of transfection is called microinjection .
Because eukaryotic cells are typically larger than those of prokaryotes , DNA fragments can sometimes be directly injected into the cytoplasm using a glass micropipette , as shown in .
Transfecting plant cells can be even more difficult than animal cells because of their thick cell walls .
One approach involves treating plant cells with enzymes to remove their cell walls , producing protoplasts .
Then , a gene gun is used to shoot gold or tungsten particles coated with recombinant DNA molecules into the plant protoplasts at high speeds .
Recipient protoplast cells can then recover and be used to generate new transgenic plants .
Another method of transfecting plants involves shuttle vectors , plasmids that can move between bacterial and eukaryotic cells .
The tumor-inducing ( T ) plasmids originating from the bacterium Agrobacterium tumefaciens are commonly used as shuttle vectors for incorporating genes into plants .
In nature , the T plasmids of A. tumefaciens cause plants to develop tumors when they are transferred from bacterial cells to plant cells .
Researchers have been able to manipulate these naturally occurring plasmids to remove their tumor-causing genes and insert desirable DNA fragments .
The resulting recombinant T plasmids can be transferred into the plant genome through the natural transfer of T plasmids from the bacterium to the plant host .
Once inside the plant host cell , the gene of interest recombines into the plant cell ’ s genome .
Viral vectors can also be used to transfect eukaryotic cells .
In fact , this method is often used in gene therapy ( see ) to introduce healthy genes into human patients suffering from diseases that result from genetic mutations .
Viral genes can be deleted and replaced with the gene to be delivered to the patient ; the virus then infects the host cell and delivers the foreign DNA into the genome of the targeted cell .
Adenoviruses are often used for this purpose because they can be grown to high titer and can infect both nondividing and dividing host cells .
However , use of viral vectors for gene therapy can pose some risks for patients , as discussed in .
The sequence can also tell us something about the function of a particular part of the DNA , such as whether it encodes a particular protein .
Comparing protein signatures —the expression levels of specific arrays of proteins—between samples is an important method for evaluating cellular responses to a multitude of environmental factors and stresses .
Analysis of protein signatures can reveal the identity of an organism or how a cell is responding during disease .
The DNA and proteins of interest are microscopic and typically mixed in with many other molecules including DNA or proteins irrelevant to our interests .
Many techniques have been developed to isolate and characterize molecules of interest .
These methods were originally developed for research purposes , but in many cases they have been simplified to the point that routine clinical use is possible .
For example , many pathogens , such as the bacterium Helicobacter pylori , which causes stomach ulcers , can be detected using protein-based tests .
In addition , an increasing number of highly specific and accurate DNA amplification-based identification assays can now detect pathogens such as antibiotic-resistant enteric bacteria , herpes simplex virus , varicella-zoster virus , and many others .
In this subsection , we will outline some of the basic methods used for separating and visualizing specific fragments of DNA that are of interest to a scientist .
Some of these methods do not require knowledge of the complete sequence of the DNA molecule .
Before the advent of rapid DNA sequencing , these methods were the only ones available to work with DNA , but they still form the basic arsenal of tools used by molecular geneticists to study the body ’ s responses to microbial and other diseases .
DNA molecules are small , and the information contained in their sequence is invisible .
How does a researcher isolate a particular stretch of DNA , or having isolated it , determine what organism it is from , what its sequence is , or what its function is ?
One method to identify the presence of a certain DNA sequence uses artificially constructed pieces of DNA called probes .
Probes can be used to identify different bacterial species in the environment and many DNA probes are now available to detect pathogens clinically .
For example , DNA probes are used to detect the vaginal pathogens Candida albicans , Gardnerella vaginalis , and Trichomonas vaginalis .
To screen a genomic library for a particular gene or sequence of interest , researchers must know something about that gene .
If researchers have a portion of the sequence of DNA for the gene of interest , they can design a DNA probe , a single-stranded DNA fragment that is complementary to part of the gene of interest and different from other DNA sequences in the sample .
The DNA probe may be synthesized chemically by commercial laboratories , or it may be created by cloning , isolating , and denaturing a DNA fragment from a living organism .
The DNA sample being probed must also be denatured to make it single-stranded so that the single-stranded DNA probe can anneal to the single-stranded DNA sample at locations where their sequences are complementary .
While these techniques are valuable for diagnosis , their direct use on sputum and other bodily samples may be problematic due to the complex nature of these samples .
DNA often must first be isolated from bodily samples through chemical extraction methods before a DNA probe can be used to identify pathogens .
There are a number of situations in which a researcher might want to physically separate a collection of DNA fragments of different sizes .
A researcher may also digest a DNA sample with a restriction enzyme to form fragments .
The resulting size and fragment distribution pattern can often yield useful information about the sequence of DNA bases that can be used , much like a bar-code scan , to identify the individual or species to which the DNA belongs .
Gel electrophoresis is a technique commonly used to separate biological molecules based on size and biochemical characteristics , such as charge and polarity .
Agarose gel electrophoresis is widely used to separate DNA ( or RNA ) of varying sizes that may be generated by restriction enzyme digestion or by other means , such as the PCR .
Due to its negatively charged backbone , DNA is strongly attracted to a positive electrode .
In agarose gel electrophoresis , the gel is oriented horizontally in a buffer solution .
Samples are loaded into sample wells on the side of the gel closest to the negative electrode , then drawn through the molecular sieve of the agarose matrix toward the positive electrode .
The agarose matrix impedes the movement of larger molecules through the gel , whereas smaller molecules pass through more readily .
Thus , the distance of migration is inversely correlated to the size of the DNA fragment , with smaller fragments traveling a longer distance through the gel .
Sizes of DNA fragments within a sample can be estimated by comparison to fragments of known size in a DNA ladder also run on the same gel .
To separate very large DNA fragments , such as chromosomes or viral genomes , agarose gel electrophoresis can be modified by periodically alternating the orientation of the electric field during pulsed-field gel electrophoresis ( PFGE ) .
In PFGE , smaller fragments can reorient themselves and migrate slightly faster than larger fragments and this technique can thus serve to separate very large fragments that would otherwise travel together during standard agarose gel electrophoresis .
In any of these electrophoresis techniques , the locations of the DNA or RNA fragments in the gel can be detected by various methods .
One common method is adding ethidium bromide , a stain that inserts into the nucleic acids at non-specific locations and can be visualized when exposed to ultraviolet light .
Other stains that are safer than ethidium bromide , a potential carcinogen , are now available .
Restriction enzyme recognition sites are short ( only a few nucleotides long ) , sequence-specific palindromes , and may be found throughout the genome .
Thus , differences in DNA sequences in the genomes of individuals will lead to differences in distribution of restriction-enzyme recognition sites that can be visualized as distinct banding patterns on a gel after agarose gel electrophoresis .
Restriction fragment length polymorphism ( RFLP ) analysis compares DNA banding patterns of different DNA samples after restriction digestion .
RFLP analysis has many practical applications in both medicine and forensic science .
For example , epidemiologists use RFLP analysis to track and identify the source of specific microorganisms implicated in outbreaks of food poisoning or certain infectious diseases .
RFLP analysis can also be used on human DNA to determine inheritance patterns of chromosomes with variant genes , including those associated with heritable diseases or to establish paternity .
Forensic scientists use RFLP analysis as a form of DNA fingerprinting , which is useful for analyzing DNA obtained from crime scenes , suspects , and victims .
DNA samples are collected , the numbers of copies of the sample DNA molecules are increased using PCR , and then subjected to restriction enzyme digestion and agarose gel electrophoresis to generate specific banding patterns .
By comparing the banding patterns of samples collected from the crime scene against those collected from suspects or victims , investigators can definitively determine whether DNA evidence collected at the scene was left behind by suspects or victims .
Several molecular techniques capitalize on sequence complementarity and hybridization between nucleic acids of a sample and DNA probes .
Typically , probing nucleic-acid samples within a gel is unsuccessful because as the DNA probe soaks into a gel , the sample nucleic acids within the gel diffuse out .
Thus , blotting techniques are commonly used to transfer nucleic acids to a thin , positively charged membrane made of nitrocellulose or nylon .
In the Southern blot technique , developed by Sir Edwin Southern in 1975 , DNA fragments within a sample are first separated by agarose gel electrophoresis and then transferred to a membrane through capillary action .
The DNA fragments that bind to the surface of the membrane are then exposed to a specific single-stranded DNA probe labeled with a radioactive or fluorescent molecular beacon to aid in detection .
Southern blots may be used to detect the presence of certain DNA sequences in a given DNA sample .
Once the target DNA within the membrane is visualized , researchers can cut out the portion of the membrane containing the fragment to recover the DNA fragment of interest .
Variations of the Southern blot—the dot blot , slot blot , and the spot blot—do not involve electrophoresis , but instead concentrate DNA from a sample into a small location on a membrane .
After hybridization with a DNA probe , the signal intensity detected is measured , allowing the researcher to estimate the amount of target DNA present within the sample .
A colony blot is another variation of the Southern blot in which colonies representing different clones in a genomic library are transferred to a membrane by pressing the membrane onto the culture plate .
The cells on the membrane are lysed and the membrane can then be probed to determine which colonies within a genomic library harbor the target gene .
Because the colonies on the plate are still growing , the cells of interest can be isolated from the plate .
In the northern blot , another variation of the Southern blot , RNA ( not DNA ) is immobilized on the membrane and probed .
Northern blots are typically used to detect the amount of mRNA made through gene expression within a tissue or organism sample .
Another technique that capitalizes on the hybridization between complementary nucleic acid sequences is called microarray analysis .
Microarray analysis is useful for the comparison of gene-expression patterns between different cell types—for example , cells infected with a virus versus uninfected cells , or cancerous cells versus healthy cells .
Typically , DNA or cDNA from an experimental sample is deposited on a glass slide alongside known DNA sequences .
Each slide can hold more than 30,000 different DNA fragment types .
Distinct DNA fragments ( encompassing an organism ’ s entire genomic library ) or cDNA fragments ( corresponding to an organism ’ s full complement of expressed genes ) can be individually spotted on a glass slide .
Once deposited on the slide , genomic DNA or mRNA can be isolated from the two samples for comparison .
If mRNA is isolated , it is reverse-transcribed to cDNA using reverse transcriptase .
Then the two samples of genomic DNA or cDNA are labeled with different fluorescent dyes ( typically red and green ) .
The labeled genomic DNA samples are then combined in equal amounts , added to the microarray chip , and allowed to hybridize to complementary spots on the microarray .
Hybridization of sample genomic DNA molecules can be monitored by measuring the intensity of fluorescence at particular spots on the microarray .
Differences in the amount of hybridization between the samples can be readily observed .
If only one sample ’ s nucleic acids hybridize to a particular spot on the microarray , then that spot will appear either green or red .
However , if both samples ’ nucleic acids hybridize , then the spot will appear yellow due to the combination of the red and green dyes .
Although microarray technology allows for a holistic comparison between two samples in a short time , it requires sophisticated ( and expensive ) detection equipment and analysis software .
Because of the expense , this technology is typically limited to research settings .
Researchers have used microarray analysis to study how gene expression is affected in organisms that are infected by bacteria or viruses or subjected to certain chemical treatments .
In many cases it may not be desirable or possible to study DNA or RNA directly .
Proteins can provide speciesspecific information for identification as well as important information about how and whether a cell or tissue is responding to the presence of a pathogenic microorganism .
Various proteins require different methods for isolation and characterization .
A variation of gel electrophoresis , called polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis ( PAGE ) , is commonly used for separating proteins .
In PAGE , the gel matrix is finer and composed of polyacrylamide instead of agarose .
Additionally , PAGE is typically performed using a vertical gel apparatus .
Because of the varying charges associated with amino acid side chains , PAGE can be used to separate intact proteins based on their net charges .
Alternatively , proteins can be denatured and coated with a negatively charged detergent called sodium dodecyl sulfate ( SDS ) , masking the native charges and allowing separation based on size only .
PAGE can be further modified to separate proteins based on two characteristics , such as their charges at various pHs as well as their size , through the use of two-dimensional PAGE .
In any of these cases , following electrophoresis , proteins are visualized through staining , commonly with either Coomassie blue or a silver stain .
Various methods can be used for obtaining sequences of DNA , which are useful for studying disease-causing organisms .
With the advent of rapid sequencing technology , our knowledge base of the entire genomes of pathogenic organisms has grown phenomenally .
We start with a description of the polymerase chain reaction , which is not a sequencing method but has allowed researchers and clinicians to obtain the large quantities of DNA needed for sequencing and other studies .
The polymerase chain reaction eliminates the dependence we once had on cells to make multiple copies of DNA , achieving the same result through relatively simple reactions outside the cell .
Most methods of DNA analysis , such as restriction enzyme digestion and agarose gel electrophoresis , or DNA sequencing require large amounts of a specific DNA fragment .
In the past , large amounts of DNA were produced by growing the host cells of a genomic library .
However , libraries take time and effort to prepare and DNA samples of interest often come in minute quantities .
The polymerase chain reaction ( PCR ) permits rapid amplification in the number of copies of specific DNA sequences for further analysis .
One of the most powerful techniques in molecular biology , PCR was developed in 1983 by Kary Mullis while at Cetus Corporation .
The heat-stable DNA polymerase enzymes used in PCR are derived from hyperthermophilic prokaryotes .
Taq DNA polymerase , commonly used in PCR , is derived from the Thermus aquaticus bacterium isolated from a hot spring in Yellowstone National Park .
DNA replication requires the use of primers for the initiation of replication to have free 3 -hydroxyl groups available for the addition of nucleotides by DNA polymerase .
However , while primers composed of RNA are normally used in cells , DNA primers are used for PCR .
DNA primers are preferable due to their stability , and DNA primers with known sequences targeting a specific DNA region can be chemically synthesized commercially .
These DNA primers are functionally similar to the DNA probes used for the various hybridization techniques described earlier , binding to specific targets due to complementarity between the target DNA sequence and the primer .
PCR occurs over multiple cycles , each containing three steps : denaturation , annealing , and extension .
Machines called thermal cyclers are used for PCR ; these machines can be programmed to automatically cycle through the temperatures required at each step .
First , double-stranded template DNA containing the target sequence is denatured at approximately 95 °C .
The high temperature required to physically ( rather than enzymatically ) separate the DNA strands is the reason the heat-stable DNA polymerase is required .
Next , the temperature is lowered to approximately 50 °C .
This allows the DNA primers complementary to the ends of the target sequence to anneal ( stick ) to the template strands , with one primer annealing to each strand .
Finally , the temperature is raised to 72 °C , the optimal temperature for the activity of the heat-stable DNA polymerase , allowing for the addition of nucleotides to the primer using the single-stranded target as a template .
Each cycle doubles the number of double-stranded target DNA copies .
Typically , PCR protocols include 25–40 cycles , allowing for the amplification of a single target sequence by tens of millions to over a trillion .
Natural DNA replication is designed to copy the entire genome , and initiates at one or more origin sites .
Primers are constructed during replication , not before , and do not consist of a few specific sequences .
PCR targets specific regions of a DNA sample using sequence-specific primers .
In recent years , a variety of isothermal PCR amplification methods that circumvent the need for thermal cycling have been developed , taking advantage of accessory proteins that aid in the DNA replication process .
As the development of these methods continues and their use becomes more widespread in research , forensic , and clinical labs , thermal cyclers may become obsolete .
Several later modifications to PCR further increase the utility of this technique .
Reverse transcriptase PCR ( RTPCR ) is used for obtaining DNA copies of a specific mRNA molecule .
RT-PCR begins with the use of the reverse transcriptase enzyme to convert mRNA molecules into cDNA .
That cDNA is then used as a template for traditional PCR amplification .
RT-PCR can detect whether a specific gene has been expressed in a sample .
Another recent application of PCR is real-time PCR , also known as quantitative PCR ( qPCR ) .
Standard PCR and RT-PCR protocols are not quantitative because any one of the reagents may become limiting before all of the cycles within the protocol are complete , and samples are only analyzed at the end .
In qPCR , however , the use of fluorescence allows one to monitor the increase in a double-stranded template during a PCR reaction as it occurs .
These kinetics data can then be used to quantify the amount of the original target sequence .
The use of qPCR in recent years has further expanded the capabilities of PCR , allowing researchers to determine the number of DNA copies , and sometimes organisms , present in a sample .
In clinical settings , qRT-PCR is used to determine viral load in HIV-positive patients to evaluate the effectiveness of their therapy .
A basic sequencing technique is the chain termination method , also known as the dideoxy method or the Sanger DNA sequencing method , developed by Frederick Sanger in 1972 .
The ddNTPs are monomers missing a hydroxyl group ( –OH ) at the site at which another nucleotide usually attaches to form a chain .
Every time a ddNTP is randomly incorporated into the growing complementary strand , it terminates the process of DNA replication for that particular strand .
This results in multiple short strands of replicated DNA that are each terminated at a different point during replication .
When the reaction mixture is subjected to gel electrophoresis , the multiple newly replicated DNA strands form a ladder of differing sizes .
Because the ddNTPs are labeled , each band on the gel reflects the size of the DNA strand when the ddNTP terminated the reaction .
In Sanger ’ s day , four reactions were set up for each DNA molecule being sequenced , each reaction containing only one of the four possible ddNTPs .
Each ddNTP was labeled with a radioactive phosphorus molecule .
The products of the four reactions were then run in separate lanes side by side on long , narrow PAGE gels , and the bands of varying lengths were detected by autoradiography .
Today , this process has been simplified with the use of ddNTPs , each labeled with a different colored fluorescent dye or fluorochrome , in one sequencing reaction containing all four possible ddNTPs for each DNA molecule being sequenced .
These fluorochromes are detected by fluorescence spectroscopy .
Determining the fluorescence color of each band as it passes by the detector produces the nucleotide sequence of the template strand .
Since 2005 , automated sequencing techniques used by laboratories fall under the umbrella of next generation sequencing , which is a group of automated techniques used for rapid DNA sequencing .
These methods have revolutionized the field of molecular genetics because the low-cost sequencers can generate sequences of hundreds of thousands or millions of short fragments ( 25 to 600 base pairs ) just in one day .
In 454 sequencing ( pyrosequencing ) , for example , a DNA sample is fragmented into 400–600-bp single-strand fragments , modified with the addition of DNA adapters to both ends of each fragment .
Each DNA fragment is then immobilized on a bead and amplified by PCR , using primers designed to anneal to the adapters , creating a bead containing many copies of that DNA fragment .
Each bead is then put into a separate well containing sequencing enzymes .
To the well , each of the four nucleotides is added one after the other ; when each one is incorporated , pyrophosphate is released as a byproduct of polymerization , emitting a small flash of light that is recorded by a detector .
This provides the order of nucleotides incorporated as a new strand of DNA is made and is an example of synthesis sequencing .
Next generation sequencers use sophisticated software to get through the cumbersome process of putting all the fragments in order .
Overall , these technologies continue to advance rapidly , decreasing the cost of sequencing and increasing the availability of sequence data from a wide variety of organisms quickly .
The National Center for Biotechnology Information houses a widely used genetic sequence database called GenBank where researchers deposit genetic information for public use .
Upon publication of sequence data , researchers upload it to GenBank , giving other researchers access to the information .
The collaboration allows researchers to compare newly discovered or unknown sample sequence information with the vast array of sequence data that already exists .
Explain the uses of genome-wide comparative analyses Summarize the advantages of genetically engineered pharmaceutical products Advances in molecular biology have led to the creation of entirely new fields of science .
Among these are fields that study aspects of whole genomes , collectively referred to as whole-genome methods .
In this section , we ’ ll provide a brief overview of the whole-genome fields of genomics , transcriptomics , and proteomics .
The study and comparison of entire genomes , including the complete set of genes and their nucleotide sequence and organization , is called genomics .
This field has great potential for future medical advances through the study of the human genome as well as the genomes of infectious organisms .
Analysis of microbial genomes has contributed to the development of new antibiotics , diagnostic tools , vaccines , medical treatments , and environmental cleanup techniques .
The field of transcriptomics is the science of the entire collection of mRNA molecules produced by cells .
Scientists compare gene expression patterns between infected and uninfected host cells , gaining important information about the cellular responses to infectious disease .
Additionally , transcriptomics can be used to monitor the gene expression of virulence factors in microorganisms , aiding scientists in better understanding pathogenic processes from this viewpoint .
When genomics and transcriptomics are applied to entire microbial communities , we use the terms metagenomics and metatranscriptomics , respectively .
Metagenomics and metatranscriptomics allow researchers to study genes and gene expression from a collection of multiple species , many of which may not be easily cultured or cultured at all in the laboratory .
A DNA microarray ( discussed in the previous section ) can be used in metagenomics studies .
Another up-and-coming clinical application of genomics and transcriptomics is pharmacogenomics , also called toxicogenomics , which involves evaluating the effectiveness and safety of drugs on the basis of information from an individual ’ s genomic sequence .
Genomic responses to drugs can be studied using experimental animals ( such as laboratory rats or mice ) or live cells in the laboratory before embarking on studies with humans .
Changes in gene expression in the presence of a drug can sometimes be an early indicator of the potential for toxic effects .
Personal genome sequence information may someday be used to prescribe medications that will be most effective and least toxic on the basis of the individual patient ’ s genotype .
The study of proteomics is an extension of genomics that allows scientists to study the entire complement of proteins in an organism , called the proteome .
Even though all cells of a multicellular organism have the same set of genes , cells in various tissues produce different sets of proteins .
Thus , the genome is constant , but the proteome varies and is dynamic within an organism .
Proteomics may be used to study which proteins are expressed under various conditions within a single cell type or to compare protein expression patterns between different organisms .
The most prominent disease being studied with proteomic approaches is cancer , but this area of study is also being applied to infectious diseases .
Research is currently underway to examine the feasibility of using proteomic approaches to diagnose various types of hepatitis , tuberculosis , and HIV infection , which are rather difficult to diagnose using currently available techniques .
A recent and developing proteomic analysis relies on identifying proteins called biomarkers , whose expression is affected by the disease process .
Biomarkers are currently being used to detect various forms of cancer as well as infections caused by pathogens such as Yersinia pestis and Vaccinia virus .
Other “ -omic ” sciences related to genomics and proteomics include metabolomics , glycomics , and lipidomics , which focus on the complete set of small-molecule metabolites , sugars , and lipids , respectively , found within a cell .
Through these various global approaches , scientists continue to collect , compile , and analyze large amounts of genetic information .
This emerging field of bioinformatics can be used , among many other applications , for clues to treating diseases and understanding the workings of cells .
Additionally , researchers can use reverse genetics , a technique related to classic mutational analysis , to determine the function of specific genes .
Classic methods of studying gene function involved searching for the genes responsible for a given phenotype .
Reverse genetics uses the opposite approach , starting with a specific DNA sequence and attempting to determine what phenotype it produces .
Alternatively , scientists can attach known genes ( called reporter genes ) that encode easily observable characteristics to genes of interest , and the location of expression of such genes of interest can be easily monitored .
This gives the researcher important information about what the gene product might be doing or where it is located in the organism .
Genetic engineering has provided a way to create new pharmaceutical products called recombinant DNA pharmaceuticals .
Such products include antibiotic drugs , vaccines , and hormones used to treat various diseases .
lists examples of recombinant DNA products and their uses .
For example , the naturally occurring antibiotic synthesis pathways of various Streptomyces spp. , long known for their antibiotic production capabilities , can be modified to improve yields or to create new antibiotics through the introduction of genes encoding additional enzymes .
More than 200 new antibiotics have been generated through the targeted inactivation of genes and the novel combination of antibiotic synthesis genes in antibiotic-producing Streptomyces hosts .
Genetic engineering is also used to manufacture subunit vaccines , which are safer than other vaccines because they contain only a single antigenic molecule and lack any part of the genome of the pathogen ( see ) .
For example , a vaccine for hepatitis B is created by inserting a gene encoding a hepatitis B surface protein into a yeast ; the yeast then produces this protein , which the human immune system recognizes as an antigen .
The hepatitis B antigen is purified from yeast cultures and administered to patients as a vaccine .
Even though the vaccine does not contain the hepatitis B virus , the presence of the antigenic protein stimulates the immune system to produce antibodies that will protect the patient against the virus in the event of exposure .
Genetic engineering has also been important in the production of other therapeutic proteins , such as insulin , interferons , and human growth hormone , to treat a variety of human medical conditions .
For example , at one time , it was possible to treat diabetes only by giving patients pig insulin , which caused allergic reactions due to small differences between the proteins expressed in human and pig insulin .
However , since 1978 , recombinant DNA technology has been used to produce large-scale quantities of human insulin using E. coli in a relatively inexpensive process that yields a more consistently effective pharmaceutical product .
Scientists have also genetically engineered E. coli capable of producing human growth hormone ( HGH ) , which is used to treat growth disorders in children and certain other disorders in adults .
The HGH gene was cloned from a cDNA library and inserted into E. coli cells by cloning it into a bacterial vector .
Eventually , genetic engineering will be used to produce DNA vaccines and various gene therapies , as well as customized medicines for fighting cancer and other diseases .
In , we described the function of mRNA , rRNA , and tRNA .
In addition to these types of RNA , cells also produce several types of small noncoding RNA molecules that are involved in the regulation of gene expression .
These include antisense RNA molecules , which are complementary to regions of specific mRNA molecules found in both prokaryotes and eukaryotic cells .
Non-coding RNA molecules play a major role in RNA interference ( RNAi ) , a natural regulatory mechanism by which mRNA molecules are prevented from guiding the synthesis of proteins .
RNA interference of specific genes results from the base pairing of short , single-stranded antisense RNA molecules to regions within complementary mRNA molecules , preventing protein synthesis .
Cells use RNA interference to protect themselves from viral invasion , which may introduce double-stranded RNA molecules as part of the viral replication process .
Researchers are currently developing techniques to mimic the natural process of RNA interference as a way to treat viral infections in eukaryotic cells .
RNA interference technology involves using small interfering RNAs ( siRNAs ) or microRNAs ( miRNAs ) .
siRNAs are completely complementary to the mRNA transcript of a specific gene of interest while miRNAs are mostly complementary .
These double-stranded RNAs are bound to DICER , an endonuclease that cleaves the RNA into short molecules ( approximately 20 nucleotides long ) .
The RNAs are then bound to RNA-induced silencing complex ( RISC ) , a ribonucleoprotein .
The siRNA-RISC complex binds to mRNA and cleaves it .
For miRNA , only one of the two strands binds to RISC .
The miRNA-RISC complex then binds to mRNA , inhibiting translation .
If the miRNA is completely complementary to the target gene , then the mRNA can be cleaved .
Taken together , these mechanisms are known as gene silencing .
Summarize the mechanisms , risks , and potential benefits of gene therapy Identify ethical issues involving gene therapy and the regulatory agencies that provide oversight for clinical trials Compare somatic-cell and germ-line gene therapy Many types of genetic engineering have yielded clear benefits with few apparent risks .
Few would question , for example , the value of our now abundant supply of human insulin produced by genetically engineered bacteria .
However , many emerging applications of genetic engineering are much more controversial , often because their potential benefits are pitted against significant risks , real or perceived .
This is certainly the case for gene therapy , a clinical application of genetic engineering that may one day provide a cure for many diseases but is still largely an experimental approach to treatment .
Human diseases that result from genetic mutations are often difficult to treat with drugs or other traditional forms of therapy because the signs and symptoms of disease result from abnormalities in a patient ’ s genome .
For example , a patient may have a genetic mutation that prevents the expression of a specific protein required for the normal function of a particular cell type .
This is the case in patients with Severe Combined Immunodeficiency ( SCID ) , a genetic disease that impairs the function of certain white blood cells essential to the immune system .
Gene therapy attempts to correct genetic abnormalities by introducing a nonmutated , functional gene into the patient ’ s genome .
The nonmutated gene encodes a functional protein that the patient would otherwise be unable to produce .
Viral vectors such as adenovirus are sometimes used to introduce the functional gene ; part of the viral genome is removed and replaced with the desired gene .
More advanced forms of gene therapy attempt to correct the mutation at the original site in the genome , such as is the case with treatment of SCID .
So far , gene therapies have proven relatively ineffective , with the possible exceptions of treatments for cystic fibrosis and adenosine deaminase deficiency , a type of SCID .
Other trials have shown the clear hazards of attempting genetic manipulation in complex multicellular organisms like humans .
In some patients , the use of an adenovirus vector can trigger an unanticipated inflammatory response from the immune system , which may lead to organ failure .
Moreover , because viruses can often target multiple cell types , the virus vector may infect cells not targeted for the therapy , damaging these other cells and possibly leading to illnesses such as cancer .
Another potential risk is that the modified virus could revert to being infectious and cause disease in the patient .
Lastly , there is a risk that the inserted gene could unintentionally inactivate another important gene in the patient ’ s genome , disrupting normal cell cycling and possibly leading to tumor formation and cancer .
Because gene therapy involves so many risks , candidates for gene therapy need to be fully informed of these risks before providing informed consent to undergo the therapy .
Presently , there is significant oversight of gene therapy clinical trials .
Along with several local agencies , these federal agencies interact with the institutional review board to ensure that protocols are in place to protect patient safety during clinical trials .
Compliance with these protocols is enforced mostly on the local level in cooperation with the federal agencies .
Gene therapies are currently under the most extensive federal and local review compared to other types of therapies , which are more typically only under the review of the FDA .
Some researchers believe that these extensive regulations actually inhibit progress in gene therapy research .
In 2013 , the Institute of Medicine ( now the National Academy of Medicine ) called upon the NIH to relax its review of gene therapy trials in most cases .
However , ensuring patient safety continues to be of utmost concern .
This raises questions such as : Which genetic traits are worthy of being “ corrected ” ?
Should gene therapy be used for cosmetic reasons or to enhance human abilities ?
Should genetic manipulation be used to impart desirable traits to the unborn ?
Who should be responsible for regulating and policing inappropriate use of gene therapies ?
Is everyone entitled to gene therapy , or could the cost of gene therapy create new forms of social inequality ?
The ability to alter reproductive cells using gene therapy could also generate new ethical dilemmas .
To date , the various types of gene therapies have been targeted to somatic cells , the non-reproductive cells within the body .
Because somatic cell traits are not inherited , any genetic changes accomplished by somatic-cell gene therapy would not be passed on to offspring .
However , should scientists successfully introduce new genes to germ cells ( eggs or sperm ) , the resulting traits could be passed on to offspring .
This approach , called germ-line gene therapy , could potentially be used to combat heritable diseases , but it could also lead to unintended consequences for future generations .
Moreover , there is the question of informed consent , because those impacted by germ-line gene therapy are unborn and therefore unable to choose whether they receive the therapy .
For these reasons , the U.S. government does not currently fund research projects investigating germ-line gene therapies in humans .
How clean is clean ?
People wash their cars and vacuum the carpets , but most would not want to eat from these surfaces .
Similarly , we might eat with silverware cleaned in a dishwasher , but we could not use the same dishwasher to clean surgical instruments .
As these examples illustrate , “ clean ” is a relative term .
Car washing , vacuuming , and dishwashing all reduce the microbial load on the items treated , thus making them “ cleaner. ” But whether they are “ clean enough ” depends on their intended use .
Because people do not normally eat from cars or carpets , these items do not require the same level of cleanliness that silverware does .
Likewise , because silverware is not used for invasive surgery , these utensils do not require the same level of cleanliness as surgical equipment , which requires sterilization to prevent infection .
Why not play it safe and sterilize everything ?
Sterilizing everything we come in contact with is impractical , as well as potentially dangerous .
As this chapter will demonstrate , sterilization protocols often require timeand labor-intensive treatments that may degrade the quality of the item being treated or have toxic effects on users .
Inanimate items , such as doorknobs , toys , or towels , which may harbor microbes and aid in disease transmission , are called fomites .
Two factors heavily influence the level of cleanliness required for a particular fomite and , hence , the protocol chosen to achieve this level .
The first factor is the application for which the item will be used .
For example , invasive applications that require insertion into the human body require a much higher level of cleanliness than applications that do not .
The second factor is the level of resistance to antimicrobial treatment by potential pathogens .
For example , foods preserved by canning often become contaminated with the bacterium Clostridium botulinum , which produces the neurotoxin that causes botulism .
Because C. botulinum can produce endospores that can survive harsh conditions , extreme temperatures and pressures must be used to eliminate the endospores .
Other organisms may not require such extreme measures and can be controlled by a procedure such as washing clothes in a laundry machine .
For researchers or laboratory personnel working with pathogens , the risks associated with specific pathogens determine the levels of cleanliness and control required .
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ( CDC ) and the National Institutes of Health ( NIH ) have established four classification levels , called “ biological safety levels ” ( BSLs ) .
Various organizations around the world , including the World Health Organization ( WHO ) and the European Union ( EU ) , use a similar classification scheme .
According to the CDC , the BSL is determined by the agent ’ s infectivity , ease of transmission , and potential disease severity , as well as the type of work being done with the agent .
Each BSL requires a different level of biocontainment to prevent contamination and spread of infectious agents to laboratory personnel and , ultimately , the community .
For example , the lowest BSL , BSL-1 , requires the fewest precautions because it applies to situations with the lowest risk for microbial infection .
BSL-1 agents are those that generally do not cause infection in healthy human adults .
These include noninfectious bacteria , such as nonpathogenic strains of Escherichia coli and Bacillus subtilis , and viruses known to infect animals other than humans , such as baculoviruses ( insect viruses ) .
Because working with BSL-1 agents poses very little risk , few precautions are necessary .
Laboratory workers use standard aseptic technique and may work with these agents at an open laboratory bench or table , wearing personal protective equipment ( PPE ) such as a laboratory coat , goggles , and gloves , as needed .
Other than a sink for handwashing and doors to separate the laboratory from the rest of the building , no additional modifications are needed .
Agents classified as BSL-2 include those that pose moderate risk to laboratory workers and the community , and are typically “ indigenous , ” meaning that they are commonly found in that geographical area .
These include bacteria such as Staphylococcus aureus and Salmonella spp. , and viruses like hepatitis , mumps , and measles viruses .
BSL-2 laboratories require additional precautions beyond those of BSL-1 , including restricted access ; required PPE , including a face shield in some circumstances ; and the use of biological safety cabinets for procedures that may disperse agents through the air ( called “ aerosolization ” ) .
BSL-2 laboratories are equipped with self-closing doors , an eyewash station , and an autoclave , which is a specialized device for sterilizing materials with pressurized steam before use or disposal .
BSL-1 laboratories may also have an autoclave .
BSL-3 agents have the potential to cause lethal infections by inhalation .
These may be either indigenous or “ exotic , ” meaning that they are derived from a foreign location , and include pathogens such as Mycobacterium tuberculosis , Bacillus anthracis , West Nile virus , and human immunodeficiency virus ( HIV ) .
Because of the serious nature of the infections caused by BSL-3 agents , laboratories working with them require restricted access .
Laboratory workers are under medical surveillance , possibly receiving vaccinations for the microbes with which they work .
In addition to the standard PPE already mentioned , laboratory personnel in BSL-3 laboratories must also wear a respirator and work with microbes and infectious agents in a biological safety cabinet at all times .
BSL-3 laboratories require a handsfree sink , an eyewash station near the exit , and two sets of self-closing and locking doors at the entrance .
These laboratories are equipped with directional airflow , meaning that clean air is pulled through the laboratory from clean areas to potentially contaminated areas .
This air can not be recirculated , so a constant supply of clean air is required .
BSL-4 agents are the most dangerous and often fatal .
These microbes are typically exotic , are easily transmitted by inhalation , and cause infections for which there are no treatments or vaccinations .
Examples include Ebola virus and Marburg virus , both of which cause hemorrhagic fevers , and smallpox virus .
There are only a small number of laboratories in the United States and around the world appropriately equipped to work with these agents .
In addition to BSL-3 precautions , laboratory workers in BSL-4 facilities must also change their clothing on entering the laboratory , shower on exiting , and decontaminate all material on exiting .
While working in the laboratory , they must either wear a full-body protective suit with a designated air supply or conduct all work within a biological safety cabinet with a high-efficiency particulate air ( HEPA ) -filtered air supply and a doubly HEPA-filtered exhaust .
If wearing a suit , the air pressure within the suit must be higher than that outside the suit , so that if a leak in the suit occurs , laboratory air that may be contaminated can not be drawn into the suit .
The laboratory itself must be located either in a separate building or in an isolated portion of a building and have its own air supply and exhaust system , as well as its own decontamination system .
The BSLs are summarized in .
The most extreme protocols for microbial control aim to achieve sterilization : the complete removal or killing of all vegetative cells , endospores , and viruses from the targeted item or environment .
Sterilization protocols are generally reserved for laboratory , medical , manufacturing , and food industry settings , where it may be imperative for certain items to be completely free of potentially infectious agents .
Sterilization can be accomplished through either physical means , such as exposure to high heat , pressure , or filtration through an appropriate filter , or by chemical means .
Chemicals that can be used to achieve sterilization are called sterilants .
Sterilants effectively kill all microbes and viruses , and , with appropriate exposure time , can also kill endospores .
For many clinical purposes , aseptic technique is necessary to prevent contamination of sterile surfaces .
Aseptic technique involves a combination of protocols that collectively maintain sterility , or asepsis , thus preventing contamination of the patient with microbes and infectious agents .
Medical procedures that carry risk of contamination must be performed in a sterile field , a designated area that is kept free of all vegetative microbes , endospores , and viruses .
Sterile fields are created according to protocols requiring the use of sterilized materials , such as packaging and drapings , and strict procedures for washing and application of sterilants .
Other protocols are followed to maintain the sterile field while the medical procedure is being performed .
One food sterilization protocol , commercial sterilization , uses heat at a temperature low enough to preserve food quality but high enough to destroy common pathogens responsible for food poisoning , such as C. botulinum .
Because C. botulinum and its endospores are commonly found in soil , they may easily contaminate crops during harvesting , and these endospores can later germinate within the anaerobic environment once foods are canned .
Metal cans of food contaminated with C. botulinum will bulge due to the microbe ’ s production of gases ; contaminated jars of food typically bulge at the metal lid .
To eliminate the risk for C. botulinum contamination , commercial food-canning protocols are designed with a large margin of error .
They assume an impossibly large population of endospores ( 10 per can ) and aim to reduce this population to 1 endospore per can to ensure the safety of canned foods .
For example , lowand medium-acid foods are heated to 121 °C for a minimum of 2.52 minutes , which is the time it would take to reduce a population of 10 endospores per can down to 1 endospore at this temperature .
Even so , commercial sterilization does not eliminate the presence of all microbes ; rather , it targets those pathogens that cause spoilage and foodborne diseases , while allowing many nonpathogenic organisms to survive .
Therefore , “ sterilization ” is somewhat of a misnomer in this context , and commercial sterilization may be more accurately described as “ quasi-sterilization. ” Sterilization protocols require procedures that are not practical , or necessary , in many settings .
Various other methods are used in clinical and nonclinical settings to reduce the microbial load on items .
Although the terms for these methods are often used interchangeably , there are important distinctions .
The process of disinfection inactivates most microbes on the surface of a fomite by using antimicrobial chemicals or heat .
Because some microbes remain , the disinfected item is not considered sterile .
Ideally , disinfectant s should be fast acting , stable , easy to prepare , inexpensive , and easy to use .
An example of a natural disinfectant is vinegar ; its acidity kills most microbes .
Chemical disinfectants , such as chlorine bleach or products containing chlorine , are used to clean nonliving surfaces such as laboratory benches , clinical surfaces , and bathroom sinks .
Typical disinfection does not lead to sterilization because endospores tend to survive even when all vegetative cells have been killed .
Unlike disinfectants , antiseptic s are antimicrobial chemicals safe for use on living skin or tissues .
Examples of antiseptics include hydrogen peroxide and isopropyl alcohol .
The process of applying an antiseptic is called antisepsis .
In addition to the characteristics of a good disinfectant , antiseptics must also be selectively effective against microorganisms and able to penetrate tissue deeply without causing tissue damage .
The type of protocol required to achieve the desired level of cleanliness depends on the particular item to be cleaned .
For example , those used clinically are categorized as critical , semicritical , and noncritical .
Critical items must be sterile because they will be used inside the body , often penetrating sterile tissues or the bloodstream ; examples of critical item s include surgical instruments , catheters , and intravenous fluids .
Gastrointestinal endoscopes and various types of equipment for respiratory therapies are examples of semicritical item s ; they may contact mucous membranes or nonintact skin but do not penetrate tissues .
Semicritical items do not typically need to be sterilized but do require a high level of disinfection .
Items that may contact but not penetrate intact skin are noncritical item s ; examples are bed linens , furniture , crutches , stethoscopes , and blood pressure cuffs .
These articles need to be clean but not highly disinfected .
The act of handwashing is an example of degerming , in which microbial numbers are significantly reduced by gently scrubbing living tissue , most commonly skin , with a mild chemical ( e.g. , soap ) to avoid the transmission of pathogenic microbes .
Wiping the skin with an alcohol swab at an injection site is another example of degerming .
These degerming methods remove most ( but not all ) microbes from the skin ’ s surface .
The term sanitization refers to the cleansing of fomites to remove enough microbes to achieve levels deemed safe for public health .
For example , commercial dishwashers used in the food service industry typically use very hot water and air for washing and drying ; the high temperatures kill most microbes , sanitizing the dishes .
Surfaces in hospital rooms are commonly sanitized using a chemical disinfectant to prevent disease transmission between patients .
summarizes common protocols , definitions , applications , and agents used to control microbial growth .
Physical and chemical methods of microbial control that kill the targeted microorganism are identified by the suffix -cide ( or -cidal ) .
The prefix indicates the type of microbe or infectious agent killed by the treatment method : bactericides kill bacteria , viricides kill or inactivate viruses , and fungicides kill fungi .
Other methods do not kill organisms but , instead , stop their growth , making their population static ; such methods are identified by the suffix -stat ( or -static ) .
For example , bacteriostatic treatments inhibit the growth of bacteria , whereas fungistatic treatments inhibit the growth of fungi .
Factors that determine whether a particular treatment is -cidal or -static include the types of microorganisms targeted , the concentration of the chemical used , and the nature of the treatment applied .
Although -static treatments do not actually kill infectious agents , they are often less toxic to humans and other animals , and may also better preserve the integrity of the item treated .
Such treatments are typically sufficient to keep the microbial population of an item in check .
The reduced toxicity of some of these -static chemicals also allows them to be impregnated safely into plastics to prevent the growth of microbes on these surfaces .
Such plastics are used in products such as toys for children and cutting boards for food preparation .
When used to treat an infection , -static treatments are typically sufficient in an otherwise healthy individual , preventing the pathogen from multiplying , thus allowing the individual ’ s immune system to clear the infection .
The degree of microbial control can be evaluated using a microbial death curve to describe the progress and effectiveness of a particular protocol .
When exposed to a particular microbial control protocol , a fixed percentage of the microbes within the population will die .
Because the rate of killing remains constant even when the population size varies , the percentage killed is more useful information than the absolute number of microbes killed .
Death curves are often plotted as semilog plots just like microbial growth curves because the reduction in microorganisms is typically logarithmic .
The amount of time it takes for a specific protocol to produce a one orderof-magnitude decrease in the number of organisms , or the death of 90 % of the population , is called the decimal reduction time ( DRT ) or D-value .
Several factors contribute to the effectiveness of a disinfecting agent or microbial control protocol .
First , as demonstrated in , the length of time of exposure is important .
Longer exposure times kill more microbes .
Because microbial death of a population exposed to a specific protocol is logarithmic , it takes longer to kill a high-population load than a low-population load exposed to the same protocol .
A shorter treatment time ( measured in multiples of the D-value ) is needed when starting with a smaller number of organisms .
Effectiveness also depends on the susceptibility of the agent to that disinfecting agent or protocol .
The concentration of disinfecting agent or intensity of exposure is also important .
For example , higher temperatures and higher concentrations of disinfectants kill microbes more quickly and effectively .
All these factors must be considered when choosing the appropriate protocol to control microbial growth in a given situation .
Understand and compare various physical methods of controlling microbial growth , including heating , refrigeration , freezing , high-pressure treatment , desiccation , lyophilization , irradiation , and filtration For thousands of years , humans have used various physical methods of microbial control for food preservation .
Common control methods include the application of high temperatures , radiation , filtration , and desiccation ( drying ) , among others .
Many of these methods nonspecifically kill cells by disrupting membranes , changing membrane permeability , or damaging proteins and nucleic acids by denaturation , degradation , or chemical modification .
Various physical methods used for microbial control are described in this section .
Heating is one of the most common—and oldest—forms of microbial control .
It is used in simple techniques like cooking and canning .
Heat can kill microbes by altering their membranes and denaturing proteins .
The thermal death point ( TDP ) of a microorganism is the lowest temperature at which all microbes are killed in a 10-minute exposure .
Different microorganisms will respond differently to high temperatures , with some ( e.g. , endospore-formers such as C. botulinum ) being more heat tolerant .
A similar parameter , the thermal death time ( TDT ) , is the length of time needed to kill all microorganisms in a sample at a given temperature .
These parameters are often used to describe sterilization procedures that use high heat , such as autoclaving .
Boiling is one of the oldest methods of moist-heat control of microbes , and it is typically quite effective at killing vegetative cells and some viruses .
However , boiling is less effective at killing endospores ; some endospores are able to survive up to 20 hours of boiling .
Additionally , boiling may be less effective at higher altitudes , where the boiling point of water is lower and the boiling time needed to kill microbes is therefore longer .
For these reasons , boiling is not considered a useful sterilization technique in the laboratory or clinical setting .
Many different heating protocols can be used for sterilization in the laboratory or clinic , and these protocols can be broken down into two main categories : dry-heat sterilization and moist-heat sterilization .
Aseptic technique in the laboratory typically involves some dry-heat sterilization protocols using direct application of high heat , such as sterilizing inoculating loops .
Incineration at very high temperatures destroys all microorganisms .
Dry heat can also be applied for relatively long periods of time ( at least 2 hours ) at temperatures up to 170 °C by using a dry-heat sterilizer , such as an oven .
However , moist-heat sterilization is typically the more effective protocol because it penetrates cells better than dry heat does .
Autoclaves rely on moist-heat sterilization .
They are used to raise temperatures above the boiling point of water to sterilize items such as surgical equipment from vegetative cells , viruses , and especially endospores , which are known to survive boiling temperatures , without damaging the items .
Charles Chamberland ( 1851–1908 ) designed the modern autoclave in 1879 while working in the laboratory of Louis Pasteur .
The autoclave is still considered the most effective method of sterilization .
Outside laboratory and clinical settings , large industrial autoclaves called retorts allow for moist-heat sterilization on a large scale .
In general , the air in the chamber of an autoclave is removed and replaced with increasing amounts of steam trapped within the enclosed chamber , resulting in increased interior pressure and temperatures above the boiling point of water .
The two main types of autoclaves differ in the way that air is removed from the chamber .
In gravity displacement autoclaves , steam is introduced into the chamber from the top or sides .
Air , which is heavier than steam , sinks to the bottom of the chamber , where it is forced out through a vent .
Complete displacement of air is difficult , especially in larger loads , so longer cycles may be required for such loads .
In prevacuum sterilizers , air is removed completely using a high-speed vacuum before introducing steam into the chamber .
Because air is more completely eliminated , the steam can more easily penetrate wrapped items .
Many autoclaves are capable of both gravity and prevacuum cycles , using the former for the decontamination of waste and sterilization of media and unwrapped glassware , and the latter for sterilization of packaged instruments .
Standard operating temperatures for autoclaves are 121 °C or , in some cases , 132 °C , typically at a pressure of 15 to 20 pounds per square inch ( psi ) .
The length of exposure depends on the volume and nature of material being sterilized , but it is typically 20 minutes or more , with larger volumes requiring longer exposure times to ensure sufficient heat transfer to the materials being sterilized .
The steam must directly contact the liquids or dry materials being sterilized , so containers are left loosely closed and instruments are loosely wrapped in paper or foil .
The key to autoclaving is that the temperature must be high enough to kill endospores to achieve complete sterilization .
Because sterilization is so important to safe medical and laboratory protocols , quality control is essential .
Autoclaves may be equipped with recorders to document the pressures and temperatures achieved during each run .
Additionally , internal indicators of various types should be autoclaved along with the materials to be sterilized to ensure that the proper sterilization temperature has been reached .
One common type of indicator is the use of heat-sensitive autoclave tape , which has white stripes that turn black when the appropriate temperature is achieved during a successful autoclave run .
This type of indicator is relatively inexpensive and can be used during every run .
However , autoclave tape provides no indication of length of exposure , so it can not be used as an indicator of sterility .
Another type of indicator , a biological indicator spore test , uses either a strip of paper or a liquid suspension of the endospores of Geobacillus stearothermophilus to determine whether the endospores are killed by the process .
The endospores of the obligate thermophilic bacterium G. stearothermophilus are the gold standard used for this purpose because of their extreme heat resistance .
Biological spore indicators can also be used to test the effectiveness of other sterilization protocols , including ethylene oxide , dry heat , formaldehyde , gamma radiation , and hydrogen peroxide plasma sterilization using either G .
stearothermophilus , Bacillus atrophaeus , B. subtilis , or B. pumilus spores .
In the case of validating autoclave function , the endospores are incubated after autoclaving to ensure no viable endospores remain .
Bacterial growth subsequent to endospore germination can be monitored by biological indicator spore tests that detect acid metabolites or fluorescence produced by enzymes derived from viable G. stearothermophilus .
A third type of autoclave indicator is the Diack tube , a glass ampule containing a temperature-sensitive pellet that melts at the proper sterilization temperature .
Spore strips or Diack tubes are used periodically to ensure the autoclave is functioning properly .
Although complete sterilization is ideal for many medical applications , it is not always practical for other applications and may also alter the quality of the product .
Boiling and autoclaving are not ideal ways to control microbial growth in many foods because these methods may ruin the consistency and other organoleptic ( sensory ) qualities of the food .
Pasteurization is a form of microbial control for food that uses heat but does not render the food sterile .
Traditional pasteurization kills pathogens and reduces the number of spoilage-causing microbes while maintaining food quality .
The process of pasteurization was first developed by Louis Pasteur in the 1860s as a method for preventing the spoilage of beer and wine .
Today , pasteurization is most commonly used to kill heat-sensitive pathogens in milk and other food products ( e.g. , apple juice and honey ) .
However , because pasteurized food products are not sterile , they will eventually spoil .
The methods used for milk pasteurization balance the temperature and the length of time of treatment .
One method , high-temperature short-time ( HTST ) pasteurization , exposes milk to a temperature of 72 °C for 15 seconds , which lowers bacterial numbers while preserving the quality of the milk .
An alternative is ultra-high-temperature ( UHT ) pasteurization , in which the milk is exposed to a temperature of 138 °C for 2 or more seconds .
UHT pasteurized milk can be stored for a long time in sealed containers without being refrigerated ; however , the very high temperatures alter the proteins in the milk , causing slight changes in the taste and smell .
Still , this method of pasteurization is advantageous in regions where access to refrigeration is limited .
Just as high temperatures are effective for controlling microbial growth , exposing microbes to low temperatures can also be an easy and effective method of microbial control , with the exception of psychrophiles , which prefer cold temperatures ( see ) .
Refrigerators used in home kitchens or in the laboratory maintain temperatures between 0 °C and 7 °C .
This temperature range inhibits microbial metabolism , slowing the growth of microorganisms significantly and helping preserve refrigerated products such as foods or medical supplies .
Certain types of laboratory cultures can be preserved by refrigeration for later use .
Freezing below −2 °C may stop microbial growth and even kill susceptible organisms .
In addition , halted bacterial growth can restart in thawed foods , so thawed foods should be treated like fresh perishables .
Bacterial cultures and medical specimens requiring long-term storage or transport are often frozen at ultra-low temperatures of −70 °C or lower .
These ultra-low temperatures can be achieved by storing specimens on dry ice in an ultra-low freezer or in special liquid nitrogen tanks , which maintain temperatures lower than −196 °C .
Exposure to high pressure kills many microbes .
In the food industry , high-pressure processing ( also called pascalization ) is used to kill bacteria , yeast , molds , parasites , and viruses in foods while maintaining food quality and extending shelf life .
The application of high pressure between 100 and 800 MPa ( sea level atmospheric pressure is about 0.1 MPa ) is sufficient to kill vegetative cells by protein denaturation , but endospores may survive these pressures .
In clinical settings , hyperbaric oxygen therapy is sometimes used to treat infections .
In this form of therapy , a patient breathes pure oxygen at a pressure higher than normal atmospheric pressure , typically between 1 and 3 atmospheres ( atm ) .
This is achieved by placing the patient in a hyperbaric chamber or by supplying the pressurized oxygen through a breathing tube .
Hyperbaric oxygen therapy helps increase oxygen saturation in tissues that become hypoxic due to infection and inflammation .
This increased oxygen concentration enhances the body ’ s immune response by increasing the activities of neutrophils and macrophages , white blood cells that fight infections .
Increased oxygen levels also contribute to the formation of toxic free radicals that inhibit the growth of oxygen-sensitive or anaerobic bacteria like as Clostridium perfringens , a common cause of gas gangrene .
In C. perfringens infections , hyperbaric oxygen therapy can also reduce secretion of a bacterial toxin that causes tissue destruction .
Hyperbaric oxygen therapy also seems to enhance the effectiveness of antibiotic treatments .
Unfortunately , some rare risks include oxygen toxicity and effects on delicate tissues , such as the eyes , middle ear , and lungs , which may be damaged by the increased air pressure .
High pressure processing is not commonly used for disinfection or sterilization of fomites .
Although the application of pressure and steam in an autoclave is effective for killing endospores , it is the high temperature achieved , and not the pressure directly , that results in endospore death .
Drying , also known as desiccation or dehydration , is a method that has been used for millennia to preserve foods such as raisins , prunes , and jerky .
It works because all cells , including microbes , require water for their metabolism and survival .
Although drying controls microbial growth , it might not kill all microbes or their endospores , which may start to regrow when conditions are more favorable and water content is restored .
In some cases , foods are dried in the sun , relying on evaporation to achieve desiccation .
Freeze-drying , or lyophilization , is another method of dessication in which an item is rapidly frozen ( “ snap-frozen ” ) and placed under vacuum so that water is lost by sublimation .
Lyophilization combines both exposure to cold temperatures and desiccation , making it quite effective for controlling microbial growth .
In addition , lyophilization causes less damage to an item than conventional desiccation and better preserves the item ’ s original qualities .
Lyophilized items may be stored at room temperature if packaged appropriately to prevent moisture acquisition .
Lyophilization is used for preservation in the food industry and is also used in the laboratory for the long-term storage and transportation of microbial cultures .
The water content of foods and materials , called the water activity , can be lowered without physical drying by the addition of solutes such as salts or sugars .
Many microorganisms do not survive these conditions of high osmotic pressure .
Honey , for example , is 80 % sucrose , an environment in which very few microorganisms are capable of growing , thereby eliminating the need for refrigeration .
Salted meats and fish , like ham and cod , respectively , were critically important foods before the age of refrigeration .
Fruits were preserved by adding sugar , making jams and jellies .
However , certain microbes , such as molds and yeasts , tend to be more tolerant of desiccation and high osmotic pressures , and , thus , may still contaminate these types of foods .
Radiation in various forms , from high-energy radiation to sunlight , can be used to kill microbes or inhibit their growth .
Ionizing radiation includes X-rays , gamma rays , and high-energy electron beams .
Ionizing radiation is strong enough to pass into the cell , where it alters molecular structures and damages cell components .
For example , ionizing radiation introduces double-strand breaks in DNA molecules .
This may directly cause DNA mutations to occur , or mutations may be introduced when the cell attempts to repair the DNA damage .
As these mutations accumulate , they eventually lead to cell death .
Both X-rays and gamma rays easily penetrate paper and plastic and can therefore be used to sterilize many packaged materials .
In the laboratory , ionizing radiation is commonly used to sterilize materials that can not be autoclaved , such as plastic Petri dishes and disposable plastic inoculating loops .
For clinical use , ionizing radiation is used to sterilize gloves , intravenous tubing , and other latex and plastic items used for patient care .
Ionizing radiation is also used for the sterilization of other types of delicate , heat-sensitive materials used clinically , including tissues for transplantation , pharmaceutical drugs , and medical equipment .
In Europe , gamma irradiation for food preservation is widely used , although it has been slow to catch on in the United States ( see the box on this topic ) .
Packaged dried spices are also often gamma-irradiated .
Because of their ability to penetrate paper , plastic , thin sheets of wood and metal , and tissue , great care must be taken when using X-rays and gamma irradiation .
These types of ionizing irradiation can not penetrate thick layers of iron or lead , so these metals are commonly used to protect humans who may be potentially exposed .
Another type of radiation , nonionizing radiation , is commonly used for disinfection and uses less energy than ionizing radiation .
It does not penetrate cells or packaging .
Ultraviolet ( UV ) light is one example ; it causes thymine dimers to form between adjacent thymines within a single strand of DNA .
When DNA polymerase encounters the thymine dimer , it does not always incorporate the appropriate complementary nucleotides ( two adenines ) , and this leads to formation of mutations that can ultimately kill microorganisms .
UV light can be used effectively by both consumers and laboratory personnel to control microbial growth .
UV lamps are now commonly incorporated into water purification systems for use in homes .
In addition , small portable UV lights are commonly used by campers to purify water from natural environments before drinking .
Germicidal lamps are also used in surgical suites , biological safety cabinets , and transfer hoods , typically emitting UV light at a wavelength of 260 nm .
Because UV light does not penetrate surfaces and will not pass through plastics or glass , cells must be exposed directly to the light source .
Sunlight has a very broad spectrum that includes UV and visible light .
In some cases , sunlight can be effective against certain bacteria because of both the formation of thymine dimers by UV light and by the production of reactive oxygen products induced in low amounts by exposure to visible light .
The use of high-frequency ultrasound waves to disrupt cell structures is called sonication .
Application of ultrasound waves causes rapid changes in pressure within the intracellular liquid ; this leads to cavitation , the formation of bubbles inside the cell , which can disrupt cell structures and eventually cause the cell to lyse or collapse .
Sonication is useful in the laboratory for efficiently lysing cells to release their contents for further research ; outside the laboratory , sonication is used for cleaning surgical instruments , lenses , and a variety of other objects such as coins , tools , and musical instruments .
Filtration is a method of physically separating microbes from samples .
Air is commonly filtered through highefficiency particulate air ( HEPA ) filter s .
HEPA filters have effective pore sizes of 0.3 µm , small enough to capture bacterial cells , endospores , and many viruses , as air passes through these filters , nearly sterilizing the air on the other side of the filter .
HEPA filters have a variety of applications and are used widely in clinical settings , in cars and airplanes , and even in the home .
For example , they may be found in vacuum cleaners , heating and air-conditioning systems , and air purifiers .
Biological safety cabinets are a good example of the use of HEPA filters .
HEPA filters in biological safety cabinets ( BSCs ) are used to remove particulates in the air either entering the cabinet ( air intake ) , leaving the cabinet ( air exhaust ) , or treating both the intake and exhaust .
Use of an air-intake HEPA filter prevents environmental contaminants from entering the BSC , creating a clean area for handling biological materials .
Use of an air-exhaust HEPA filter prevents laboratory pathogens from contaminating the laboratory , thus maintaining a safe work area for laboratory personnel .
There are three classes of BSCs : I , II , and III .
Each class is designed to provide a different level of protection for laboratory personnel and the environment ; BSC II and III are also designed to protect the materials or devices in the cabinet .
summarizes the level of safety provided by each class of BSC for each BSL .
Class I BSCs protect laboratory workers and the environment from a low to moderate risk for exposure to biological agents used in the laboratory .
Air is drawn into the cabinet and then filtered before exiting through the building ’ s exhaust system .
Class II BSCs use directional air flow and partial barrier systems to contain infectious agents .
Class III BSCs are designed for working with highly infectious agents like those used in BSL-4 laboratories .
They are gas tight , and materials entering or exiting the cabinet must be passed through a double-door system , allowing the intervening space to be decontaminated between uses .
All air is passed through one or two HEPA filters and an air incineration system before being exhausted directly to the outdoors ( not through the building ’ s exhaust system ) .
Personnel can manipulate materials inside the Class III cabinet by using long rubber gloves sealed to the cabinet .
HEPA filters are also commonly used in hospitals and surgical suites to prevent contamination and the spread of airborne microbes through ventilation systems .
HEPA filtration systems may be designed for entire buildings or for individual rooms .
For example , burn units , operating rooms , or isolation units may require special HEPA-filtration systems to remove opportunistic pathogens from the environment because patients in these rooms are particularly vulnerable to infection .
Filtration can also be used to remove microbes from liquid samples using membrane filtration .
Membrane filters for liquids function similarly to HEPA filters for air .
Typically , membrane filters that are used to remove bacteria have an effective pore size of 0.2 µm , smaller than the average size of a bacterium ( 1 µm ) , but filters with smaller pore sizes are available for more specific needs .
Membrane filtration is useful for removing bacteria from various types of heatsensitive solutions used in the laboratory , such as antibiotic solutions and vitamin solutions .
Large volumes of culture media may also be filter sterilized rather than autoclaved to protect heat-sensitive components .
Often when filtering small volumes , syringe filters are used , but vacuum filters are typically used for filtering larger volumes .
and summarize the physical methods of control discussed in this section .
Understand and compare various chemicals used to control microbial growth , including their uses , advantages and disadvantages , chemical structure , and mode of action In addition to physical methods of microbial control , chemicals are also used to control microbial growth .
A wide variety of chemicals can be used as disinfectants or antiseptics .
This section describes the variety of chemicals used as disinfectants and antiseptics , including their mechanisms of action and common uses .
In the 1800s , scientists began experimenting with a variety of chemicals for disinfection .
In the 1860s , British surgeon Joseph Lister ( 1827–1912 ) began using carbolic acid , known as phenol , as a disinfectant for the treatment of surgical wounds ( see ) .
In 1879 , Lister ’ s work inspired the American chemist Joseph Lawrence ( 1836–1909 ) to develop Listerine , an alcohol-based mixture of several related compounds that is still used today as an oral antiseptic .
Today , carbolic acid is no longer used as a surgical disinfectant because it is a skin irritant , but the chemical compounds found in antiseptic mouthwashes and throat lozenges are called phenolics .
Chemically , phenol consists of a benzene ring with an –OH group , and phenolics are compounds that have this group as part of their chemical structure .
Phenolics such as thymol and eucalyptol occur naturally in plants .
Other phenolics can be derived from creosote , a component of coal tar .
Phenolics tend to be stable , persistent on surfaces , and less toxic than phenol .
They inhibit microbial growth by denaturing proteins and disrupting membranes .
Since Lister ’ s time , several phenolic compounds have been used to control microbial growth .
The bisphenol hexachlorophene , a disinfectant , is the active ingredient in pHisoHex , a topical cleansing detergent widely used for handwashing in hospital settings .
pHisoHex is particularly effective against gram-positive bacteria , including those causing staphylococcal and streptococcal skin infections .
pHisoHex was formerly used for bathing infants , but this practice has been discontinued because it has been shown that exposure to hexachlorophene can lead to neurological problems .
Triclosan is another bisphenol compound that has seen widespread application in antibacterial products over the last several decades .
Initially used in toothpastes , triclosan is now commonly used in hand soaps and is frequently impregnated into a wide variety of other products , including cutting boards , knives , shower curtains , clothing , and concrete , to make them antimicrobial .
It is particularly effective against gram-positive bacteria on the skin , as well as certain gram-negative bacteria and yeasts .
Some of the first chemical disinfectants and antiseptics to be used were heavy metals .
Heavy metals kill microbes by binding to proteins , thus inhibiting enzymatic activity .
Heavy metals are oligodynamic , meaning that very small concentrations show significant antimicrobial activity .
Ions of heavy metals bind to sulfur-containing amino acids strongly and bioaccumulate within cells , allowing these metals to reach high localized concentrations .
This causes proteins to denature .
Heavy metals are not selectively toxic to microbial cells .
They may bioaccumulate in human or animal cells , as well , and excessive concentrations can have toxic effects on humans .
If too much silver accumulates in the body , for example , it can result in a condition called argyria , in which the skin turns irreversibly blue-gray .
One way to reduce the potential toxicity of heavy metals is by carefully controlling the duration of exposure and concentration of the heavy metal .
Mercury is an example of a heavy metal that has been used for many years to control microbial growth .
It was used for many centuries to treat syphilis .
Mercury compounds like mercuric chloride are mainly bacteriostatic and have a very broad spectrum of activity .
Various forms of mercury bind to sulfur-containing amino acids within proteins , inhibiting their functions .
In recent decades , the use of such compounds has diminished because of mercury ’ s toxicity .
It is toxic to the central nervous , digestive , and renal systems at high concentrations , and has negative environmental effects , including bioaccumulation in fish .
Topical antiseptics such as mercurochrome , which contains mercury in low concentrations , and merthiolate , a tincture ( a solution of mercury dissolved in alcohol ) were once commonly used .
However , because of concerns about using mercury compounds , these antiseptics are no longer sold in the United States .
Silver has long been used as an antiseptic .
In ancient times , drinking water was stored in silver jugs .
Silvadene cream is commonly used to treat topical wounds and is particularly helpful in preventing infection in burn wounds .
Silver nitrate drops were once routinely applied to the eyes of newborns to protect against ophthalmia neonatorum , eye infections that can occur due to exposure to pathogens in the birth canal , but antibiotic creams are more now commonly used .
Silver is often combined with antibiotics , making the antibiotics thousands of times more effective .
Silver is also commonly incorporated into catheters and bandages , rendering them antimicrobial ; however , there is evidence that heavy metals may also enhance selection for antibiotic resistance .
Several other heavy metals also exhibit antimicrobial activity .
Copper sulfate is a common algicide used to control algal growth in swimming pools and fish tanks .
The use of metallic copper to minimize microbial growth is also becoming more widespread .
Copper linings in incubators help reduce contamination of cell cultures .
The use of copper pots for water storage in underdeveloped countries is being investigated as a way to combat diarrheal diseases .
Copper coatings are also becoming popular for frequently handled objects such as doorknobs , cabinet hardware , and other fixtures in health-care facilities in an attempt to reduce the spread of microbes .
Nickel and zinc coatings are now being used in a similar way .
Other forms of zinc , including zinc chloride and zinc oxide , are also used commercially .
Zinc chloride is quite safe for humans and is commonly found in mouthwashes , substantially increasing their length of effectiveness .
Zinc oxide is found in a variety of products , including topical antiseptic creams such as calamine lotion , diaper ointments , baby powder , and dandruff shampoos .
Other chemicals commonly used for disinfection are the halogens iodine , chlorine , and fluorine .
Iodine works by oxidizing cellular components , including sulfur-containing amino acids , nucleotides , and fatty acids , and destabilizing the macromolecules that contain these molecules .
It is often used as a topical tincture , but it may cause staining or skin irritation .
An iodophor is a compound of iodine complexed with an organic molecule , thereby increasing iodine ’ s stability and , in turn , its efficacy .
One common iodophor is povidone-iodine , which includes a wetting agent that releases iodine relatively slowly .
Betadine is a brand of povidone-iodine commonly used as a hand scrub by medical personnel before surgery and for topical antisepsis of a patient ’ s skin before incision .
Chlorine is another halogen commonly used for disinfection .
When chlorine gas is mixed with water , it produces a strong oxidant called hypochlorous acid , which is uncharged and enters cells easily .
Chlorine gas is commonly used in municipal drinking water and wastewater treatment plants , with the resulting hypochlorous acid producing the actual antimicrobial effect .
Those working at water treatment facilities need to take great care to minimize personal exposure to chlorine gas .
Sodium hypochlorite is the chemical component of common household bleach , and it is also used for a wide variety of disinfecting purposes .
Hypochlorite salts , including sodium and calcium hypochlorites , are used to disinfect swimming pools .
Chlorine gas , sodium hypochlorite , and calcium hypochlorite are also commonly used disinfectants in the food processing and restaurant industries to reduce the spread of foodborne diseases .
Workers in these industries also need to take care to use these products correctly to ensure their own safety as well as the safety of consumers .
A recent joint statement published by the Food and Agriculture Organization ( FAO ) of the United Nations and WHO indicated that none of the many beneficial uses of chlorine products in food processing to reduce the spread of foodborne illness posed risks to consumers .
Another class of chlorinated compounds called chloramines are widely used as disinfectants .
Chloramines are relatively stable , releasing chlorine over long periods time .
Chloramines are derivatives of ammonia by substitution of one , two , or all three hydrogen atoms with chlorine atoms .
Chloramines and other cholorine compounds may be used for disinfection of drinking water , and chloramine tablets are frequently used by the military for this purpose .
After a natural disaster or other event that compromises the public water supply , the CDC recommends disinfecting tap water by adding small amounts of regular household bleach .
Recent research suggests that sodium dichloroisocyanurate ( NaDCC ) may also be a good alternative for drinking water disinfection .
Currently , NaDCC tablets are available for general use and for use by the military , campers , or those with emergency needs ; for these uses , NaDCC is preferable to chloramine tablets .
Chlorine dioxide , a gaseous agent used for fumigation and sterilization of enclosed areas , is also commonly used for the disinfection of water .
Although chlorinated compounds are relatively effective disinfectants , they have their disadvantages .
Some may irritate the skin , nose , or eyes of some individuals , and they may not completely eliminate certain hardy organisms from contaminated drinking water .
The protozoan parasite Cryptosporidium , for example , has a protective outer shell that makes it resistant to chlorinated disinfectants .
Thus , boiling of drinking water in emergency situations is recommended when possible .
The halogen fluorine is also known to have antimicrobial properties that contribute to the prevention of dental caries ( cavities ) .
Fluoride is the main active ingredient of toothpaste and is also commonly added to tap water to help communities maintain oral health .
Chemically , fluoride can become incorporated into the hydroxyapatite of tooth enamel , making it more resistant to corrosive acids produced by the fermentation of oral microbes .
Fluoride also enhances the uptake of calcium and phosphate ions in tooth enamel , promoting remineralization .
In addition to strengthening enamel , fluoride also seems to be bacteriostatic .
It accumulates in plaque-forming bacteria , interfering with their metabolism and reducing their production of the acids that contribute to tooth decay .
Alcohols make up another group of chemicals commonly used as disinfectants and antiseptics .
They work by rapidly denaturing proteins , which inhibits cell metabolism , and by disrupting membranes , which leads to cell lysis .
Once denatured , the proteins may potentially refold if enough water is present in the solution .
Alcohols are typically used at concentrations of about 70 % aqueous solution and , in fact , work better in aqueous solutions than 100 % alcohol solutions .
This is because alcohols coagulate proteins .
In higher alcohol concentrations , rapid coagulation of surface proteins prevents effective penetration of cells .
The most commonly used alcohols for disinfection are ethyl alcohol ( ethanol ) and isopropyl alcohol ( isopropanol , rubbing alcohol ) .
Alcohols tend to be bactericidal and fungicidal , but may also be viricidal for enveloped viruses only .
Although alcohols are not sporicidal , they do inhibit the processes of sporulation and germination .
Alcohols are volatile and dry quickly , but they may also cause skin irritation because they dehydrate the skin at the site of application .
One common clinical use of alcohols is swabbing the skin for degerming before needle injection .
Alcohols also are the active ingredients in instant hand sanitizers , which have gained popularity in recent years .
The alcohol in these hand sanitizers works both by denaturing proteins and by disrupting the microbial cell membrane , but will not work effectively in the presence of visible dirt .
Last , alcohols are used to make tinctures with other antiseptics , such as the iodine tinctures discussed previously in this chapter .
All in all , alcohols are inexpensive and quite effective for the disinfection of a broad range of vegetative microbes .
However , one disadvantage of alcohols is their high volatility , limiting their effectiveness to immediately after application .
Surface-active agents , or surfactants , are a group of chemical compounds that lower the surface tension of water .
Surfactants are the major ingredients in soaps and detergents .
Soaps are salts of long-chain fatty acids and have both polar and nonpolar regions , allowing them to interact with polar and nonpolar regions in other molecules .
They can interact with nonpolar oils and grease to create emulsions in water , loosening and lifting away dirt and microbes from surfaces and skin .
Soaps do not kill or inhibit microbial growth and so are not considered antiseptics or disinfectants .
However , proper use of soaps mechanically carries away microorganisms , effectively degerming a surface .
Some soaps contain added bacteriostatic agents such as triclocarban or cloflucarban , compounds structurally related to triclosan , that introduce antiseptic or disinfectant properties to the soaps .
Soaps , however , often form films that are difficult to rinse away , especially in hard water , which contains high concentrations of calcium and magnesium mineral salts .
Detergents contain synthetic surfactant molecules with both polar and nonpolar regions that have strong cleansing activity but are more soluble , even in hard water , and , therefore , leave behind no soapy deposits .
Anionic detergents , such as those used for laundry , have a negatively charged anion at one end attached to a long hydrophobic chain , whereas cationic detergents have a positively charged cation instead .
Cationic detergents include an important class of disinfectants and antiseptics called the quaternary ammonium salts ( quats ) , named for the characteristic quaternary nitrogen atom that confers the positive charge .
Overall , quats have properties similar to phospholipids , having hydrophilic and hydrophobic ends .
As such , quats have the ability to insert into the bacterial phospholipid bilayer and disrupt membrane integrity .
The cationic charge of quats appears to confer their antimicrobial properties , which are diminished when neutralized .
Quats have several useful properties .
They are stable , nontoxic , inexpensive , colorless , odorless , and tasteless .
They tend to be bactericidal by disrupting membranes .
They are also active against fungi , protozoans , and enveloped viruses , but endospores are unaffected .
In clinical settings , they may be used as antiseptics or to disinfect surfaces .
Mixtures of quats are also commonly found in household cleaners and disinfectants , including many current formulations of Lysol brand products , which contain benzalkonium chlorides as the active ingredients .
Benzalkonium chlorides , along with the quat cetylpyrimidine chloride , are also found in products such as skin antiseptics , oral rinses , and mouthwashes .
Bisbiguanides were first synthesized in the 20th century and are cationic ( positively charged ) molecules known for their antiseptic properties .
One important bisbiguanide antiseptic is chlorhexidine .
It has broad-spectrum activity against yeasts , gram-positive bacteria , and gram-negative bacteria , with the exception of Pseudomonas aeruginosa , which may develop resistance on repeated exposure .
Chlorhexidine disrupts cell membranes and is bacteriostatic at lower concentrations or bactericidal at higher concentrations , in which it actually causes the cells ’ cytoplasmic contents to congeal .
It also has activity against enveloped viruses .
However , chlorhexidine is poorly effective against Mycobacterium tuberculosis and nonenveloped viruses , and it is not sporicidal .
Chlorhexidine is typically used in the clinical setting as a surgical scrub and for other handwashing needs for medical personnel , as well as for topical antisepsis for patients before surgery or needle injection .
It is more persistent than iodophors , providing long-lasting antimicrobial activity .
Chlorhexidine solutions may also be used as oral rinses after oral procedures or to treat gingivitis .
Another bisbiguanide , alexidine , is gaining popularity as a surgical scrub and an oral rinse because it acts faster than chlorhexidine .
The alkylating agent s are a group of strong disinfecting chemicals that act by replacing a hydrogen atom within a molecule with an alkyl group ( C H ) , thereby inactivating enzymes and nucleic acids .
The alkylating agent formaldehyde ( CH OH ) is commonly used in solution at a concentration of 37 % ( known as formalin ) or as a gaseous disinfectant and biocide .
It is a strong , broad-spectrum disinfectant and biocide that has the ability to kill bacteria , viruses , fungi , and endospores , leading to sterilization at low temperatures , which is sometimes a convenient alternative to the more labor-intensive heat sterilization methods .
It also cross-links proteins and has been widely used as a chemical fixative .
Because of this , it is used for the storage of tissue specimens and as an embalming fluid .
It also has been used to inactivate infectious agents in vaccine preparation .
Formaldehyde is very irritating to living tissues and is also carcinogenic ; therefore , it is not used as an antiseptic .
Glutaraldehyde is structurally similar to formaldehyde but has two reactive aldehyde groups , allowing it to act more quickly than formaldehyde .
It is commonly used as a 2 % solution for sterilization and is marketed under the brand name Cidex .
It is used to disinfect a variety of surfaces and surgical and medical equipment .
However , similar to formaldehyde , glutaraldehyde irritates the skin and is not used as an antiseptic .
A new type of disinfectant gaining popularity for the disinfection of medical equipment is o-phthalaldehyde ( OPA ) , which is found in some newer formulations of Cidex and similar products , replacing glutaraldehyde .
oPhthalaldehyde also has two reactive aldehyde groups , but they are linked by an aromatic bridge .
o-Phthalaldehyde is thought to work similarly to glutaraldehyde and formaldehyde , but is much less irritating to skin and nasal passages , produces a minimal odor , does not require processing before use , and is more effective against mycobacteria .
Ethylene oxide is a type of alkylating agent that is used for gaseous sterilization .
It is highly penetrating and can sterilize items within plastic bags such as catheters , disposable items in laboratories and clinical settings ( like packaged Petri dishes ) , and other pieces of equipment .
Ethylene oxide exposure is a form of cold sterilization , making it useful for the sterilization of heat-sensitive items .
Great care needs to be taken with the use of ethylene oxide , however ; it is carcinogenic , like the other alkylating agents , and is also highly explosive .
With careful use and proper aeration of the products after treatment , ethylene oxide is highly effective , and ethylene oxide sterilizers are commonly found in medical settings for sterilizing packaged materials .
β-Propionolactone is an alkylating agent with a different chemical structure than the others already discussed .
Like other alkylating agents , β-propionolactone binds to DNA , thereby inactivating it .
It is a clear liquid with a strong odor and has the ability to kill endospores .
As such , it has been used in either liquid form or as a vapor for the sterilization of medical instruments and tissue grafts , and it is a common component of vaccines , used to maintain their sterility .
It has also been used for the sterilization of nutrient broth , as well as blood plasma , milk , and water .
It is quickly metabolized by animals and humans to lactic acid .
It is also an irritant , however , and may lead to permanent damage of the eyes , kidneys , or liver .
Additionally , it has been shown to be carcinogenic in animals ; thus , precautions are necessary to minimize human exposure to β-propionolactone .
Peroxygens are strong oxidizing agents that can be used as disinfectants or antiseptics .
The most widely used peroxygen is hydrogen peroxide ( H O ) , which is often used in solution to disinfect surfaces and may also be used as a gaseous agent .
Hydrogen peroxide solutions are inexpensive skin antiseptics that break down into water and oxygen gas , both of which are environmentally safe .
This decomposition is accelerated in the presence of light , so hydrogen peroxide solutions typically are sold in brown or opaque bottles .
One disadvantage of using hydrogen peroxide as an antiseptic is that it also causes damage to skin that may delay healing or lead to scarring .
Contact lens cleaners often include hydrogen peroxide as a disinfectant .
Hydrogen peroxide works by producing free radicals that damage cellular macromolecules .
Hydrogen peroxide has broad-spectrum activity , working against gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria ( with slightly greater efficacy against gram-positive bacteria ) , fungi , viruses , and endospores .
However , bacteria that produce the oxygendetoxifying enzymes catalase or peroxidase may have inherent tolerance to low hydrogen peroxide concentrations .
To kill endospores , the length of exposure or concentration of solutions of hydrogen peroxide must be increased .
Gaseous hydrogen peroxide has greater efficacy and can be used as a sterilant for rooms or equipment .
Plasma , a hot , ionized gas , described as the fourth state of matter , is useful for sterilizing equipment because it penetrates surfaces and kills vegetative cells and endospores .
Hydrogen peroxide and peracetic acid , another commonly used peroxygen , each may be introduced as a plasma .
Peracetic acid can be used as a liquid or plasma sterilant insofar as it readily kills endospores , is more effective than hydrogen peroxide even at rather low concentrations , and is immune to inactivation by catalases and peroxidases .
It also breaks down to environmentally innocuous compounds ; in this case , acetic acid and oxygen .
Other examples of peroxygens include benzoyl peroxide and carbamide peroxide .
Benzoyl peroxide is a peroxygen that used in acne medication solutions .
It kills the bacterium Propionibacterium acnes , which is associated with acne .
Carbamide peroxide , an ingredient used in toothpaste , is a peroxygen that combats oral biofilms that cause tooth discoloration and halitosis ( bad breath ) .
Last , ozone gas is a peroxygen with disinfectant qualities and is used to clean air or water supplies .
Overall , peroxygens are highly effective and commonly used , with no associated environmental hazard .
Within the last 15 years , the use of supercritical fluids , especially supercritical carbon dioxide ( scCO ) , has gained popularity for certain sterilizing applications .
When carbon dioxide is brought to approximately 10 times atmospheric pressure , it reaches a supercritical state that has physical properties between those of liquids and gases .
Materials put into a chamber in which carbon dioxide is pressurized in this way can be sterilized because of the ability of scCO to penetrate surfaces .
Supercritical carbon dioxide works by penetrating cells and forming carbonic acid , thereby lowering the cell pH considerably .
This technique is effective against vegetative cells and is also used in combination with peracetic acid to kill endospores .
Its efficacy can also be augmented with increased temperature or by rapid cycles of pressurization and depressurization , which more likely produce cell lysis .
Benefits of scCO include the nonreactive , nontoxic , and nonflammable properties of carbon dioxide , and this protocol is effective at low temperatures .
Unlike other methods , such as heat and irradiation , that can degrade the object being sterilized , the use of scCO preserves the object ’ s integrity and is commonly used for treating foods ( including spices and juices ) and medical devices such as endoscopes .
It is also gaining popularity for disinfecting tissues such as skin , bones , tendons , and ligaments prior to transplantation .
scCO can also be used for pest control because it can kill insect eggs and larvae within products .
Chemical preservatives are used to inhibit microbial growth and minimize spoilage in some foods .
Commonly used chemical preservatives include sorbic acid , benzoic acid , and propionic acid , and their more soluble salts potassium sorbate , sodium benzoate , and calcium propionate , all of which are used to control the growth of molds in acidic foods .
Each of these preservatives is nontoxic and readily metabolized by humans .
They are also flavorless , so they do not compromise the flavor of the foods they preserve .
Sorbic and benzoic acids exhibit increased efficacy as the pH decreases .
Sorbic acid is thought to work by inhibiting various cellular enzymes , including those in the citric acid cycle , as well as catalases and peroxidases .
It is added as a preservative in a wide variety of foods , including dairy , bread , fruit , and vegetable products .
Benzoic acid is found naturally in many types of fruits and berries , spices , and fermented products .
It is thought to work by decreasing intracellular pH , interfering with mechanisms such as oxidative phosphorylation and the uptake of molecules such as amino acids into cells .
Foods preserved with benzoic acid or sodium benzoate include fruit juices , jams , ice creams , pastries , soft drinks , chewing gum , and pickles .
Propionic acid is thought to both inhibit enzymes and decrease intracellular pH , working similarly to benzoic acid .
However , propionic acid is a more effective preservative at a higher pH than either sorbic acid or benzoic acid .
Propionic acid is naturally produced by some cheeses during their ripening and is added to other types of cheese and baked goods to prevent mold contamination .
It is also added to raw dough to prevent contamination by the bacterium Bacillus mesentericus , which causes bread to become ropy .
Other commonly used chemical preservatives include sulfur dioxide and nitrites .
Sulfur dioxide prevents browning of foods and is used for the preservation of dried fruits ; it has been used in winemaking since ancient times .
Sulfur dioxide gas dissolves in water readily , forming sulfites .
Although sulfites can be metabolized by the body , some people have sulfite allergies , including asthmatic reactions .
Additionally , sulfites degrade thiamine , an important nutrient in some foods .
The mode of action of sulfites is not entirely clear , but they may interfere with the disulfide bond ( see ) formation in proteins , inhibiting enzymatic activity .
Alternatively , they may reduce the intracellular pH of the cell , interfering with proton motive force-driven mechanisms .
Nitrites are added to processed meats to maintain color and stop the germination of Clostridium botulinum endospores .
Nitrites are reduced to nitric oxide , which reacts with heme groups and iron-sulfur groups .
When nitric oxide reacts with the heme group within the myoglobin of meats , a red product forms , giving meat its red color .
Alternatively , it is thought that when nitric acid reacts with the iron-sulfur enzyme ferredoxin within bacteria , this electron transport-chain carrier is destroyed , preventing ATP synthesis .
Nitrosamines , however , are carcinogenic and can be produced through exposure of nitrite-preserved meats ( e.g. , hot dogs , lunch meat , breakfast sausage , bacon , meat in canned soups ) to heat during cooking .
The discovery of natural antimicrobial substances produced by other microbes has added to the arsenal of preservatives used in food .
Nisin is an antimicrobial peptide produced by the bacterium Lactococcus lactis and is particularly effective against gram-positive organisms .
Nisin works by disrupting cell wall production , leaving cells more prone to lysis .
It is used to preserve cheeses , meats , and beverages .
Natamycin is an antifungal macrolide antibiotic produced by the bacterium Streptomyces natalensis .
It was approved by the FDA in 1982 and is used to prevent fungal growth in various types of dairy products , including cottage cheese , sliced cheese , and shredded cheese .
Natamycin is also used for meat preservation in countries outside the United States .
Describe why the phenol coefficient is used Compare and contrast the disk-diffusion , use-dilution , and in-use methods for testing the effectiveness of antiseptics , disinfectants , and sterilants The effectiveness of various chemical disinfectants is reflected in the terms used to describe them .
Chemical disinfectants are grouped by the power of their activity , with each category reflecting the types of microbes and viruses its component disinfectants are effective against .
High-level germicides have the ability to kill vegetative cells , fungi , viruses , and endospores , leading to sterilization , with extended use .
Intermediate-level germicides , as their name suggests , are less effective against endospores and certain viruses , and low-level germicides kill only vegetative cells and certain enveloped viruses , and are ineffective against endospores .
However , several environmental conditions influence the potency of an antimicrobial agent and its effectiveness .
For example , length of exposure is particularly important , with longer exposure increasing efficacy .
Similarly , the concentration of the chemical agent is also important , with higher concentrations being more effective than lower ones .
Temperature , pH , and other factors can also affect the potency of a disinfecting agent .
One method to determine the effectiveness of a chemical agent includes swabbing surfaces before and after use to confirm whether a sterile field was maintained during use .
Additional tests are described in the sections that follow .
These tests allow for the maintenance of appropriate disinfection protocols in clinical settings , controlling microbial growth to protect patients , health-care workers , and the community .
The effectiveness of a disinfectant or antiseptic can be determined in a number of ways .
Historically , a chemical agent ’ s effectiveness was often compared with that of phenol , the first chemical agent used by Joseph Lister .
They exposed the test bacteria to the antimicrobial chemical solutions diluted in water for 7.5 minutes .
They then calculated a phenol coefficient for each chemical for each of the two bacteria tested .
A phenol coefficient of 1.0 means that the chemical agent has about the same level of effectiveness as phenol .
A chemical agent with a phenol coefficient of less than 1.0 is less effective than phenol .
An example is formalin , with phenol coefficients of 0.3 ( S. aureus ) and 0.7 ( S. enterica serovar Typhi ) .
A chemical agent with a phenol coefficient greater than 1.0 is more effective than phenol , such as chloramine , with phenol coefficients of 133 and 100 , respectively .
Although the phenol coefficient was once a useful measure of effectiveness , it is no longer commonly used because the conditions and organisms used were arbitrarily chosen .
The disk-diffusion method involves applying different chemicals to separate , sterile filter paper disks .
The disks are then placed on an agar plate that has been inoculated with the targeted bacterium and the chemicals diffuse out of the disks into the agar where the bacteria have been inoculated .
As the “ lawn ” of bacteria grows , zones of inhibition of microbial growth are observed as clear areas around the disks .
Although there are other factors that contribute to the sizes of zones of inhibition ( e.g. , whether the agent is water soluble and able to diffuse in the agar ) , larger zones typically correlate to increased inhibition effectiveness of the chemical agent .
The diameter across each zone is measured in millimeters .
Other methods are also used for measuring the effectiveness of a chemical agent in clinical settings .
The use-dilution test is commonly used to determine a chemical ’ s disinfection effectiveness on an inanimate surface .
For this test , a cylinder of stainless steel is dipped in a culture of the targeted microorganism and then dried .
The cylinder is then dipped in solutions of disinfectant at various concentrations for a specified amount of time .
Finally , the cylinder is transferred to a new test tube containing fresh sterile medium that does not contain disinfectant , and this test tube is incubated .
Bacterial survival is demonstrated by the presence of turbidity in the medium , whereas killing of the target organism on the cylinder by the disinfectant will produce no turbidity .
Disinfectant manufacturers perform use-dilution tests to validate the efficacy claims for their products , as designated by the EPA .
An in-use test can determine whether an actively used solution of disinfectant in a clinical setting is microbially contaminated .
A 1-mL sample of the used disinfectant is diluted into 9 mL of sterile broth medium that also contains a compound to inactivate the disinfectant .
Ten drops , totaling approximately 0.2 mL of this mixture , are then inoculated onto each of two agar plates .
One plate is incubated at 37 °C for 3 days and the other is incubated at room temperature for 7 days .
The plates are monitored for growth of microbial colonies .
Growth of five or more colonies on either plate suggests that viable microbial cells existed in the disinfectant solution and that it is contaminated .
Such in-use tests monitor the effectiveness of disinfectants in the clinical setting .
In nature , some microbes produce substances that inhibit or kill other microbes that might otherwise compete for the same resources .
Humans have successfully exploited these abilities , using microbes to mass-produce substances that can be used as antimicrobial drugs .
Since their discovery , antimicrobial drugs have saved countless lives , and they remain an essential tool for treating and controlling infectious disease .
But their widespread and often unnecessary use has had an unintended side effect : the rise of multidrug-resistant microbial strains .
In this chapter , we will discuss how antimicrobial drugs work , why microbes develop resistance , and what health professionals can do to encourage responsible use of antimicrobials .
Compare and contrast natural , semisynthetic , and synthetic antimicrobial drugs Describe the chemotherapeutic approaches of ancient societies Describe the historically important individuals and events that led to the development of antimicrobial drugs Most people associate the term chemotherapy with treatments for cancer .
However , chemotherapy is actually a broader term that refers to any use of chemicals or drugs to treat disease .
Chemotherapy may involve drugs that target cancerous cells or tissues , or it may involve antimicrobial drugs that target infectious microorganisms .
Antimicrobial drugs typically work by destroying or interfering with microbial structures and enzymes , either killing microbial cells or inhibiting of their growth .
But before we examine how these drugs work , we will briefly explore the history of humans ’ use of antimicrobials for the purpose of chemotherapy .
Although the discovery of antimicrobials and their subsequent widespread use is commonly associated with modern medicine , there is evidence that humans have been exposed to antimicrobial compounds for millennia .
Chemical analyses of the skeletal remains of people from Nubia ( now found in present-day Sudan ) dating from between 350 and 550 AD have shown residue of the antimicrobial agent tetracycline in high enough quantities to suggest the purposeful fermentation of tetracycline-producing Streptomyces during the beer-making process .
The resulting beer , which was thick and gruel-like , was used to treat a variety of ailments in both adults and children , including gum disease and wounds .
The antimicrobial properties of certain plants may also have been recognized by various cultures around the world , including Indian and Chinese herbalists who have long used plants for a wide variety of medical purposes .
Healers of many cultures understood the antimicrobial properties of fungi and their use of moldy bread or other mold-containing products to treat wounds has been well documented for centuries .
Today , while about 80 % of the world ’ s population still relies on plant-derived medicines , scientists are now discovering the active compounds conferring the medicinal benefits contained in many of these traditionally used plants .
Societies relied on traditional medicine for thousands of years ; however , the first half of the 20th century brought an era of strategic drug discovery .
In the early 1900s , the German physician and scientist Paul Ehrlich ( 1854–1915 ) set out to discover or synthesize chemical compounds capable of killing infectious microbes without harming the patient .
In 1909 , after screening more than 600 arsenic-containing compounds , Ehrlich ’ s assistant Sahachiro Hata ( 1873–1938 ) found one such “ magic bullet. ” Compound 606 targeted the bacterium Treponema pallidum , the causative agent of syphilis .
Compound 606 was found to successfully cure syphilis in rabbits and soon after was marketed under the name Salvarsan as a remedy for the disease in humans .
Ehrlich ’ s innovative approach of systematically screening a wide variety of compounds remains a common strategy for the discovery of new antimicrobial agents even today .
A few decades later , German scientists Josef Klarer , Fritz Mietzsch , and Gerhard Domagk discovered the antibacterial activity of a synthetic dye , prontosil , that could treat streptococcal and staphylococcal infections in mice .
Domagk ’ s own daughter was one of the first human recipients of the drug , which completely cured her of a severe streptococcal infection that had resulted from a poke with an embroidery needle .
Gerhard Domagk ( 1895–1964 ) was awarded the Nobel Prize in Medicine in 1939 for his work with prontosil and sulfanilamide , the active breakdown product of prontosil in the body .
Sulfanilamide , the first synthetic antimicrobial created , served as the foundation for the chemical development of a family of sulfa drugs .
A synthetic antimicrobial is a drug that is developed from a chemical not found in nature .
The success of the sulfa drugs led to the discovery and production of additional important classes of synthetic antimicrobials , including the quinolines and oxazolidinones .
A few years before the discovery of prontosil , scientist Alexander Fleming ( 1881–1955 ) made his own accidental discovery that turned out to be monumental .
In 1928 , Fleming returned from holiday and examined some old plates of staphylococci in his research laboratory at St. Mary ’ s Hospital in London .
He observed that contaminating mold growth ( subsequently identified as a strain of Penicillium notatum ) inhibited staphylococcal growth on one plate .
Fleming , therefore , is credited with the discovery of penicillin , the first natural antibiotic , .
Further experimentation showed that penicillin from the mold was antibacterial against streptococci , meningococci , and Corynebacterium diphtheriae , the causative agent of diphtheria .
Fleming and his colleagues were credited with discovering and identifying penicillin , but its isolation and mass production were accomplished by a team of researchers at Oxford University under the direction of Howard Florey ( 1898–1968 ) and Ernst Chain ( 1906–1979 ) .
In 1940 , the research team purified penicillin and reported its success as an antimicrobial agent against streptococcal infections in mice .
Their subsequent work with human subjects also showed penicillin to be very effective .
Because of their important work , Fleming , Florey , and Chain were awarded the Nobel Prize in Physiology and Medicine in 1945 .
In the early 1940s , scientist Dorothy Hodgkin ( 1910–1994 ) , who studied crystallography at Oxford University , used X-rays to analyze the structure of a variety of natural products .
In 1946 , she determined the structure of penicillin , for which she was awarded the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1964 .
Once the structure was understood , scientists could modify it to produce a variety of semisynthetic penicillins .
A semisynthetic antimicrobial is a chemically modified derivative of a natural antibiotic .
The chemical modifications are generally designed to increase the range of bacteria targeted , increase stability , decrease toxicity , or confer other properties beneficial for treating infections .
Penicillin is only one example of a natural antibiotic .
Also in the 1940s , Selman Waksman ( 1888–1973 ) , a prominent soil microbiologist at Rutgers University , led a research team that discovered several antimicrobials , including actinomycin , streptomycin , and neomycin .
The discoveries of these antimicrobials stemmed from Waksman ’ s study of fungi and the Actinobacteria , including soil bacteria in the genus Streptomyces , known for their natural production of a wide variety of antimicrobials .
His work earned him the Nobel Prize in Physiology and Medicine in 1952 .
The actinomycetes are the source of more than half of all natural antibiotics and continue to serve as an excellent reservoir for the discovery of novel antimicrobial agents .
Some researchers argue that we have not yet come close to tapping the full antimicrobial potential of this group .
The following discussion will focus primarily on antibacterial drugs , but the concepts translate to other antimicrobial classes .
Identify factors and variables that can influence the side effects of a drug Antibacterial drugs can be either bacteriostatic or bactericidal in their interactions with target bacteria .
Bacteriostatic drugs cause a reversible inhibition of growth , with bacterial growth restarting after elimination of the drug .
By contrast , bactericidal drugs kill their target bacteria .
The decision of whether to use a bacteriostatic or bactericidal drugs depends on the type of infection and the immune status of the patient .
In a patient with strong immune defenses , bacteriostatic and bactericidal drugs can be effective in achieving clinical cure .
However , when a patient is immunocompromised , a bactericidal drug is essential for the successful treatment of infections .
Regardless of the immune status of the patient , life-threatening infections such as acute endocarditis require the use of a bactericidal drug .
The spectrum of activity of an antibacterial drug relates to diversity of targeted bacteria .
A narrow-spectrum antimicrobial targets only specific subsets of bacterial pathogens .
For example , some narrow-spectrum drugs only target gram-positive bacteria , whereas others target only gram-negative bacteria .
If the pathogen causing an infection has been identified , it is best to use a narrow-spectrum antimicrobial and minimize collateral damage to the normal microbiota .
A broad-spectrum antimicrobial targets a wide variety of bacterial pathogens , including both grampositive and gram-negative species , and is frequently used as empiric therapy to cover a wide range of potential pathogens while waiting on the laboratory identification of the infecting pathogen .
Broad-spectrum antimicrobials are also used for polymicrobic infections ( mixed infection with multiple bacterial species ) , or as prophylactic prevention of infections with surgery/invasive procedures .
Finally , broad-spectrum antimicrobials may be selected to treat an infection when a narrow-spectrum drug fails because of development of drug resistance by the target pathogen .
The risk associated with using broad-spectrum antimicrobials is that they will also target a broad spectrum of the normal microbiota , increasing the risk of a superinfection , a secondary infection in a patient having a preexisting infection .
A superinfection develops when the antibacterial intended for the preexisting infection kills the protective microbiota , allowing another pathogen resistant to the antibacterial to proliferate and cause a secondary infection .
Common examples of superinfections that develop as a result of antimicrobial usage include yeast infections ( candidiasis ) and pseudomembranous colitis caused by Clostridium difficile , which can be fatal .
The amount of medication given during a certain time interval is the dosage , and it must be determined carefully to ensure that optimum therapeutic drug levels are achieved at the site of infection without causing significant toxicity ( side effects ) to the patient .
Each drug class is associated with a variety of potential side effects , and some of these are described for specific drugs later in this chapter .
Despite best efforts to optimize dosing , allergic reactions and other potentially serious side effects do occur .
Therefore , the goal is to select the optimum dosage that will minimize the risk of side effects while still achieving clinical cure , and there are important factors to consider when selecting the best dose and dosage interval .
For example , in children , dose is based upon the patient ’ s mass .
However , the same is not true for adults and children 12 years of age and older , for which there is typically a single standard dose regardless of the patient ’ s mass .
With the great variability in adult body mass , some experts have argued that mass should be considered for all patients when determining appropriate dosage .
An additional consideration is how drugs are metabolized and eliminated from the body .
In general , patients with a history of liver or kidney dysfunction may experience reduced drug metabolism or clearance from the body , resulting in increased drug levels that may lead to toxicity and make them more prone to side effects .
There are also some factors specific to the drugs themselves that influence appropriate dose and time interval between doses .
For example , the half-life , or rate at which 50 % of a drug is eliminated from the plasma , can vary significantly between drugs .
Some drugs have a short half-life of only 1 hour and must be given multiple times a day , whereas other drugs have half-lives exceeding 12 hours and can be given as a single dose every 24 hours .
Although a longer half-life can be considered an advantage for an antibacterial when it comes to convenient dosing intervals , the longer half-life can also be a concern for a drug that has serious side effects because drug levels may remain toxic for a longer time .
Last , some drugs are dose dependent , meaning they are more effective when administered in large doses to provide high levels for a short time at the site of infection .
Others are time dependent , meaning they are more effective when lower optimum levels are maintained over a longer period of time .
The route of administration , the method used to introduce a drug into the body , is also an important consideration for drug therapy .
Drugs that can be administered orally are generally preferred because patients can more conveniently take these drugs at home .
However , some drugs are not absorbed easily from the gastrointestinal ( GI ) tract into the bloodstream .
These drugs are often useful for treating diseases of the intestinal tract , such as tapeworms treated with niclosamide , or for decontaminating the bowel , as with colistin .
Some drugs that are not absorbed easily , such as bacitracin , polymyxin , and several antifungals , are available as topical preparations for treatment of superficial skin infections .
Sometimes , patients may not initially be able to take oral medications because of their illness ( e.g. , vomiting , intubation for respirator ) .
When this occurs , and when a chosen drug is not absorbed in the GI tract , administration of the drug by a parenteral route ( intravenous or intramuscular injection ) is preferred and typically is performed in health-care settings .
For most drugs , the plasma levels achieved by intravenous administration is substantially higher than levels achieved by oral or intramuscular administration , and this can also be an important consideration when choosing the route of administration for treating an infection .
For the optimum treatment of some infections , two antibacterial drugs may be administered together to provide a synergistic interaction that is better than the efficacy of either drug alone .
A classic example of synergistic combinations is trimethoprim and sulfamethoxazole ( Bactrim ) .
Individually , these two drugs provide only bacteriostatic inhibition of bacterial growth , but combined , the drugs are bactericidal .
Whereas synergistic drug interactions provide a benefit to the patient , antagonistic interactions produce harmful effects .
Antagonism can occur between two antimicrobials or between antimicrobials and nonantimicrobials being used to treat other conditions .
The effects vary depending on the drugs involved , but antagonistic interactions may cause loss of drug activity , decreased therapeutic levels due to increased metabolism and elimination , or increased potential for toxicity due to decreased metabolism and elimination .
As an example , some antibacterials are absorbed most effectively from the acidic environment of the stomach .
If a patient takes antacids , however , this increases the pH of the stomach and negatively impacts the absorption of these antimicrobials , decreasing their effectiveness in treating an infection .
Studies have also shown an association between use of some antimicrobials and failure of oral contraceptives .
Most antimicrobial drugs currently in clinical use are antibacterial because the prokaryotic cell provides a greater variety of unique targets for selective toxicity , in comparison to fungi , parasites , and viruses .
Each class of antibacterial drugs has a unique mode of action ( the way in which a drug affects microbes at the cellular level ) , and these are summarized in and .
Several different classes of antibacterials block steps in the biosynthesis of peptidoglycan , making cells more susceptible to osmotic lysis .
Therefore , antibacterials that target cell wall biosynthesis are bactericidal in their action .
Because human cells do not make peptidoglycan , this mode of action is an excellent example of selective toxicity .
Penicillin , the first antibiotic discovered , is one of several antibacterials within a class called β-lactams .
This group of compounds includes the penicillins , cephalosporins , monobactams , and carbapenems , and is characterized by the presence of a β-lactam ring found within the central structure of the drug molecule .
The βlactam antibacterials block the crosslinking of peptide chains during the biosynthesis of new peptidoglycan in the bacterial cell wall .
They are able to block this process because the β-lactam structure is similar to the structure of the peptidoglycan subunit component that is recognized by the crosslinking transpeptidase enzyme , also known as a penicillin-binding protein ( PBP ) .
Penicillin G and penicillin V are natural antibiotics from fungi and are primarily active against gram-positive bacterial pathogens , and a few gram-negative bacterial pathogens such as Pasteurella multocida .
summarizes the semisynthetic development of some of the penicillins .
Adding an amino group ( -NH ) to penicillin G created the aminopenicillins ( i.e. , ampicillin and amoxicillin ) that have increased spectrum of activity against more gramnegative pathogens .
Furthermore , the addition of a hydroxyl group ( -OH ) to amoxicillin increased acid stability , which allows for improved oral absorption .
Methicillin is a semisynthetic penicillin that was developed to address the spread of enzymes ( penicillinases ) that were inactivating the other penicillins .
Changing the R group of penicillin G to the more bulky dimethoxyphenyl group provided protection of the β-lactam ring from enzymatic destruction by penicillinases , giving us the first penicillinase-resistant penicillin .
Similar to the penicillins , cephalosporins contain a β-lactam ring and block the transpeptidase activity of penicillin-binding proteins .
However , the β-lactam ring of cephalosporins is fused to a six-member ring , rather than the five-member ring found in penicillins .
This chemical difference provides cephalosporins with an increased resistance to enzymatic inactivation by β-lactamases .
The drug cephalosporin C was originally isolated from the fungus Cephalosporium acremonium in the 1950s and has a similar spectrum of activity to that of penicillin against gram-positive bacteria but is active against more gram-negative bacteria than penicillin .
Another important structural difference is that cephalosporin C possesses two R groups , compared with just one R group for penicillin , and this provides for greater diversity in chemical alterations and development of semisynthetic cephalosporins .
The family of semisynthetic cephalosporins is much larger than the penicillins , and these drugs have been classified into generations based primarily on their spectrum of activity , increasing in spectrum from the narrow-spectrum , first-generation cephalosporins to the broad-spectrum , fourth-generation cephalosporins .
A new fifth-generation cephalosporin has been developed that is active against methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus ( MRSA ) .
The carbapenems and monobactams also have a β-lactam ring as part of their core structure , and they inhibit the transpeptidase activity of penicillin-binding proteins .
The only monobactam used clinically is aztreonam .
It is a narrow-spectrum antibacterial with activity only against gram-negative bacteria .
In contrast , the carbapenem family includes a variety of semisynthetic drugs ( imipenem , meropenem , and doripenem ) that provide very broad-spectrum activity against gram-positive and gram-negative bacterial pathogens .
The drug vancomycin , a member of a class of compounds called the glycopeptides , was discovered in the 1950s as a natural antibiotic from the actinomycete Amycolatopsis orientalis .
Similar to the β-lactams , vancomycin inhibits cell wall biosynthesis and is bactericidal .
However , in contrast to the β-lactams , the structure of vancomycin is not similar to that of cell-wall peptidoglycan subunits and does not directly inactivate penicillin-binding proteins .
Vancomycin also structurally blocks transpeptidation .
Vancomycin is bactericidal against grampositive bacterial pathogens , but it is not active against gram-negative bacteria because of its inability to penetrate the protective outer membrane .
The drug bacitracin consists of a group of structurally similar peptide antibiotics originally isolated from Bacillus subtilis .
Bacitracin blocks the activity of a specific cell-membrane molecule that is responsible for the movement of peptidoglycan precursors from the cytoplasm to the exterior of the cell , ultimately preventing their incorporation into the cell wall .
Bacitracin is effective against a wide range of bacteria , including gram-positive organisms found on the skin , such as Staphylococcus and Streptococcus .
Although it may be administered orally or intramuscularly in some circumstances , bacitracin has been shown to be nephrotoxic ( damaging to the kidneys ) .
Therefore , it is more commonly combined with neomycin and polymyxin in topical ointments such as Neosporin .
The cytoplasmic ribosomes found in animal cells ( 80S ) are structurally distinct from those found in bacterial cells ( 70S ) , making protein biosynthesis a good selective target for antibacterial drugs .
Several types of protein biosynthesis inhibitors are discussed in this section and are summarized in .
Aminoglycosides are large , highly polar antibacterial drugs that bind to the 30S subunit of bacterial ribosomes , impairing the proofreading ability of the ribosomal complex .
This impairment causes mismatches between codons and anticodons , resulting in the production of proteins with incorrect amino acids and shortened proteins that insert into the cytoplasmic membrane .
Disruption of the cytoplasmic membrane by the faulty proteins kills the bacterial cells .
The aminoglycosides , which include drugs such as streptomycin , gentamicin , neomycin , and kanamycin , are potent broad-spectrum antibacterials .
However , aminoglycosides have been shown to be nephrotoxic ( damaging to kidney ) , neurotoxic ( damaging to the nervous system ) , and ototoxic ( damaging to the ear ) .
Another class of antibacterial compounds that bind to the 30S subunit to aminoglycosides , these drugs are bacteriostatic and inhibit protein synthesis by blocking the association of tRNAs with the ribosome during translation .
Naturally occurring tetracyclines produced by various strains of Streptomyces were first discovered in the 1940s , and several semisynthetic tetracyclines , including doxycycline and tigecycline have also been produced .
Although the tetracyclines are broad spectrum in their coverage of bacterial pathogens , side effects that can limit their use include phototoxicity , permanent discoloration of developing teeth , and liver toxicity with high doses or in patients with kidney impairment .
is the tetracyclines .
In contrast There are several classes of antibacterial drugs that work through binding to the 50S subunit of bacterial ribosomes .
Macrolides are broad-spectrum , bacteriostatic drugs that block elongation of proteins by inhibiting peptide bond formation between specific combinations of amino acids .
The first macrolide was erythromycin .
It was isolated in 1952 from Streptomyces erythreus and prevents translocation .
Semisynthetic macrolides include azithromycin and telithromycin .
Telithromycin is the first semisynthetic within the class known as ketolides .
Although telithromycin shows increased potency and activity against macrolideresistant pathogens , the US Food and Drug Administration ( FDA ) has limited its use to treatment of communityacquired pneumonia and requires the strongest “ black box warning ” label for the drug because of serious hepatotoxicity .
The lincosamides include the naturally produced lincomycin and semisynthetic clindamycin .
Although structurally distinct from macrolides , lincosamides are similar in their mode of action to the macrolides through binding to the 50S ribosomal subunit and preventing peptide bond formation .
Lincosamides are particularly active against streptococcal and staphylococcal infections .
The drug chloramphenicol represents yet another structurally distinct class of antibacterials that also bind to the 50S ribosome , inhibiting peptide bond formation .
Chloramphenicol , produced by Streptomyces venezuelae , was discovered in 1947 ; in 1949 , it became the first broad-spectrum antibiotic that was approved by the FDA .
Although it is a natural antibiotic , it is also easily synthesized and was the first antibacterial drug synthetically mass produced .
As a result of its mass production , broad-spectrum coverage , and ability to penetrate into tissues efficiently , chloramphenicol was historically used to treat a wide range of infections , from meningitis to typhoid fever to conjunctivitis .
Unfortunately , serious side effects , such as lethal gray baby syndrome , and suppression of bone marrow production , have limited its clinical role .
Chloramphenicol also causes anemia in two different ways .
One mechanism involves the targeting of mitochondrial ribosomes within hematopoietic stem cells , causing a reversible , dose-dependent suppression of blood cell production .
Once chloramphenicol dosing is discontinued , blood cell production returns to normal .
This mechanism highlights the similarity between 70S ribosomes of bacteria and the 70S ribosomes within our mitochondria .
The second mechanism of anemia is idiosyncratic ( i.e. , the mechanism is not understood ) , and involves an irreversible lethal loss of blood cell production known as aplastic anemia .
This mechanism of aplastic anemia is not dose dependent and can develop after therapy has stopped .
Because of toxicity concerns , chloramphenicol usage in humans is now rare in the United States and is limited to severe infections unable to be treated by less toxic antibiotics .
Because its side effects are much less severe in animals , it is used in veterinary medicine .
The oxazolidinones , including linezolid , are a new broad-spectrum class of synthetic protein synthesis inhibitors that bind to the 50S ribosomal subunit of both gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria .
However , their mechanism of action seems somewhat different from that of the other 50S subunit-binding protein synthesis inhibitors already discussed .
Instead , they seem to interfere with formation of the initiation complex ( association of the 50S subunit , 30S subunit , and other factors ) for translation , and they prevent translocation of the growing protein from the ribosomal A site to the P site .
summarizes the protein synthesis inhibitors .
A small group of antibacterials target the bacterial membrane as their mode of action .
The polymyxins are natural polypeptide antibiotics that were first discovered in 1947 as products of Bacillus polymyxa ; only polymyxin B and polymyxin E ( colistin ) have been used clinically .
They are lipophilic with detergent-like properties and interact with the lipopolysaccharide component of the outer membrane of gram-negative bacteria , ultimately disrupting both their outer and inner membranes and killing the bacterial cells .
Unfortunately , the membrane-targeting mechanism is not a selective toxicity , and these drugs also target and damage the membrane of cells in the kidney and nervous system when administered systemically .
However , the emergence and spread of multidrug-resistant pathogens has led to increased use of intravenous colistin in hospitals , often as a drug of last resort to treat serious infections .
The antibacterial daptomycin is a cyclic lipopeptide produced by Streptomyces roseosporus that seems to work like the polymyxins , inserting in the bacterial cell membrane and disrupting it .
However , in contrast to polymyxin B and colistin , which target only gram-negative bacteria , daptomycin specifically targets gram-positive bacteria .
It is typically administered intravenously and seems to be well tolerated , showing reversible toxicity in skeletal muscles .
Some antibacterial drugs work by inhibiting nucleic acid synthesis .
For example , metronidazole is a semisynthetic member of the nitroimidazole family that is also an antiprotozoan .
It interferes with DNA replication in target cells .
The drug rifampin is a semisynthetic member of the rifamycin family and functions by blocking RNA polymerase activity in bacteria .
The RNA polymerase enzymes in bacteria are structurally different from those in eukaryotes , providing for selective toxicity against bacterial cells .
It is used for the treatment of a variety of infections , but its primary use , often in a cocktail with other antibacterial drugs , is against mycobacteria that cause tuberculosis .
Despite the selectivity of its mechanism , rifampin can induce liver enzymes to increase metabolism of other drugs being administered ( antagonism ) , leading to hepatotoxicity ( liver toxicity ) and negatively influencing the bioavailability and therapeutic effect of the companion drugs .
One member of the quinolone family , a group of synthetic antimicrobials , is nalidixic acid .
It was discovered in 1962 as a byproduct during the synthesis of chloroquine , an antimalarial drug .
Nalidixic acid selectively inhibits the activity of bacterial DNA gyrase , blocking DNA replication .
Chemical modifications to the original quinolone backbone have resulted in the production of fluoroquinolones , like ciprofloxacin and levofloxacin , which also inhibit the activity of DNA gyrase .
Ciprofloxacin and levofloxacin are effective against a broad spectrum of gram-positive or gram-negative bacteria , and are among the most commonly prescribed antibiotics used to treat a wide range of infections , including urinary tract infections , respiratory infections , abdominal infections , and skin infections .
However , despite their selective toxicity against DNA gyrase , side effects associated with different fluoroquinolones include phototoxicity , neurotoxicity , cardiotoxicity , glucose metabolism dysfunction , and increased risk for tendon rupture .
Some synthetic drugs control bacterial infections by functioning as antimetabolites , competitive inhibitors for bacterial metabolic enzymes .
The sulfonamides ( sulfa drugs ) are the oldest synthetic antibacterial agents and are structural analogues of para -aminobenzoic acid ( PABA ) , an early intermediate in folic acid synthesis .
By inhibiting the enzyme involved in the production of dihydrofolic acid , sulfonamides block bacterial biosynthesis of folic acid and , subsequently , pyrimidines and purines required for nucleic acid synthesis .
This mechanism of action provides bacteriostatic inhibition of growth against a wide spectrum of gram-positive and gram-negative pathogens .
Because humans obtain folic acid from food instead of synthesizing it intracellularly , sulfonamides are selectively toxic for bacteria .
However , allergic reactions to sulfa drugs are common .
The sulfones are structurally similar to sulfonamides but are not commonly used today except for the treatment of Hansen ’ s disease ( leprosy ) .
Trimethoprim is a synthetic antimicrobial compound that serves as an antimetabolite within the same folic acid synthesis pathway as sulfonamides .
However , trimethoprim is a structural analogue of dihydrofolic acid and inhibits a later step in the metabolic pathway .
Trimethoprim is used in combination with the sulfa drug sulfamethoxazole to treat urinary tract infections , ear infections , and bronchitis .
As discussed , the combination of trimethoprim and sulfamethoxazole is an example of antibacterial synergy .
When used alone , each antimetabolite only decreases production of folic acid to a level where bacteriostatic inhibition of growth occurs .
However , when used in combination , inhibition of both steps in the metabolic pathway decreases folic acid synthesis to a level that is lethal to the bacterial cell .
Because of the importance of folic acid during fetal development , sulfa drugs and trimethoprim use should be carefully considered during early pregnancy .
The drug isoniazid is an antimetabolite with specific toxicity for mycobacteria and has long been used in combination with rifampin or streptomycin in the treatment of tuberculosis .
Possible side effects of isoniazid use include hepatotoxicity , neurotoxicity , and hematologic toxicity ( anemia ) .
Bedaquiline , representing the synthetic antibacterial class of compounds called the diarylquinolines , uses a novel mode of action that specifically inhibits mycobacterial growth .
Although the specific mechanism has yet to be elucidated , this compound appears to interfere with the function of ATP synthases , perhaps by interfering with the use of the hydrogen ion gradient for ATP synthesis by oxidative phosphorylation , leading to reduced ATP production .
Due to its side effects , including hepatotoxicity and potentially lethal heart arrhythmia , its use is reserved for serious , otherwise untreatable cases of tuberculosis .
Explain the differences between modes of action of drugs that target fungi , protozoa , helminths , and viruses Because fungi , protozoa , and helminths are eukaryotic , their cells are very similar to human cells , making it more difficult to develop drugs with selective toxicity .
Additionally , viruses replicate within human host cells , making it difficult to develop drugs that are selectively toxic to viruses or virus-infected cells .
Despite these challenges , there are antimicrobial drugs that target fungi , protozoa , helminths , and viruses , and some even target more than one type of microbe .
, , , and provide examples for antimicrobial drugs in these various classes .
The most common mode of action for antifungal drugs is the disruption of the cell membrane .
Antifungals take advantage of small differences between fungi and humans in the biochemical pathways that synthesize sterols .
The sterols are important in maintaining proper membrane fluidity and , hence , proper function of the cell membrane .
For most fungi , the predominant membrane sterol is ergosterol .
Because human cell membranes use cholesterol , instead of ergosterol , antifungal drugs that target ergosterol synthesis are selectively toxic .
The imidazoles are synthetic fungicides that disrupt ergosterol biosynthesis ; they are commonly used in medical applications and also in agriculture to keep seeds and harvested crops from molding .
Examples include miconazole , ketoconazole , and clotrimazole , which are used to treat fungal skin infections such as ringworm , specifically tinea pedis ( athlete ’ s foot ) , tinea cruris ( jock itch ) , and tinea corporis .
These infections are commonly caused by dermatophytes of the genera Trichophyton , Epidermophyton , and Microsporum .
Miconazole is also used predominantly for the treatment of vaginal yeast infections caused by the fungus Candida , and ketoconazole is used for the treatment of tinea versicolor and dandruff , which both can be caused by the fungus Malassezia .
The triazole drugs , including fluconazole , also inhibit ergosterol biosynthesis .
However , they can be administered orally or intravenously for the treatment of several types of systemic yeast infections , including oral thrush and cryptococcal meningitis , both of which are prevalent in patients with AIDS .
The triazoles also exhibit more selective toxicity , compared with the imidazoles , and are associated with fewer side effects .
The allylamines , a structurally different class of synthetic antifungal drugs , inhibit an earlier step in ergosterol biosynthesis .
The most commonly used allylamine is terbinafine ( marketed under the brand name Lamisil ) , which is used topically for the treatment of dermatophytic skin infections like athlete ’ s foot , ringworm , and jock itch .
Oral treatment with terbinafine is also used for the treatment of fingernail and toenail fungus , but it can be associated with the rare side effect of hepatotoxicity .
The polyenes are a class of antifungal agents naturally produced by certain actinomycete soil bacteria and are structurally related to macrolides .
These large , lipophilic molecules bind to ergosterol in fungal cytoplasmic membranes , thus creating pores .
Common examples include nystatin and amphotericin B. Nystatin is typically used as a topical treatment for yeast infections of the skin , mouth , and vagina , but may also be used for intestinal fungal infections .
The drug amphotericin B is used for systemic fungal infections like aspergillosis , cryptococcal meningitis , histoplasmosis , blastomycosis , and candidiasis .
Amphotericin B was the only antifungal drug available for several decades , but its use is associated with some serious side effects , including nephrotoxicity ( kidney toxicity ) .
Amphotericin B is often used in combination with flucytosine , a fluorinated pyrimidine analog that is converted by a fungal-specific enzyme into a toxic product that interferes with both DNA replication and protein synthesis in fungi .
Flucytosine is also associated with hepatotoxicity ( liver toxicity ) and bone marrow depression .
Beyond targeting ergosterol in fungal cell membranes , there are a few antifungal drugs that target other fungal structures .
The echinocandins , including caspofungin , are a group of naturally produced antifungal compounds that block the synthesis of β ( 1→3 ) glucan found in fungal cell walls but not found in human cells .
This drug class has the nickname “ penicillin for fungi. ” Caspofungin is used for the treatment of aspergillosis as well as systemic yeast infections .
Although chitin is only a minor constituent of fungal cell walls , it is also absent in human cells , making it a selective target .
The polyoxins and nikkomycins are naturally produced antifungals that target chitin synthesis .
Polyoxins are used to control fungi for agricultural purposes , and nikkomycin Z is currently under development for use in humans to treat yeast infections and Valley fever ( coccidioidomycosis ) , a fungal disease prevalent in the southwestern US .
The naturally produced antifungal griseofulvin is thought to specifically disrupt fungal cell division by interfering with microtubules involved in spindle formation during mitosis .
It was one of the first antifungals , but its use is associated with hepatotoxicity .
It is typically administered orally to treat various types of dermatophytic skin infections when other topical antifungal treatments are ineffective .
There are a few drugs that act as antimetabolites against fungal processes .
For example , atovaquone , a representative of the naphthoquinone drug class , is a semisynthetic antimetabolite for fungal and protozoal versions of a mitochondrial cytochrome important in electron transport .
Structurally , it is an analog of coenzyme Q , with which it competes for electron binding .
It is particularly useful for the treatment of Pneumocystis pneumonia caused by Pneumocystis jirovecii .
The antibacterial sulfamethoxazole-trimethoprim combination also acts as an antimetabolite against P. jirovecii .
shows the various therapeutic classes of antifungal drugs , categorized by mode of action , with examples of each .
There are a few mechanisms by which antiprotozoan drugs target infectious protozoans .
Some are antimetabolites , such as atovaquone , proguanil , and artemisinins .
Atovaquone , in addition to being antifungal , blocks electron transport in protozoans and is used for the treatment of protozoan infections including malaria , babesiosis , and toxoplasmosis .
Proguanil is another synthetic antimetabolite that is processed in parasitic cells into its active form , which inhibits protozoan folic acid synthesis .
It is often used in combination with atovaquone , and the combination is marketed as Malarone for both malaria treatment and prevention .
Artemisinin , a plant-derived antifungal first discovered by Chinese scientists in the 1970s , is quite effective against malaria .
Semisynthetic derivatives of artemisinin are more water soluble than the natural version , which makes them more bioavailable .
Although the exact mechanism of action is unclear , artemisinins appear to act as prodrugs that are metabolized by target cells to produce reactive oxygen species ( ROS ) that damage target cells .
Due to the rise in resistance to antimalarial drugs , artemisinins are also commonly used in combination with other antimalarial compounds in artemisinin-based combination therapy ( ACT ) .
Several antimetabolites are used for the treatment of toxoplasmosis caused by the parasite Toxoplasma gondii .
The synthetic sulfa drug sulfadiazine competitively inhibits an enzyme in folic acid production in parasites and can be used to treat malaria and toxoplasmosis .
Pyrimethamine is a synthetic drug that inhibits a different enzyme in the folic acid production pathway and is often used in combination with sulfadoxine ( another sulfa drug ) for the treatment of malaria or in combination with sulfadiazine for the treatment of toxoplasmosis .
Side effects of pyrimethamine include decreased bone marrow activity that may cause increased bruising and low red blood cell counts .
When toxicity is a concern , spiramycin , a macrolide protein synthesis inhibitor , is typically administered for the treatment of toxoplasmosis .
Two classes of antiprotozoan drugs interfere with nucleic acid synthesis : nitroimidazoles and quinolines .
Nitroimidazoles , including semisynthetic metronidazole , which was discussed previously as an antibacterial drug , and synthetic tinidazole , are useful in combating a wide variety of protozoan pathogens , such as Giardia lamblia , Entamoeba histolytica , and Trichomonas vaginalis .
Upon introduction into these cells in low-oxygen environments , nitroimidazoles become activated and introduce DNA strand breakage , interfering with DNA replication in target cells .
Unfortunately , metronidazole is associated with carcinogenesis ( the development of cancer ) in humans .
Another type of synthetic antiprotozoan drug that has long been thought to specifically interfere with DNA replication in certain pathogens is pentamidine .
It has historically been used for the treatment of African sleeping sickness ( caused by the protozoan Trypanosoma brucei ) and leishmaniasis ( caused by protozoa of the genus Leishmania ) , but it is also an alternative treatment for the fungus Pneumocystis .
Some studies indicate that it specifically binds to the DNA found within kinetoplasts ( kDNA ; long mitochondrion-like structures unique to trypanosomes ) , leading to the cleavage of kDNA .
However , nuclear DNA of both the parasite and host remain unaffected .
It also appears to bind to tRNA , inhibiting the addition of amino acids to tRNA , thus preventing protein synthesis .
Possible side effects of pentamidine use include pancreatic dysfunction and liver damage .
The quinolines are a class of synthetic compounds related to quinine , which has a long history of use against malaria .
Quinolines are thought to interfere with heme detoxification , which is necessary for the parasite ’ s effective breakdown of hemoglobin into amino acids inside red blood cells .
The synthetic derivatives chloroquine , quinacrine ( also called mepacrine ) , and mefloquine are commonly used as antimalarials , and chloroquine is also used to treat amebiasis typically caused by Entamoeba histolytica .
Long-term prophylactic use of chloroquine or mefloquine may result in serious side effects , including hallucinations or cardiac issues .
Patients with glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency experience severe anemia when treated with chloroquine .
Because helminths are multicellular eukaryotes like humans , developing drugs with selective toxicity against them is extremely challenging .
Despite this , several effective classes have been developed .
Synthetic benzimidazoles , like mebendazole and albendazole , bind to helminthic β-tubulin , preventing microtubule formation .
Microtubules in the intestinal cells of the worms seem to be particularly affected , leading to a reduction in glucose uptake .
Besides their activity against a broad range of helminths , benzimidazoles are also active against many protozoans , fungi , and viruses , and their use for inhibiting mitosis and cell cycle progression in cancer cells is under study .
Possible side effects of their use include liver damage and bone marrow suppression .
The avermectins are members of the macrolide family that were first discovered from a Japanese soil isolate , Streptomyces avermectinius .
A more potent semisynthetic derivative of avermectin is ivermectin , which binds to glutamate-gated chloride channels specific to invertebrates including helminths , blocking neuronal transmission and causing starvation , paralysis , and death of the worms .
Ivermectin is used to treat roundworm diseases , including onchocerciasis ( also called river blindness , caused by the worm Onchocerca volvulus ) and strongyloidiasis ( caused by the worm Strongyloides stercoralis or S. fuelleborni ) .
Ivermectin also can also treat parasitic insects like mites , lice , and bed bugs , and is nontoxic to humans .
Niclosamide is a synthetic drug that has been used for over 50 years to treat tapeworm infections .
Although its mode of action is not entirely clear , niclosamide appears to inhibit ATP formation under anaerobic conditions and inhibit oxidative phosphorylation in the mitochondria of its target pathogens .
Niclosamide is not absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract , thus it can achieve high localized intestinal concentrations in patients .
Recently , it has been shown to also have antibacterial , antiviral , and antitumor activities .
Another synthetic antihelminthic drug is praziquantel , which used for the treatment of parasitic tapeworms and liver flukes , and is particularly useful for the treatment of schistosomiasis ( caused by blood flukes from three genera of Schistosoma ) .
Its mode of action remains unclear , but it appears to cause the influx of calcium into the worm , resulting in intense spasm and paralysis of the worm .
It is often used as a preferred alternative to niclosamide in the treatment of tapeworms when gastrointestinal discomfort limits niclosamide use .
The thioxanthenones , another class of synthetic drugs structurally related to quinine , exhibit antischistosomal activity by inhibiting RNA synthesis .
The thioxanthenone lucanthone and its metabolite hycanthone were the first used clinically , but serious neurological , gastrointestinal , cardiovascular , and hepatic side effects led to their discontinuation .
Oxamniquine , a less toxic derivative of hycanthone , is only effective against S. mansoni , one of the three species known to cause schistosomiasis in humans .
Praziquantel was developed to target the other two schistosome species , but concerns about increasing resistance have renewed interest in developing additional derivatives of oxamniquine to target all three clinically important schistosome species .
Unlike the complex structure of fungi , protozoa , and helminths , viral structure is simple , consisting of nucleic acid , a protein coat , viral enzymes , and , sometimes , a lipid envelope .
Furthermore , viruses are obligate intracellular pathogens that use the host ’ s cellular machinery to replicate .
These characteristics make it difficult to develop drugs with selective toxicity against viruses .
Many antiviral drugs are nucleoside analogs and function by inhibiting nucleic acid biosynthesis .
For example , acyclovir ( marketed as Zovirax ) is a synthetic analog of the nucleoside guanosine .
It is activated by the herpes simplex viral enzyme thymidine kinase and , when added to a growing DNA strand during replication , causes chain termination .
Its specificity for virus-infected cells comes from both the need for a viral enzyme to activate it and the increased affinity of the activated form for viral DNA polymerase compared to host cell DNA polymerase .
Acyclovir and its derivatives are frequently used for the treatment of herpes virus infections , including genital herpes , chickenpox , shingles , Epstein-Barr virus infections , and cytomegalovirus infections .
Acyclovir can be administered either topically or systemically , depending on the infection .
One possible side effect of its use includes nephrotoxicity .
The drug adenine-arabinoside , marketed as vidarabine , is a synthetic analog to deoxyadenosine that has a mechanism of action similar to that of acyclovir .
It is also effective for the treatment of various human herpes viruses .
However , because of possible side effects involving low white blood cell counts and neurotoxicity , treatment with acyclovir is now preferred .
Ribavirin , another synthetic guanosine analog , works by a mechanism of action that is not entirely clear .
It appears to interfere with both DNA and RNA synthesis , perhaps by reducing intracellular pools of guanosine triphosphate ( GTP ) .
Ribavarin also appears to inhibit the RNA polymerase of hepatitis C virus .
It is primarily used for the treatment of the RNA viruses like hepatitis C ( in combination therapy with interferon ) and respiratory syncytial virus .
Possible side effects of ribavirin use include anemia and developmental effects on unborn children in pregnant patients .
In recent years , another nucleotide analog , sofosbuvir ( Solvaldi ) , has also been developed for the treatment of hepatitis C. Sofosbuvir is a uridine analog that interferes with viral polymerase activity .
It is commonly coadministered with ribavirin , with and without interferon .
Inhibition of nucleic acid synthesis is not the only target of synthetic antivirals .
Although the mode of action of amantadine and its relative rimantadine are not entirely clear , these drugs appear to bind to a transmembrane protein that is involved in the escape of the influenza virus from endosomes .
Blocking escape of the virus also prevents viral RNA release into host cells and subsequent viral replication .
Increasing resistance has limited the use of amantadine and rimantadine in the treatment of influenza A .
Use of amantadine can result in neurological side effects , but the side effects of rimantadine seem less severe .
Interestingly , because of their effects on brain chemicals such as dopamine and NMDA ( N-methyl D-aspartate ) , amantadine and rimantadine are also used for the treatment of Parkinson ’ s disease .
Neuraminidase inhibitors , ( Rapivab ) , specifically target influenza viruses by blocking the activity of influenza virus neuraminidase , preventing the release of the virus from infected cells .
These three antivirals can decrease flu symptoms and shorten the duration of illness , but they differ in their modes of administration : olsetamivir is administered orally , zanamivir is inhaled , and peramivir is administered intravenously .
Resistance to these neuraminidase inhibitors still seems to be minimal .
Pleconaril is a synthetic antiviral under development that showed promise for the treatment of picornaviruses .
Use of pleconaril for the treatment of the common cold caused by rhinoviruses was not approved by the FDA in 2002 because of lack of proven effectiveness , lack of stability , and association with irregular menstruation .
Its further development for this purpose was halted in 2007 .
However , pleconaril is still being investigated for use in the treatment of life-threatening complications of enteroviruses , such as meningitis and sepsis .
It is also being investigated for use in the global eradication of a specific enterovirus , polio .
Pleconaril seems to work by binding to the viral capsid and preventing the uncoating of viral particles inside host cells during viral infection .
Viruses with complex life cycles , such as HIV , can be more difficult to treat .
First , HIV targets CD4-positive white blood cells , which are necessary for a normal immune response to infection .
Second , HIV is a retrovirus , meaning ( Relenza ) , and peramivir including olsetamivir ( Tamiflu ) , zanamivir that it converts its RNA genome into a DNA copy that integrates into the host cell ’ s genome , thus hiding within host cell DNA .
Third , the HIV reverse transcriptase lacks proofreading activity and introduces mutations that allow for rapid development of antiviral drug resistance .
To help prevent the emergence of resistance , a combination of specific synthetic antiviral drugs is typically used in ART for HIV .
Drugs called protease inhibitors ( e.g. , ritonavir ) block the processing of viral proteins and prevent viral maturation .
Protease inhibitors are also being developed for the treatment of other viral types .
For example , simeprevir ( Olysio ) has been approved for the treatment of hepatitis C and is administered with ribavirin and interferon in combination therapy .
The integrase inhibitors ( e.g. , raltegravir ) , block the activity of the HIV integrase responsible for the recombination of a DNA copy of the viral genome into the host cell chromosome .
shows the various therapeutic classes of antiviral drugs , categorized by mode of action , with examples of each .
Explain the concept of drug resistance Describe how microorganisms develop or acquire drug resistance Describe the different mechanisms of antimicrobial drug resistance Antimicrobial resistance is not a new phenomenon .
In nature , microbes are constantly evolving in order to overcome the antimicrobial compounds produced by other microorganisms .
Human development of antimicrobial drugs and their widespread clinical use has simply provided another selective pressure that promotes further evolution .
Several important factors can accelerate the evolution of drug resistance .
These include the overuse and misuse of antimicrobials , inappropriate use of antimicrobials , subtherapeutic dosing , and patient noncompliance with the recommended course of treatment .
Exposure of a pathogen to an antimicrobial compound can select for chromosomal mutations conferring resistance , which can be transferred vertically to subsequent microbial generations and eventually become predominant in a microbial population that is repeatedly exposed to the antimicrobial .
Alternatively , many genes responsible for drug resistance are found on plasmids or in transposons that can be transferred easily between microbes through horizontal gene transfer ( see ) .
Transposons also have the ability to move resistance genes between plasmids and chromosomes to further promote the spread of resistance .
There are several common mechanisms for drug resistance , which are summarized in .
These mechanisms include enzymatic modification of the drug , modification of the antimicrobial target , and prevention of drug penetration or accumulation .
Resistance genes may code for enzymes that chemically modify an antimicrobial , thereby inactivating it , or destroy an antimicrobial through hydrolysis .
Resistance to many types of antimicrobials occurs through this mechanism .
For example , aminoglycoside resistance can occur through enzymatic transfer of chemical groups to the drug molecule , impairing the binding of the drug to its bacterial target .
For β-lactams , bacterial resistance can involve the enzymatic hydrolysis of the β-lactam bond within the β-lactam ring of the drug molecule .
Once the β-lactam bond is broken , the drug loses its antibacterial activity .
This mechanism of resistance is mediated by β-lactamases , which are the most common mechanism of β-lactam resistance .
Inactivation of rifampin commonly occurs through glycosylation , phosphorylation , or adenosine diphosphate ( ADP ) ribosylation , and resistance to macrolides and lincosamides can also occur due to enzymatic inactivation of the drug or modification .
Microbes may develop resistance mechanisms that involve inhibiting the accumulation of an antimicrobial drug , which then prevents the drug from reaching its cellular target .
This strategy is common among gram-negative pathogens and can involve changes in outer membrane lipid composition , porin channel selectivity , and/or porin channel concentrations .
For example , a common mechanism of carbapenem resistance among Pseudomonas aeruginosa is to decrease the amount of its OprD porin , which is the primary portal of entry for carbapenems through the outer membrane of this pathogen .
Additionally , many gram-positive and gram-negative pathogenic bacteria produce efflux pumps that actively transport an antimicrobial drug out of the cell and prevent the accumulation of drug to a level that would be antibacterial .
For example , resistance to β-lactams , tetracyclines , and fluoroquinolones commonly occurs through active efflux out of the cell , and it is rather common for a single efflux pump to have the ability to translocate multiple types of antimicrobials .
Because antimicrobial drugs have very specific targets , structural changes to those targets can prevent drug binding , rendering the drug ineffective .
Through spontaneous mutations in the genes encoding antibacterial drug targets , bacteria have an evolutionary advantage that allows them to develop resistance to drugs .
This mechanism of resistance development is quite common .
Genetic changes impacting the active site of penicillin-binding proteins ( PBPs ) can inhibit the binding of β-lactam drugs and provide resistance to multiple drugs within this class .
This mechanism is very common among strains of Streptococcus pneumoniae , which alter their own PBPs through genetic mechanisms .
In contrast , strains of Staphylococcus aureus develop resistance to methicillin ( MRSA ) through the acquisition of a new low-affinity PBP , rather than structurally alter their existing PBPs .
Not only does this new low-affinity PBP provide resistance to methicillin but it provides resistance to virtually all β-lactam drugs , with the exception of the newer fifth-generation cephalosporins designed specifically to kill MRSA .
When an antimicrobial drug functions as an antimetabolite , targeting a specific enzyme to inhibit its activity , there are additional ways that microbial resistance may occur .
First , the microbe may overproduce the target enzyme such that there is a sufficient amount of antimicrobial-free enzyme to carry out the proper enzymatic reaction .
Second , the bacterial cell may develop a bypass that circumvents the need for the functional target enzyme .
Both of these strategies have been found as mechanisms of sulfonamide resistance .
Vancomycin resistance among S. aureus has been shown to involve the decreased cross-linkage of peptide chains in the bacterial cell wall , which provides an increase in targets for vancomycin to bind to in the outer cell wall .
Increased binding of vancomycin in the outer cell wall provides a blockage that prevents free drug molecules from penetrating to where they can block new cell wall synthesis .
A recently discovered mechanism of resistance called target mimicry involves the production of proteins that bind and sequester drugs , preventing the drugs from binding to their target .
For example , Mycobacterium tuberculosis produces a protein with regular pentapeptide repeats that appears to mimic the structure of DNA .
This protein binds fluoroquinolones , sequestering them and keeping them from binding to DNA , providing M. tuberculosis resistance to fluoroquinolones .
Proteins that mimic the A-site of the bacterial ribosome have been found to contribute to aminoglycoside resistance as well .
From a clinical perspective , our greatest concerns are multidrug-resistant microbes ( MDRs ) and cross resistance .
MDRs are colloquially known as “ superbugs ” and carry one or more resistance mechanism ( s ) , making them resistant to multiple antimicrobials .
In cross-resistance , a single resistance mechanism confers resistance to multiple antimicrobial drugs .
For example , having an efflux pump that can export multiple antimicrobial drugs is a common way for microbes to be resistant to multiple drugs by using a single resistance mechanism .
In recent years , several clinically important superbugs have emerged , and the CDC reports that superbugs are responsible for more than 2 million infections in the US annually , resulting in at least 23,000 fatalities .
Several of the superbugs discussed in the following sections have been dubbed the ESKAPE pathogens .
This acronym refers to the names of the pathogens ( Enterococcus faecium , Staphylococcus aureus , Klebsiella pneumoniae , Acinetobacter baumannii , Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Enterobacter spp . )
but it is also fitting in that these pathogens are able to “ escape ” many conventional forms of antimicrobial therapy .
As such , infections by ESKAPE pathogens can be difficult to treat and they cause a large number of nosocomial infections .
Methicillin , a semisynthetic penicillin , was designed to resist inactivation by β-lactamases .
Unfortunately , soon after the introduction of methicillin to clinical practice , methicillin-resistant strains of S. aureus appeared and started to spread .
The mechanism of resistance , acquisition of a new low-affinity PBP , provided S. aureus with resistance to all available β-lactams .
Strains of methicillin-resistant S. aureus ( MRSA ) are widespread opportunistic pathogens and a particular concern for skin and other wound infections , but may also cause pneumonia and septicemia .
Although originally a problem in health-care settings ( hospital-acquired MRSA [ HA-MRSA ] ) , MRSA infections are now also acquired through contact with contaminated members of the general public , called community-associated MRSA ( CA-MRSA ) .
Approximately one-third of the population carries S. aureus as a member of their normal nasal microbiota without illness , and about 6 % of these strains are methicillin resistant .
Vancomycin is only effective against gram-positive organisms , and it is used to treat wound infections , septic infections , endocarditis , and meningitis that are caused by pathogens resistant to other antibiotics .
It is considered one of the last lines of defense against such resistant infections , including MRSA .
The mechanism of vancomycin resistance among enterococci is target modification involving a structural change to the peptide component of the peptidoglycan subunits , preventing vancomycin from binding .
These strains are typically spread among patients in clinical settings by contact with health-care workers and contaminated surfaces and medical equipment .
VISA and VRSA strains differ from each other in the mechanism of resistance and the degree of resistance each mechanism confers .
VISA strains exhibit intermediate resistance , with a minimum inhibitory concentration ( MIC ) of 4–8 μg/mL , and the mechanism involves an increase in vancomycin targets .
VISA strains decrease the crosslinking of peptide chains in the cell wall , providing an increase in vancomycin targets that trap vancomycin in the outer cell wall .
In contrast , VRSA strains acquire vancomycin resistance through horizontal transfer of resistance genes from VRE , an opportunity provided in individuals coinfected with both VRE and MRSA .
VRSA exhibit a higher level of resistance , with MICs of 16 μg/mL or higher .
In the case of all three types of vancomycin-resistant bacteria , rapid clinical identification is necessary so proper procedures to limit spread can be implemented .
The oxazolidinones like linezolid are useful for the treatment of these vancomycin-resistant , opportunistic pathogens , as well as MRSA .
Gram-negative pathogens that produce extended-spectrum β-lactamases ( ESBLs ) show resistance well beyond just penicillins .
The spectrum of β-lactams inactivated by ESBLs provides for resistance to all penicillins , cephalosporins , monobactams , and the β-lactamase-inhibitor combinations , but not the carbapenems .
These multidrug-resistant bacteria are members of the intestinal microbiota of some individuals , but they are also important causes of opportunistic infections in hospitalized patients , from whom they can be spread to other people .
The occurrence of carbapenem-resistant Enterobacteriaceae ( CRE ) and carbapenem resistance among other gramnegative bacteria ( e.g. , P. aeruginosa , Acinetobacter baumannii , Stenotrophomonas maltophila ) is a growing healthcare concern .
These pathogens develop resistance to carbapenems through a variety of mechanisms , including production of carbapenemases ( broad-spectrum β-lactamases that inactivate all β-lactams , including carbapenems ) , active efflux of carbapenems out of the cell , and/or prevention of carbapenem entry through porin channels .
Similar to concerns with ESBLs , carbapenem-resistant , gram-negative pathogens are usually resistant to multiple classes of antibacterials , and some have even developed pan-resistance ( resistance to all available antibacterials ) .
Infections with carbapenem-resistant , gram-negative pathogens commonly occur in health-care settings through interaction with contaminated individuals or medical devices , or as a result of surgery .
The emergence of multidrug-resistant Mycobacterium tuberculosis ( MDR-TB ) and extensively drug-resistant Mycobacterium tuberculosis ( XDR-TB ) is also of significant global concern .
MDR-TB strains are resistant to both rifampin and isoniazid , the drug combination typically prescribed for treatment of tuberculosis .
XDR-TB strains are additionally resistant to any fluoroquinolone and at least one of three other drugs ( amikacin , kanamycin , or capreomycin ) used as a second line of treatment , leaving these patients very few treatment options .
Both types of pathogens are particularly problematic in immunocompromised persons , including those suffering from HIV infection .
The development of resistance in these strains often results from the incorrect use of antimicrobials for tuberculosis treatment , selecting for resistance .
Describe how the Kirby-Bauer disk diffusion test determines the susceptibility of a microbe to an antibacterial drug .
Explain the significance of the minimal inhibitory concentration and the minimal bactericidal concentration relative to the effectiveness of an antimicrobial drug .
Testing the effectiveness of antimicrobial drugs against specific organisms is important in identifying their spectrum of activity and the therapeutic dosage .
This type of test , generally described as antimicrobial susceptibility testing ( AST ) , is commonly performed in a clinical laboratory .
In this section , we will discuss common methods of testing the effectiveness of antimicrobials .
The Kirby-Bauer disk diffusion test has long been used as a starting point for determining the susceptibility of specific microbes to various antimicrobial drugs .
The Kirby-Bauer assay starts with a Mueller-Hinton agar plate on which a confluent lawn is inoculated with a patient ’ s isolated bacterial pathogen .
Filter paper disks impregnated with known amounts of antibacterial drugs to be tested are then placed on the agar plate .
As the bacterial inoculum grows , antibiotic diffuses from the circular disk into the agar and interacts with the growing bacteria .
Antibacterial activity is observed as a clear circular zone of inhibition around the drug-impregnated disk , similar to the disk-diffusion assay depicted in .
The diameter of the zone of inhibition , measured in millimeters and compared to a standardized chart , determines the susceptibility or resistance of the bacterial pathogen to the drug .
There are multiple factors that determine the size of a zone of inhibition in this assay , including drug solubility , rate of drug diffusion through agar , the thickness of the agar medium , and the drug concentration impregnated into the disk .
Due to a lack of standardization of these factors , interpretation of the Kirby-Bauer disk diffusion assay provides only limited information on susceptibility and resistance to the drugs tested .
The assay can not distinguish between bacteriostatic and bactericidal activities , and differences in zone sizes can not be used to compare drug potencies or efficacies .
Comparison of zone sizes to a standardized chart will only provide information on the antibacterials to which a bacterial pathogen is susceptible or resistant .
As discussed , the limitations of the Kirby-Bauer disk diffusion test do not allow for a direct comparison of antibacterial potencies to guide selection of the best therapeutic choice .
Determining these concentrations helps identify the correct drug for a particular pathogen .
For the macrobroth dilution assay , a dilution series of the drug in broth is made in test tubes and the same number of cells of a test bacterial strain is added to each tube .
The MIC is determined by examining the tubes to find the lowest drug concentration that inhibits visible growth ; this is observed as turbidity ( cloudiness ) in the broth .
Tubes with no visible growth are then inoculated onto agar media without antibiotic to determine the MBC .
Generally , serum levels of an antibacterial should be at least three to five times above the MIC for treatment of an infection .
The MIC assay can also be performed using 96-well microdilution trays , which allow for the use of small volumes and automated dispensing devices , as well as the testing of multiple antimicrobials and/or microorganisms in one tray .
MICs are interpreted as the lowest concentration that inhibits visible growth , the same as for the macrobroth dilution in test tubes .
Growth may also be interpreted visually or by using a spectrophotometer or similar device to detect turbidity or a color change if an appropriate biochemical substrate that changes color in the presence of bacterial growth is also included in each well .
The Etest is an alternative method used to determine MIC , and is a combination of the Kirby-Bauer disk diffusion test and dilution methods .
Similar to the Kirby-Bauer assay , a confluent lawn of a bacterial isolate is inoculated onto the surface of an agar plate .
Rather than using circular disks impregnated with one concentration of drug , however , commercially available plastic strips that contain a gradient of an antibacterial are placed on the surface of the inoculated agar plate .
As the bacterial inoculum grows , antibiotic diffuses from the plastic strips into the agar and interacts with the bacterial cells .
Because the rate of drug diffusion is directly related to concentration , an elliptical zone of inhibition is observed with the Etest drug gradient , rather than a circular zone of inhibition observed with the Kirby-Bauer assay .
To interpret the results , the intersection of the elliptical zone with the gradient on the drug-containing strip indicates the MIC .
Because multiple strips containing different antimicrobials can be placed on the same plate , the MIC of multiple antimicrobials can be determined concurrently and directly compared .
However , unlike the macrobroth and microbroth dilution methods , the MBC can not be determined with the Etest .
Describe the methods and strategies used for discovery of new antimicrobial agents .
With the continued evolution and spread of antimicrobial resistance , and now the identification of pan-resistant bacterial pathogens , the search for new antimicrobials is essential for preventing the postantibiotic era .
Although development of more effective semisynthetic derivatives is one strategy , resistance to them develops rapidly because bacterial pathogens are already resistant to earlier-generation drugs in the family and can easily mutate and develop resistance to the new semisynthetic drugs .
Today , scientists continue to hunt for new antimicrobial compounds and explore new avenues of antimicrobial discovery and synthesis .
They check large numbers of soils and microbial products for antimicrobial activity by using high-throughput screening methods , which use automation to test large numbers of samples simultaneously .
The recent development of the iChip allows researchers to investigate the antimicrobial-producing capabilities of soil microbes that are difficult to grow by standard cultivation techniques in the laboratory .
Rather than grow the microbes in the laboratory , they are grown in situ—right in the soil .
Use of the iChip has resulted in the discovery of teixobactin , a novel antimicrobial from Mount Ararat , Turkey .
Teixobactin targets two distinct steps in gram-positive cell wall synthesis and for which antimicrobial resistance appears not yet to have evolved .
Although soils have been widely examined , other environmental niches have not been tested as fully .
Since 70 % of the earth is covered with water , marine environments could be mined more fully for the presence of antimicrobialproducing microbes .
In addition , researchers are using combinatorial chemistry , a method for making a very large number of related compounds from simple precursors , and testing them for antimicrobial activity .
An additional strategy that needs to be explored further is the development of compounds that inhibit resistance mechanisms and restore the activity of older drugs , such as the strategy described earlier for β-lactamase inhibitors like clavulanic acid .
Finally , developing inhibitors of virulence factor production and function could be a very important avenue .
Although this strategy would not be directly antibacterial , drugs that slow the progression of an infection could provide an advantage for the immune system and could be used successfully in combination with antimicrobial drugs .
Jane woke up one spring morning feeling not quite herself .
Her throat felt a bit dry and she was sniffling .
She wondered why she felt so lousy .
Was it because of a change in the weather ?
The pollen count ?
Was she coming down with something ?
Did she catch a bug from her coworker who sneezed on her in the elevator yesterday ?
The signs and symptoms we associate with illness can have many different causes .
Sometimes they are the direct result of a pathogenic infection , but in other cases they result from a response by our immune system to a pathogen or another perceived threat .
For example , in response to certain pathogens , the immune system may release pyrogens , chemicals that cause the body temperature to rise , resulting in a fever .
This response creates a less-than-favorable environment for the pathogen , but it also makes us feel sick .
Medical professionals rely heavily on analysis of signs and symptoms to determine the cause of an ailment and prescribe treatment .
In some cases , signs and symptoms alone are enough to correctly identify the causative agent of a disease , but since few diseases produce truly unique symptoms , it is often necessary to confirm the identity of the infectious agent by other direct and indirect diagnostic methods .
Physical injuries or disabilities are not classified as disease , but there can be several causes for disease , including infection by a pathogen , genetics ( as in many cancers or deficiencies ) , noninfectious environmental causes , or inappropriate immune responses .
Our focus in this chapter will be on infectious diseases , although when diagnosing infectious diseases , it is always important to consider possible noninfectious causes .
An infection is the successful colonization of a host by a microorganism .
Infections can lead to disease , which causes signs and symptoms resulting in a deviation from the normal structure or functioning of the host .
Microorganisms that can cause disease are known as pathogens .
The signs of disease are objective and measurable , and can be directly observed by a clinician .
Changes in any of the body ’ s vital signs may be indicative of disease .
For example , having a fever ( a body temperature significantly higher than 37 °C or 98.6 °F ) is a sign of disease because it can be measured .
In addition to changes in vital signs , other observable conditions may be considered signs of disease .
For example , the presence of antibodies in a patient ’ s serum ( the liquid portion of blood that lacks clotting factors ) can be observed and measured through blood tests and , therefore , can be considered a sign .
However , it is important to note that the presence of antibodies is not always a sign of an active disease .
Antibodies can remain in the body long after an infection has resolved ; also , they may develop in response to a pathogen that is in the body but not currently causing disease .
Unlike signs , symptoms of disease are subjective .
Symptoms are felt or experienced by the patient , but they can not be clinically confirmed or objectively measured .
Examples of symptoms include nausea , loss of appetite , and pain .
Such symptoms are important to consider when diagnosing disease , but they are subject to memory bias and are difficult to measure precisely .
Some clinicians attempt to quantify symptoms by asking patients to assign a numerical value to their symptoms .
For example , the Wong-Baker Faces pain-rating scale asks patients to rate their pain on a scale of 0–10 .
An alternative method of quantifying pain is measuring skin conductance fluctuations .
These fluctuations reflect sweating due to skin sympathetic nerve activity resulting from the stressor of pain .
A specific group of signs and symptoms characteristic of a particular disease is called a syndrome .
Many syndromes are named using a nomenclature based on signs and symptoms or the location of the disease .
lists some of the prefixes and suffixes commonly used in naming syndromes .
Clinicians must rely on signs and on asking questions about symptoms , medical history , and the patient ’ s recent activities to identify a particular disease and the potential causative agent .
Diagnosis is complicated by the fact that different microorganisms can cause similar signs and symptoms in a patient .
For example , an individual presenting with symptoms of diarrhea may have been infected by one of a wide variety of pathogenic microorganisms .
Bacterial pathogens associated with diarrheal disease include Vibrio cholerae , Listeria monocytogenes , Campylobacter jejuni , and enteropathogenic Escherichia coli ( EPEC ) .
Viral pathogens associated with diarrheal disease include norovirus and rotavirus .
Parasitic pathogens associated with diarrhea include Giardia lamblia and Cryptosporidium parvum .
Likewise , fever is indicative of many types of infection , from the common cold to the deadly Ebola hemorrhagic fever .
Finally , some diseases may be asymptomatic or subclinical , meaning they do not present any noticeable signs or symptoms .
For example , most individual infected with herpes simplex virus remain asymptomatic and are unaware that they have been infected .
The World Health Organization ’ s ( WHO ) International Classification of Diseases ( ICD ) is used in clinical fields to classify diseases and monitor morbidity ( the number of cases of a disease ) and mortality ( the number of deaths due to a disease ) .
In this section , we will introduce terminology used by the ICD ( and in health-care professions in general ) to describe and categorize various types of disease .
An infectious disease is any disease caused by the direct effect of a pathogen .
A pathogen may be cellular ( bacteria , parasites , and fungi ) or acellular ( viruses , viroids , and prions ) .
Some infectious diseases are also communicable , meaning they are capable of being spread from person to person through either direct or indirect mechanisms .
Some infectious communicable diseases are also considered contagious diseases , meaning they are easily spread from person to person .
Not all contagious diseases are equally so ; the degree to which a disease is contagious usually depends on how the pathogen is transmitted .
For example , measles is a highly contagious viral disease that can be transmitted when an infected person coughs or sneezes and an uninfected person breathes in droplets containing the virus .
Gonorrhea is not as contagious as measles because transmission of the pathogen ( Neisseria gonorrhoeae ) requires close intimate contact ( usually sexual ) between an infected person and an uninfected person .
Diseases that are contracted as the result of a medical procedure are known as iatrogenic diseases .
Iatrogenic diseases can occur after procedures involving wound treatments , catheterization , or surgery if the wound or surgical site becomes contaminated .
For example , an individual treated for a skin wound might acquire necrotizing fasciitis ( an aggressive , “ flesh-eating ” disease ) if bandages or other dressings became contaminated by Clostridium perfringens or one of several other bacteria that can cause this condition .
Diseases acquired in hospital settings are known as nosocomial diseases .
Several factors contribute to the prevalence and severity of nosocomial diseases .
Second , many hospital patients have weakened immune systems , making them more susceptible to infections .
Compounding this , the prevalence of antibiotics in hospital settings can select for drug-resistant bacteria that can cause very serious infections that are difficult to treat .
Certain infectious diseases are not transmitted between humans directly but can be transmitted from animals to humans .
Such a disease is called zoonotic disease ( or zoonosis ) .
According to WHO , a zoonosis is a disease that occurs when a pathogen is transferred from a vertebrate animal to a human ; however , sometimes the term is defined more broadly to include diseases transmitted by all animals ( including invertebrates ) .
For example , rabies is a viral zoonotic disease spread from animals to humans through bites and contact with infected saliva .
Many other zoonotic diseases rely on insects or other arthropods for transmission .
Examples include yellow fever ( transmitted through the bite of mosquitoes infected with yellow fever virus ) and Rocky Mountain spotted fever ( transmitted through the bite of ticks infected with Rickettsia rickettsii ) .
In contrast to communicable infectious diseases , a noncommunicable infectious disease is not spread from one person to another .
One example is tetanus , caused by Clostridium tetani , a bacterium that produces endospores that can survive in the soil for many years .
This disease is typically only transmitted through contact with a skin wound ; it can not be passed from an infected person to another person .
Similarly , Legionnaires disease is caused by Legionella pneumophila , a bacterium that lives within amoebae in moist locations like water-cooling towers .
An individual may contract Legionnaires disease via contact with the contaminated water , but once infected , the individual can not pass the pathogen to other individuals .
In addition to the wide variety of noncommunicable infectious diseases , noninfectious diseases ( those not caused by pathogens ) are an important cause of morbidity and mortality worldwide .
Noninfectious diseases can be caused by a wide variety factors , including genetics , the environment , or immune system dysfunction , to name a few .
For example , sickle cell anemia is an inherited disease caused by a genetic mutation that can be passed from parent to offspring .
Other types of noninfectious diseases are listed in .
The five periods of disease ( sometimes referred to as stages or phases ) include the incubation , prodromal , illness , decline , and convalescence periods .
The incubation period occurs in an acute disease after the initial entry of the pathogen into the host ( patient ) .
It is during this time the pathogen begins multiplying in the host .
However , there are insufficient numbers of pathogen particles ( cells or viruses ) present to cause signs and symptoms of disease .
Incubation periods can vary from a day or two in acute disease to months or years in chronic disease , depending upon the pathogen .
Factors involved in determining the length of the incubation period are diverse , and can include strength of the pathogen , strength of the host immune defenses , site of infection , type of infection , and the size infectious dose received .
During this incubation period , the patient is unaware that a disease is beginning to develop .
The prodromal period occurs after the incubation period .
During this phase , the pathogen continues to multiply and the host begins to experience general signs and symptoms of illness , which typically result from activation of the immune system , such as fever , pain , soreness , swelling , or inflammation .
Usually , such signs and symptoms are too general to indicate a particular disease .
Following the prodromal period is the period of illness , during which the signs and symptoms of disease are most obvious and severe .
The period of illness is followed by the period of decline , during which the number of pathogen particles begins to decrease , and the signs and symptoms of illness begin to decline .
However , during the decline period , patients may become susceptible to developing secondary infections because their immune systems have been weakened by the primary infection .
The final period is known as the period of convalescence .
During this stage , the patient generally returns to normal functions , although some diseases may inflict permanent damage that the body can not fully repair .
Infectious diseases can be contagious during all five of the periods of disease .
Which periods of disease are more likely to associated with transmissibility of an infection depends upon the disease , the pathogen , and the mechanisms by which the disease develops and progresses .
For example , with meningitis ( infection of the lining of brain ) , the periods of infectivity depend on the type of pathogen causing the infection .
Patients with bacterial meningitis are contagious during the incubation period for up to a week before the onset of the prodromal period , whereas patients with viral meningitis become contagious when the first signs and symptoms of the prodromal period appear .
With many viral diseases associated with rashes ( e.g. , chickenpox , measles , rubella , roseola ) , patients are contagious during the incubation period up to a week before the rash develops .
In contrast , with many respiratory infections ( e.g. , colds , influenza , diphtheria , strep throat , and pertussis ) the patient becomes contagious with the onset of the prodromal period .
Depending upon the pathogen , the disease , and the individual infected , transmission can still occur during the periods of decline , convalescence , and even long after signs and symptoms of the disease disappear .
For example , an individual recovering from a diarrheal disease may continue to carry and shed the pathogen in feces for some time , posing a risk of transmission to others through direct contact or indirect contact ( e.g. , through contaminated objects or food ) .
The duration of the period of illness can vary greatly , depending on the pathogen , effectiveness of the immune response in the host , and any medical treatment received .
For an acute disease , pathologic changes occur over a relatively short time ( e.g. , hours , days , or a few weeks ) and involve a rapid onset of disease conditions .
For example , influenza ( caused by Influenzavirus ) is considered an acute disease because the incubation period is approximately 1–2 days .
Infected individuals can spread influenza to others for approximately 5 days after becoming ill. After approximately 1 week , individuals enter the period of decline .
For a chronic disease , pathologic changes can occur over longer time spans ( e.g. , months , years , or a lifetime ) .
For example , chronic gastritis ( inflammation of the lining of the stomach ) is caused by the gram-negative bacterium Helicobacter pylori .
H. pylori is able to colonize the stomach and persist in its highly acidic environment by producing the enzyme urease , which modifies the local acidity , allowing the bacteria to survive indefinitely .
Consequently , H. pylori infections can recur indefinitely unless the infection is cleared using antibiotics .
Hepatitis B virus can cause a chronic infection in some patients who do not eliminate the virus after the acute illness .
A chronic infection with hepatitis B virus is characterized by the continued production of infectious virus for 6 months or longer after the acute infection , as measured by the presence of viral antigen in blood samples .
In latent diseases , as opposed to chronic infections , the causal pathogen goes dormant for extended periods of time with no active replication .
Examples of diseases that go into a latent state after the acute infection include herpes ( herpes simplex viruses [ HSV-1 and HSV-2 ] ) , chickenpox ( varicella-zoster virus [ VZV ] ) , and mononucleosis ( Epstein-Barr virus [ EBV ] ) .
HSV-1 , HSV-2 , and VZV evade the host immune system by residing in a latent form within cells of the nervous system for long periods of time , but they can reactivate to become active infections during times of stress and immunosuppression .
For example , an initial infection by VZV may result in a case of childhood chickenpox , followed by a long period of latency .
The virus may reactivate decades later , causing episodes of shingles in adulthood .
EBV goes into latency in B cells of the immune system and possibly epithelial cells ; it can reactivate years later to produce B-cell lymphoma .
Today ’ s physicians , patients , and researchers owe a sizable debt to the physician Robert Koch ( 1843–1910 ) , who devised a systematic approach for confirming causative relationships between diseases and specific pathogens .
In 1884 , Koch published four postulates that summarized his method for determining whether a particular microorganism was the cause of a particular disease .
Each of Koch ’ s postulates represents a criterion that must be met before a disease can be positively linked with a pathogen .
In order to determine whether the criteria are met , tests are performed on laboratory animals and cultures from healthy and diseased animals are compared .
In many ways , Koch ’ s postulates are still central to our current understanding of the causes of disease .
However , advances in microbiology have revealed some important limitations in Koch ’ s criteria .
Koch made several assumptions that we now know are untrue in many cases .
The first relates to postulate 1 , which assumes that pathogens are only found in diseased , not healthy , individuals .
This is not true for many pathogens .
For example , H. pylori , described earlier in this chapter as a pathogen causing chronic gastritis , is also part of the normal microbiota of the stomach in many healthy humans who never develop gastritis .
It is estimated that upwards of 50 % of the human population acquires H. pylori early in life , with most maintaining it as part of the normal microbiota for the rest of their life without ever developing disease .
Koch ’ s second faulty assumption was that all healthy test subjects are equally susceptible to disease .
We now know that individuals are not equally susceptible to disease .
Individuals are unique in terms of their microbiota and the state of their immune system at any given time .
The makeup of the resident microbiota can influence an individual ’ s susceptibility to an infection .
Members of the normal microbiota play an important role in immunity by inhibiting the growth of transient pathogens .
In some cases , the microbiota may prevent a pathogen from establishing an infection ; in others , it may not prevent an infection altogether but may influence the severity or type of signs and symptoms .
As a result , two individuals with the same disease may not always present with the same signs and symptoms .
In addition , some individuals have stronger immune systems than others .
Individuals with immune systems weakened by age or an unrelated illness are much more susceptible to certain infections than individuals with strong immune systems .
Koch also assumed that all pathogens are microorganisms that can be grown in pure culture ( postulate 2 ) and that animals could serve as reliable models for human disease .
However , we now know that not all pathogens can be grown in pure culture , and many human diseases can not be reliably replicated in animal hosts .
Viruses and certain bacteria , including Rickettsia and Chlamydia , are obligate intracellular pathogens that can grow only when inside a host cell .
If a microbe can not be cultured , a researcher can not move past postulate 2 .
Likewise , without a suitable nonhuman host , a researcher can not evaluate postulate 2 without deliberately infecting humans , which presents obvious ethical concerns .
AIDS is an example of such a disease because the human immunodeficiency virus ( HIV ) only causes disease in humans .
In 1988 , Stanley Falkow ( 1934– ) proposed a revised form of Koch ’ s postulates known as molecular Koch ’ s postulates .
These are listed in the left column of .
The premise for molecular Koch ’ s postulates is not in the ability to isolate a particular pathogen but rather to identify a gene that may cause the organism to be pathogenic .
Falkow ’ s modifications to Koch ’ s original postulates explain not only infections caused by intracellular pathogens but also the existence of pathogenic strains of organisms that are usually nonpathogenic .
For example , the predominant form of the bacterium Escherichia coli is a member of the normal microbiota of the human intestine and is generally considered harmless .
However , there are pathogenic strains of E. coli such as enterotoxigenic E. coli ( ETEC ) and enterohemorrhagic E. coli ( O157 : H7 ) ( EHEC ) .
We now know ETEC and EHEC exist because of the acquisition of new genes by the once-harmless E. coli , which , in the form of these pathogenic strains , is now capable of producing toxins and causing illness .
The pathogenic forms resulted from minor genetic changes .
The right-side column of illustrates how molecular Koch ’ s postulates can be applied to identify EHEC as a pathogenic bacterium .
As with Koch ’ s original postulates , the molecular Koch ’ s postulates have limitations .
For example , genetic manipulation of some pathogens is not possible using current methods of molecular genetics .
In a similar vein , some diseases do not have suitable animal models , which limits the utility of both the original and molecular postulates .
The ability of a microbial agent to cause disease is called pathogenicity , and the degree to which an organism is pathogenic is called virulence .
Virulence is a continuum .
On one end of the spectrum are organisms that are avirulent ( not harmful ) and on the other are organisms that are highly virulent .
Highly virulent pathogens will almost always lead to a disease state when introduced to the body , and some may even cause multi-organ and body system failure in healthy individuals .
Less virulent pathogens may cause an initial infection , but may not always cause severe illness .
Pathogens with low virulence would more likely result in mild signs and symptoms of disease , such as low-grade fever , headache , or muscle aches .
Some individuals might even be asymptomatic .
An example of a highly virulent microorganism is Bacillus anthracis , the pathogen responsible for anthrax .
B. anthracis can produce different forms of disease , depending on the route of transmission ( e.g. , cutaneous injection , inhalation , ingestion ) .
The most serious form of anthrax is inhalation anthrax .
After B. anthracis spores are inhaled , they germinate .
An active infection develops and the bacteria release potent toxins that cause edema ( fluid buildup in tissues ) , hypoxia ( a condition preventing oxygen from reaching tissues ) , and necrosis ( cell death and inflammation ) .
Signs and symptoms of inhalation anthrax include high fever , difficulty breathing , vomiting and coughing up blood , and severe chest pains suggestive of a heart attack .
With inhalation anthrax , the toxins and bacteria enter the bloodstream , which can lead to multi-organ failure and death of the patient .
If a gene ( or genes ) involved in pathogenesis is inactivated , the bacteria become less virulent or nonpathogenic .
Virulence of a pathogen can be quantified using controlled experiments with laboratory animals .
Two important indicators of virulence are the median infectious dose ( ID ) and the median lethal dose ( LD ) , both of which are typically determined experimentally using animal models .
The ID is the number of pathogen cells or virions required to cause active infection in 50 % of inoculated animals .
The LD is the number of pathogenic cells , virions , or amount of toxin required to kill 50 % of infected animals .
To calculate these values , each group of animals is inoculated with one of a range of known numbers of pathogen cells or virions .
In graphs like the one shown in , the percentage of animals that have been infected ( for ID ) or killed ( for LD ) is plotted against the concentration of pathogen inoculated .
represents data graphed from a hypothetical experiment measuring the LD of a pathogen .
Interpretation of the data from this graph indicates that the LD of the pathogen for the test animals is 10 pathogen cells or virions ( depending upon the pathogen studied ) .
lists selected foodborne pathogens and their ID values in humans ( as determined from epidemiologic data and studies on human volunteers ) .
Keep in mind that these are median values .
The actual infective dose for an individual can vary widely , depending on factors such as route of entry ; the age , health , and immune status of the host ; and environmental and pathogen-specific factors such as susceptibility to the acidic pH of the stomach .
It is also important to note that a pathogen ’ s infective dose does not necessarily correlate with disease severity .
For example , just a single cell of Salmonella enterica serotype Typhimurium can result in an active infection .
The resultant disease , Salmonella gastroenteritis or salmonellosis , can cause nausea , vomiting , and diarrhea , but has a mortality rate of less than 1 % in healthy adults .
In contrast , S. enterica serotype Typhi has a much higher ID , typically requiring as many as 1,000 cells to produce infection .
However , this serotype causes typhoid fever , a much more systemic and severe disease that has a mortality rate as high as 10 % in untreated individuals .
Pathogens can be classified as either primary pathogens or opportunistic pathogens .
A primary pathogen can cause disease in a host regardless of the host ’ s resident microbiota or immune system .
An opportunistic pathogen , by contrast , can only cause disease in situations that compromise the host ’ s defenses , such as the body ’ s protective barriers , immune system , or normal microbiota .
An example of a primary pathogen is enterohemorrhagic E. coli ( EHEC ) , which produces a virulence factor known as Shiga toxin .
This toxin inhibits protein synthesis , leading to severe and bloody diarrhea , inflammation , and renal failure , even in patients with healthy immune systems .
Staphylococcus epidermidis , on the other hand , is an opportunistic pathogen that is among the most frequent causes of nosocomial disease .
S. epidermidis is a member of the normal microbiota of the skin , where it is generally avirulent .
However , in hospitals , it can also grow in biofilms that form on catheters , implants , or other devices that are inserted into the body during surgical procedures .
Once inside the body , S. epidermidis can cause serious infections such as endocarditis , and it produces virulence factors that promote the persistence of such infections .
Other members of the normal microbiota can also cause opportunistic infections under certain conditions .
This often occurs when microbes that reside harmlessly in one body location end up in a different body system , where they cause disease .
For example , E. coli normally found in the large intestine can cause a urinary tract infection if it enters the bladder .
This is the leading cause of urinary tract infections among women .
Members of the normal microbiota may also cause disease when a shift in the environment of the body leads to overgrowth of a particular microorganism .
For example , the yeast Candida is part of the normal microbiota of the skin , mouth , intestine , and vagina , but its population is kept in check by other organisms of the microbiota .
If an individual is taking antibacterial medications , however , bacteria that would normally inhibit the growth of Candida can be killed off , leading to a sudden growth in the population of Candida , which is not affected by antibacterial medications because it is a fungus .
An overgrowth of Candida can manifest as oral thrush ( growth on mouth , throat , and tongue ) , a vaginal yeast infection , or cutaneous candidiasis .
Other scenarios can also provide opportunities for Candida infections .
Untreated diabetes can result in a high concentration of glucose in the saliva , which provides an optimal environment for the growth of Candida , resulting in thrush .
Immunodeficiencies such as those seen in patients with HIV , AIDS , and cancer also lead to higher incidence of thrush .
Vaginal yeast infections can result from decreases in estrogen levels during the menstruation or menopause .
The amount of glycogen available to lactobacilli in the vagina is controlled by levels of estrogen ; when estrogen levels are low , lactobacilli produce less lactic acid .
The resultant increase in vaginal pH allows overgrowth of Candida in the vagina .
To cause disease , a pathogen must successfully achieve four steps or stages of pathogenesis : exposure ( contact ) , adhesion ( colonization ) , invasion , and infection .
The pathogen must be able to gain entry to the host , travel to the location where it can establish an infection , evade or overcome the host ’ s immune response , and cause damage ( i.e. , disease ) to the host .
In many cases , the cycle is completed when the pathogen exits the host and is transmitted to a new host .
An encounter with a potential pathogen is known as exposure or contact .
The food we eat and the objects we handle are all ways that we can come into contact with potential pathogens .
Yet , not all contacts result in infection and disease .
For a pathogen to cause disease , it needs to be able to gain access into host tissue .
An anatomic site through which pathogens can pass into host tissue is called a portal of entry .
These are locations where the host cells are in direct contact with the external environment .
Major portals of entry are identified in and include the skin , mucous membranes , and parenteral routes .
Mucosal surfaces are the most important portals of entry for microbes ; these include the mucous membranes of the respiratory tract , the gastrointestinal tract , and the genitourinary tract .
Although most mucosal surfaces are in the interior of the body , some are contiguous with the external skin at various body openings , including the eyes , nose , mouth , urethra , and anus .
Most pathogens are suited to a particular portal of entry .
A pathogen ’ s portal specificity is determined by the organism ’ s environmental adaptions and by the enzymes and toxins they secrete .
The respiratory and gastrointestinal tracts are particularly vulnerable portals of entry because particles that include microorganisms are constantly inhaled or ingested , respectively .
Pathogens can also enter through a breach in the protective barriers of the skin and mucous membranes .
Pathogens that enter the body in this way are said to enter by the parenteral route .
For example , the skin is a good natural barrier to pathogens , but breaks in the skin ( e.g. , wounds , insect bites , animal bites , needle pricks ) can provide a parenteral portal of entry for microorganisms .
In pregnant women , the placenta normally prevents microorganisms from passing from the mother to the fetus .
However , a few pathogens are capable of crossing the blood-placental barrier .
The gram-positive bacterium Listeria monocytogenes , which causes the foodborne disease listeriosis , is one example that poses a serious risk to the fetus and can sometimes lead to spontaneous abortion .
Other pathogens that can pass the placental barrier to infect the fetus are known collectively by the acronym TORCH .
Transmission of infectious diseases from mother to baby is also a concern at the time of birth when the baby passes through the birth canal .
Babies whose mothers have active chlamydia or gonorrhea infections may be exposed to the causative pathogens in the vagina , which can result in eye infections that lead to blindness .
To prevent this , it is standard practice to administer antibiotic drops to infants ’ eyes shortly after birth .
Following the initial exposure , the pathogen adheres at the portal of entry .
The term adhesion refers to the capability of pathogenic microbes to attach to the cells of the body using adhesion factors , and different pathogens use various mechanisms to adhere to the cells of host tissues .
Molecules ( either proteins or carbohydrates ) called adhesins are found on the surface of certain pathogens and bind to specific receptors ( glycoproteins ) on host cells .
Adhesins are present on the fimbriae and flagella of bacteria , the cilia of protozoa , and the capsids or membranes of viruses .
Protozoans can also use hooks and barbs for adhesion ; spike proteins on viruses also enhance viral adhesion .
The production of glycocalyces ( slime layers and capsules ) , with their high sugar and protein content , can also allow certain bacterial pathogens to attach to cells .
Biofilm growth can also act as an adhesion factor .
A biofilm is a community of bacteria that produce a glycocalyx , known as extrapolymeric substance ( EPS ) , that allows the biofilm to attach to a surface .
Persistent Pseudomonas aeruginosa infections are common in patients suffering from cystic fibrosis , burn wounds , and middle-ear infections ( otitis media ) because P. aeruginosa produces a biofilm .
The EPS allows the bacteria to adhere to the host cells and makes it harder for the host to physically remove the pathogen .
The EPS not only allows for attachment but provides protection against the immune system and antibiotic treatments , preventing antibiotics from reaching the bacterial cells within the biofilm .
In addition , not all bacteria in a biofilm are rapidly growing ; some are in stationary phase .
Since antibiotics are most effective against rapidly growing bacteria , portions of bacteria in a biofilm are protected against antibiotics .
Once adhesion is successful , invasion can proceed .
Invasion involves the dissemination of a pathogen throughout local tissues or the body .
Pathogens may produce exoenzymes or toxins , which serve as virulence factors that allow them to colonize and damage host tissues as they spread deeper into the body .
Pathogens may also produce virulence factors that protect them against immune system defenses .
A pathogen ’ s specific virulence factors determine the degree of tissue damage that occurs .
shows the invasion of H. pylori into the tissues of the stomach , causing damage as it progresses .
Intracellular pathogens achieve invasion by entering the host ’ s cells and reproducing .
Some are obligate intracellular pathogens ( meaning they can only reproduce inside of host cells ) and others are facultative intracellular pathogens ( meaning they can reproduce either inside or outside of host cells ) .
By entering the host cells , intracellular pathogens are able to evade some mechanisms of the immune system while also exploiting the nutrients in the host cell .
Entry to a cell can occur by endocytosis .
For most kinds of host cells , pathogens use one of two different mechanisms for endocytosis and entry .
One mechanism relies on effector proteins secreted by the pathogen ; these effector proteins trigger entry into the host cell .
This is the method that Salmonella and Shigella use when invading intestinal epithelial cells .
When these pathogens come in contact with epithelial cells in the intestine , they secrete effector molecules that cause protrusions of membrane ruffles that bring the bacterial cell in .
This process is called membrane ruffling .
The second mechanism relies on surface proteins expressed on the pathogen that bind to receptors on the host cell , resulting in entry .
For example , Yersinia pseudotuberculosis produces a surface protein known as invasin that binds to beta-1 integrins expressed on the surface of host cells .
Some host cells , such as white blood cells and other phagocytes of the immune system , actively endocytose pathogens in a process called phagocytosis .
Although phagocytosis allows the pathogen to gain entry to the host cell , in most cases , the host cell kills and degrades the pathogen by using digestive enzymes .
Normally , when a pathogen is ingested by a phagocyte , it is enclosed within a phagosome in the cytoplasm ; the phagosome fuses with a lysosome to form a phagolysosome , where digestive enzymes kill the pathogen ( see ) .
However , some intracellular pathogens have the ability to survive and multiply within phagocytes .
Examples include Listeria monocytogenes and Shigella ; these bacteria produce proteins that lyse the phagosome before it fuses with the lysosome , allowing the bacteria to escape into the phagocyte ’ s cytoplasm where they can multiply .
Bacteria such as Mycobacterium tuberculosis , Legionella pneumophila , and Salmonella species use a slightly different mechanism to evade being digested by the phagocyte .
These bacteria prevent the fusion of the phagosome with the lysosome , thus remaining alive and dividing within the phagosome .
Following invasion , successful multiplication of the pathogen leads to infection .
Infections can be described as local , focal , or systemic , depending on the extent of the infection .
A local infection is confined to a small area of the body , typically near the portal of entry .
For example , a hair follicle infected by Staphylococcus aureus infection may result in a boil around the site of infection , but the bacterium is largely contained to this small location .
Other examples of local infections that involve more extensive tissue involvement include urinary tract infections confined to the bladder or pneumonia confined to the lungs .
In a focal infection , a localized pathogen , or the toxins it produces , can spread to a secondary location .
For example , a dental hygienist nicking the gum with a sharp tool can lead to a local infection in the gum by Streptococcus bacteria of the normal oral microbiota .
These Streptococcus spp .
may then gain access to the bloodstream and make their way to other locations in the body , resulting in a secondary infection .
When an infection becomes disseminated throughout the body , we call it a systemic infection .
For example , infection by the varicella-zoster virus typically gains entry through a mucous membrane of the upper respiratory system .
It then spreads throughout the body , resulting in the classic red skin lesions associated with chickenpox .
Since these lesions are not sites of initial infection , they are signs of a systemic infection .
Sometimes a primary infection , the initial infection caused by one pathogen , can lead to a secondary infection by another pathogen .
For example , the immune system of a patient with a primary infection by HIV becomes compromised , making the patient more susceptible to secondary diseases like oral thrush and others caused by opportunistic pathogens .
Similarly , a primary infection by Influenzavirus damages and decreases the defense mechanisms of the lungs , making patients more susceptible to a secondary pneumonia by a bacterial pathogen like Haemophilus influenzae or Streptococcus pneumoniae .
Some secondary infections can even develop as a result of treatment for a primary infection .
Antibiotic therapy targeting the primary pathogen can cause collateral damage to the normal microbiota , creating an opening for opportunistic pathogens ( see ) .
For a pathogen to persist , it must put itself in a position to be transmitted to a new host , leaving the infected host through a portal of exit .
As with portals of entry , many pathogens are adapted to use a particular portal of exit .
Similar to portals of entry , the most common portals of exit include the skin and the respiratory , urogenital , and gastrointestinal tracts .
Coughing and sneezing can expel pathogens from the respiratory tract .
A single sneeze can send thousands of virus particles into the air .
Secretions and excretions can transport pathogens out of other portals of exit .
Feces , urine , semen , vaginal secretions , tears , sweat , and shed skin cells can all serve as vehicles for a pathogen to leave the body .
Pathogens that rely on insect vectors for transmission exit the body in the blood extracted by a biting insect .
Similarly , some pathogens exit the body in blood extracted by needles .
This is due to the unique virulence factors produced by individual pathogens , which determine the extent and severity of disease they may cause .
A pathogen ’ s virulence factors are encoded by genes that can be identified using molecular Koch ’ s postulates .
When genes encoding virulence factors are inactivated , virulence in the pathogen is diminished .
In this section , we examine various types and specific examples of virulence factors and how they contribute to each step of pathogenesis .
As discussed in the previous section , the first two steps in pathogenesis are exposure and adhesion .
Recall that an adhesin is a protein or glycoprotein found on the surface of a pathogen that attaches to receptors on the host cell .
Adhesins are found on bacterial , viral , fungal , and protozoan pathogens .
One example of a bacterial adhesin is type 1 fimbrial adhesin , a molecule found on the tips of fimbriae of enterotoxigenic E. coli ( ETEC ) .
Recall that fimbriae are hairlike protein bristles on the cell surface .
Type 1 fimbrial adhesin allows the fimbriae of ETEC cells to attach to the mannose glycans expressed on intestinal epithelial cells .
lists common adhesins found in some of the pathogens we have discussed or will be seeing later in this chapter .
After exposure and adhesion , the next step in pathogenesis is invasion , which can involve enzymes and toxins .
Many pathogens achieve invasion by entering the bloodstream , an effective means of dissemination because blood vessels pass close to every cell in the body .
The downside of this mechanism of dispersal is that the blood also includes numerous elements of the immune system .
Various terms ending in –emia are used to describe the presence of pathogens in the bloodstream .
The presence of bacteria in blood is called bacteremia .
Bacteremia involving pyogens ( pus-forming bacteria ) is called pyemia .
When viruses are found in the blood , it is called viremia .
The term toxemia describes the condition when toxins are found in the blood .
If bacteria are both present and multiplying in the blood , this condition is called septicemia .
Patients with septicemia are described as septic , which can lead to shock , a life-threatening decrease in blood pressure ( systolic pressure < 90 mm Hg ) that prevents cells and organs from receiving enough oxygen and nutrients .
Some bacteria can cause shock through the release of toxins ( virulence factors that can cause tissue damage ) and lead to low blood pressure .
Gram-negative bacteria are engulfed by immune system phagocytes , which then release tumor necrosis factor , a molecule involved in inflammation and fever .
Tumor necrosis factor binds to blood capillaries to increase their permeability , allowing fluids to pass out of blood vessels and into tissues , causing swelling , or edema .
With high concentrations of tumor necrosis factor , the inflammatory reaction is severe and enough fluid is lost from the circulatory system that blood pressure decreases to dangerously low levels .
This can have dire consequences because the heart , lungs , and kidneys rely on normal blood pressure for proper function ; thus , multiorgan failure , shock , and death can occur .
Some pathogens produce extracellular enzymes , or exoenzymes , that enable them to invade host cells and deeper tissues .
Exoenzymes have a wide variety of targets .
Some general classes of exoenzymes and associated pathogens are listed in .
Each of these exoenzymes functions in the context of a particular tissue structure to facilitate invasion or support its own growth and defend against the immune system .
For example , hyaluronidase S , an enzyme produced by pathogens like Staphylococcus aureus , Streptococcus pyogenes , and Clostridium perfringens , degrades the glycoside hyaluronan ( hyaluronic acid ) , which acts as an intercellular cement between adjacent cells in connective tissue .
This allows the pathogen to pass through the tissue layers at the portal of entry and disseminate elsewhere in the body .
Pathogen-produced nucleases , such as DNAse produced by S. aureus , degrade extracellular DNA as a means of escape and spreading through tissue .
As bacterial and host cells die at the site of infection , they lyse and release their intracellular contents .
The DNA chromosome is the largest of the intracellular molecules , and masses of extracellular DNA can trap bacteria and prevent their spread .
S. aureus produces a DNAse to degrade the mesh of extracellular DNA so it can escape and spread to adjacent tissues .
This strategy is also used by S. aureus and other pathogens to degrade and escape webs of extracellular DNA produced by immune system phagocytes to trap the bacteria .
Enzymes that degrade the phospholipids of cell membranes are called phospholipases .
Their actions are specific in regard to the type of phospholipids they act upon and where they enzymatically cleave the molecules .
Phospholipases can also target the membrane that encloses the phagosome within phagocytic cells .
As described earlier in this chapter , this is the mechanism used by intracellular pathogens such as L. monocytogenes and Rickettsia to escape the phagosome and multiply within the cytoplasm of phagocytic cells .
The role of phospholipases in bacterial virulence is not restricted to phagosomal escape .
Many pathogens produce phospholipases that act to degrade cell membranes and cause lysis of target cells .
These phospholipases are involved in lysis of red blood cells , white blood cells , and tissue cells .
Bacterial pathogens also produce various protein-digesting enzymes , or proteases .
Proteases can be classified according to their substrate target ( e.g. , serine proteases target proteins with the amino acid serine ) or if they contain metals in their active site ( e.g. , zinc metalloproteases contain a zinc ion , which is necessary for enzymatic activity ) .
One example of a protease that contains a metal ion is the exoenzyme collagenase .
Collagenase digests collagen , the dominant protein in connective tissue .
Collagen can be found in the extracellular matrix , especially near mucosal membranes , blood vessels , nerves , and in the layers of the skin .
Similar to hyaluronidase , collagenase allows the pathogen to penetrate and spread through the host tissue by digesting this connective tissue protein .
The collagenase produced by the gram-positive bacterium Clostridium perfringens , for example , allows the bacterium to make its way through the tissue layers and subsequently enter and multiply in the blood ( septicemia ) .
C. perfringens then uses toxins and a phospholipase to cause cellular lysis and necrosis .
Once the host cells have died , the bacterium produces gas by fermenting the muscle carbohydrates .
The widespread necrosis of tissue and accompanying gas are characteristic of the condition known as gas gangrene .
In addition to exoenzymes , certain pathogens are able to produce toxins , biological poisons that assist in their ability to invade and cause damage to tissues .
The ability of a pathogen to produce toxins to cause damage to host cells is called toxigenicity .
Toxins can be categorized as endotoxins or exotoxins .
The lipopolysaccharide ( LPS ) found on the outer membrane of gram-negative bacteria is called endotoxin .
During infection and disease , gram-negative bacterial pathogens release endotoxin either when the cell dies , resulting in the disintegration of the membrane , or when the bacterium undergoes binary fission .
The lipid component of endotoxin , lipid A , is responsible for the toxic properties of the LPS molecule .
Lipid A is relatively conserved across different genera of gram-negative bacteria ; therefore , the toxic properties of lipid A are similar regardless of the gram-negative pathogen .
In a manner similar to that of tumor necrosis factor , lipid A triggers the immune system ’ s inflammatory response ( see ) .
A classic method of detecting endotoxin is by using the Limulus amebocyte lysate ( LAL ) test .
In this procedure , the blood cells ( amebocytes ) of the horseshoe crab ( Limulus polyphemus ) is mixed with a patient ’ s serum .
The amebocytes will react to the presence of any endotoxin .
This reaction can be observed either chromogenically ( color ) or by looking for coagulation ( clotting reaction ) to occur within the serum .
An alternative method that has been used is an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay ( ELISA ) that uses antibodies to detect the presence of endotoxin .
Unlike the toxic lipid A of endotoxin , exotoxins are protein molecules that are produced by a wide variety of living pathogenic bacteria .
Although some gram-negative pathogens produce exotoxins , the majority are produced by grampositive pathogens .
Exotoxins differ from endotoxin in several other key characteristics , summarized in .
In contrast to endotoxin , which stimulates a general systemic inflammatory response when released , exotoxins are much more specific in their action and the cells they interact with .
Each exotoxin targets specific receptors on specific cells and damages those cells through unique molecular mechanisms .
Endotoxin remains stable at high temperatures , and requires heating at 121 °C ( 250 °F ) for 45 minutes to inactivate .
By contrast , most exotoxins are heat labile because of their protein structure , and many are denatured ( inactivated ) at temperatures above 41 °C ( 106 °F ) .
As discussed earlier , endotoxin can stimulate a lethal inflammatory response at very high concentrations and has a measured LD of 0.24 mg/kg .
By contrast , very small concentrations of exotoxins can be lethal .
For example , botulinum toxin , which causes botulism , has an LD of 0.000001 mg/kg ( 240,000 times more lethal than endotoxin ) .
The exotoxins can be grouped into three categories based on their target : intracellular targeting , membrane disrupting , and superantigens .
provides examples of well-characterized toxins within each of these three categories .
The intracellular targeting toxins comprise two components : A for activity and B for binding .
Thus , these types of toxins are known as A-B exotoxins .
The B component is responsible for the cellular specificity of the toxin and mediates the initial attachment of the toxin to specific cell surface receptors .
Once the A-B toxin binds to the host cell , it is brought into the cell by endocytosis and entrapped in a vacuole .
The A and B subunits separate as the vacuole acidifies .
The A subunit then enters the cell cytoplasm and interferes with the specific internal cellular function that it targets .
Four unique examples of A-B toxins are the diphtheria , cholera , botulinum , and tetanus toxins .
The diphtheria toxin is produced by the gram-positive bacterium Corynebacterium diphtheriae , the causative agent of nasopharyngeal and cutaneous diphtheria .
After the A subunit of the diphtheria toxin separates and gains access to the cytoplasm , it facilitates the transfer of adenosine diphosphate ( ADP ) -ribose onto an elongation-factor protein ( EF-2 ) that is needed for protein synthesis .
Hence , diphtheria toxin inhibits protein synthesis in the host cell , ultimately killing the cell .
Cholera toxin is an enterotoxin produced by the gram-negative bacterium Vibrio cholerae and is composed of one A subunit and five B subunits .
The mechanism of action of the cholera toxin is complex .
The B subunits bind to receptors on the intestinal epithelial cell of the small intestine .
After gaining entry into the cytoplasm of the epithelial cell , the A subunit activates an intracellular G protein .
The activated G protein , in turn , leads to the activation of the enzyme adenyl cyclase , which begins to produce an increase in the concentration of cyclic AMP ( a secondary messenger molecule ) .
The increased cAMP disrupts the normal physiology of the intestinal epithelial cells and causes them to secrete excessive amounts of fluid and electrolytes into the lumen of the intestinal tract , resulting in severe “ rice-water stool ” diarrhea characteristic of cholera .
Botulinum toxin ( also known as botox ) is a neurotoxin produced by the gram-positive bacterium Clostridium botulinum .
It is the most acutely toxic substance known to date .
The toxin is composed of a light A subunit and heavy protein chain B subunit .
The B subunit binds to neurons to allow botulinum toxin to enter the neurons at the neuromuscular junction .
The A subunit acts as a protease , cleaving proteins involved in the neuron ’ s release of acetylcholine , a neurotransmitter molecule .
Normally , neurons release acetylcholine to induce muscle fiber contractions .
The toxin ’ s ability to block acetylcholine release results in the inhibition of muscle contractions , leading to muscle relaxation .
This has the potential to stop breathing and cause death .
Because of its action , low concentrations of botox are used for cosmetic and medical procedures , including the removal of wrinkles and treatment of overactive bladder .
Another neurotoxin is tetanus toxin , which is produced by the gram-positive bacterium Clostridium tetani .
This toxin also has a light A subunit and heavy protein chain B subunit .
Unlike botulinum toxin , tetanus toxin binds to inhibitory interneurons , which are responsible for release of the inhibitory neurotransmitters glycine and gamma-aminobutyric acid ( GABA ) .
Normally , these neurotransmitters bind to neurons at the neuromuscular junction , resulting in the inhibition of acetylcholine release .
Tetanus toxin inhibits the release of glycine and GABA from the interneuron , resulting in permanent muscle contraction .
The first symptom is typically stiffness of the jaw ( lockjaw ) .
Violent muscle spasms in other parts of the body follow , typically culminating with respiratory failure and death .
shows the actions of both botulinum and tetanus toxins .
Membrane-disrupting toxins affect cell membrane function either by forming pores or by disrupting the phospholipid bilayer in host cell membranes .
Two types of membrane-disrupting exotoxins are hemolysins and leukocidins , which form pores in cell membranes , causing leakage of the cytoplasmic contents and cell lysis .
These toxins were originally thought to target red blood cells ( erythrocytes ) and white blood cells ( leukocytes ) , respectively , but we now know they can affect other cells as well .
The gram-positive bacterium Streptococcus pyogenes produces streptolysins , watersoluble hemolysins that bind to the cholesterol moieties in the host cell membrane to form a pore .
The two types of streptolysins , O and S , are categorized by their ability to cause hemolysis in erythrocytes in the absence or presence of oxygen .
Streptolysin O is not active in the presence of oxygen , whereas streptolysin S is active in the presence of oxygen .
Other important pore-forming membrane-disrupting toxins include alpha toxin of Staphylococcus aureus and pneumolysin of Streptococcus pneumoniae .
Bacterial phospholipases are membrane-disrupting toxins that degrade the phospholipid bilayer of cell membranes rather than forming pores .
We have already discussed the phospholipases associated with B. anthracis , L. pneumophila , and Rickettsia species that enable these bacteria to effect the lysis of phagosomes .
These same phospholipases are also hemolysins .
Other phospholipases that function as hemolysins include the alpha toxin of Clostridium perfringens , phospholipase C of P. aeruginosa , and beta toxin of Staphylococcus aureus .
Some strains of S. aureus also produce a leukocidin called Panton-Valentine leukocidin ( PVL ) .
PVL consists of two subunits , S and F. The S component acts like the B subunit of an A-B exotoxin in that it binds to glycolipids on the outer plasma membrane of animal cells .
The F-component acts like the A subunit of an A-B exotoxin and carries the enzymatic activity .
The toxin inserts and assembles into a pore in the membrane .
Genes that encode PVL are more frequently present in S. aureus strains that cause skin infections and pneumonia .
PVL promotes skin infections by causing edema , erythema ( reddening of the skin due to blood vessel dilation ) , and skin necrosis .
PVL has also been shown to cause necrotizing pneumonia .
PVL promotes pro-inflammatory and cytotoxic effects on alveolar leukocytes .
This results in the release of enzymes from the leukocytes , which , in turn , cause damage to lung tissue .
The third class of exotoxins is the superantigens .
These are exotoxins that trigger an excessive , nonspecific stimulation of immune cells to secrete cytokines ( chemical messengers ) .
The excessive production of cytokines , often called a cytokine storm , elicits a strong immune and inflammatory response that can cause life-threatening high fevers , low blood pressure , multi-organ failure , shock , and death .
The prototype superantigen is the toxic shock syndrome toxin of S. aureus .
Most toxic shock syndrome cases are associated with vaginal colonization by toxinproducing S. aureus in menstruating women ; however , colonization of other body sites can also occur .
Some strains of Streptococcus pyogenes also produce superantigens ; they are referred to as the streptococcal mitogenic exotoxins and the streptococcal pyrogenic toxins .
Evading the immune system is also important to invasiveness .
Bacteria use a variety of virulence factors to evade phagocytosis by cells of the immune system .
For example , many bacteria produce capsules , which are used in adhesion but also aid in immune evasion by preventing ingestion by phagocytes .
The composition of the capsule prevents immune cells from being able to adhere and then phagocytose the cell .
In addition , the capsule makes the bacterial cell much larger , making it harder for immune cells to engulf the pathogen .
A notable capsule-producing bacterium is the gram-positive pathogen Streptococcus pneumoniae , which causes pneumococcal pneumonia , meningitis , septicemia , and other respiratory tract infections .
Encapsulated strains of S. pneumoniae are more virulent than nonencapsulated strains and are more likely to invade the bloodstream and cause septicemia and meningitis .
Some pathogens can also produce proteases to protect themselves against phagocytosis .
As described in , the human immune system produces antibodies that bind to surface molecules found on specific bacteria ( e.g. , capsules , fimbriae , flagella , LPS ) .
This binding initiates phagocytosis and other mechanisms of antibacterial killing and clearance .
Proteases combat antibody-mediated killing and clearance by attacking and digesting the antibody molecules .
In addition to capsules and proteases , some bacterial pathogens produce other virulence factors that allow them to evade the immune system .
The fimbriae of certain species of Streptococcus contain M protein , which alters the surface of Streptococcus and inhibits phagocytosis by blocking the binding of the complement molecules that assist phagocytes in ingesting bacterial pathogens .
The acid-fast bacterium Mycobacterium tuberculosis ( the causative agent of tuberculosis ) produces a waxy substance known as mycolic acid in its cell envelope .
When it is engulfed by phagocytes in the lung , the protective mycolic acid coat enables the bacterium to resist some of the killing mechanisms within the phagolysosome .
Some bacteria produce virulence factors that promote infection by exploiting molecules naturally produced by the host .
For example , most strains of Staphylococcus aureus produce the exoenzyme coagulase , which exploits the natural mechanism of blood clotting to evade the immune system .
Normally , blood clotting is triggered in response to blood vessel damage ; platelets begin to plug the clot , and a cascade of reactions occurs in which fibrinogen , a soluble protein made by the liver , is cleaved into fibrin .
Fibrin is an insoluble , thread-like protein that binds to blood platelets , cross-links , and contracts to form a mesh of clumped platelets and red blood cells .
The resulting clot prevents further loss of blood from the damaged blood vessels .
However , if bacteria release coagulase into the bloodstream , the fibrinogen-to-fibrin cascade is triggered in the absence of blood vessel damage .
The resulting clot coats the bacteria in fibrin , protecting the bacteria from exposure to phagocytic immune cells circulating in the bloodstream .
Whereas coagulase causes blood to clot , kinases have the opposite effect by triggering the conversion of plasminogen to plasmin , which is involved in the digestion of fibrin clots .
By digesting a clot , kinases allow pathogens trapped in the clot to escape and spread , similar to the way that collagenase , hyaluronidase , and DNAse facilitate the spread of infection .
Examples of kinases include staphylokinases and streptokinases , produced by Staphylococcus aureus and Streptococcus pyogenes , respectively .
It is intriguing that S. aureus can produce both coagulase to promote clotting and staphylokinase to stimulate the digestion of clots .
The action of the coagulase provides an important protective barrier from the immune system , but when nutrient supplies are diminished or other conditions signal a need for the pathogen to escape and spread , the production of staphylokinase can initiate this process .
A final mechanism that pathogens can use to protect themselves against the immune system is called antigenic variation , which is the alteration of surface proteins so that a pathogen is no longer recognized by the host ’ s immune system .
For example , the bacterium Borrelia burgdorferi , the causative agent of Lyme disease , contains a surface lipoprotein known as VlsE .
Because of genetic recombination during DNA replication and repair , this bacterial protein undergoes antigenic variation .
Each time fever occurs , the VlsE protein in B. burgdorferi can differ so much that antibodies against previous VlsE sequences are not effective .
It is believed that this variation in the VlsE contributes to the ability B. burgdorferi to cause chronic disease .
Another important human bacterial pathogen that uses antigenic variation to avoid the immune system is Neisseria gonorrhoeae , which causes the sexually transmitted disease gonorrhea .
This bacterium is well known for its ability to undergo antigenic variation of its type IV pili to avoid immune defenses .
Although viral pathogens are not similar to bacterial pathogens in terms of structure , some of the properties that contribute to their virulence are similar .
Viruses use adhesins to facilitate adhesion to host cells , and certain enveloped viruses rely on antigenic variation to avoid the host immune defenses .
These virulence factors are discussed in more detail in the following sections .
One of the first steps in any viral infection is adhesion of the virus to specific receptors on the surface of cells .
This process is mediated by adhesins that are part of the viral capsid or membrane envelope .
The interaction of viral adhesins with specific cell receptors defines the tropism ( preferential targeting ) of viruses for specific cells , tissues , and organs in the body .
The spike protein hemagglutinin found on Influenzavirus is an example of a viral adhesin ; it allows the virus to bind to the sialic acid on the membrane of host respiratory and intestinal cells .
Another viral adhesin is the glycoprotein gp20 , found on HIV .
For HIV to infect cells of the immune system , it must interact with two receptors on the surface of cells .
The first interaction involves binding between gp120 and the CD4 cellular marker that is found on some essential immune system cells .
However , before viral entry into the cell can occur , a second interaction between gp120 and one of two chemokine receptors ( CCR5 and CXCR4 ) must occur .
lists the adhesins for some common viral pathogens and the specific sites to which these adhesins allow viruses to attach .
Antigenic variation also occurs in certain types of enveloped viruses , including influenza viruses , which exhibit two forms of antigenic variation : antigenic drift and antigenic shift .
Antigenic drift is the result of point mutations causing slight changes in the spike proteins hemagglutinin ( H ) and neuraminidase ( N ) .
On the other hand , antigenic shift is a major change in spike proteins due to gene reassortment .
This reassortment for antigenic shift occurs typically when two different influenza viruses infect the same host .
The rate of antigenic variation in influenza viruses is very high , making it difficult for the immune system to recognize the many different strains of Influenzavirus .
Although the body may develop immunity to one strain through natural exposure or vaccination , antigenic variation results in the continual emergence of new strains that the immune system will not recognize .
This is the main reason that vaccines against Influenzavirus must be given annually .
Each year ’ s influenza vaccine provides protection against the most prevalent strains for that year , but new or different strains may be more prevalent the following year .
Despite the relative lack of detailed mechanisms , the stages of pathogenesis and general mechanisms of virulence involved in disease production by these pathogens are similar to those of bacteria .
Pathogenic fungi can produce virulence factors that are similar to the bacterial virulence factors that have been discussed earlier in this chapter .
In this section , we will look at the virulence factors associated with species of Candida , Cryptococcus , Claviceps , and Aspergillus .
Candida albicans is an opportunistic fungal pathogen and causative agent of oral thrush , vaginal yeast infections , and cutaneous candidiasis .
Candida produces adhesins ( surface glycoproteins ) that bind to the phospholipids of epithelial and endothelial cells .
To assist in spread and tissue invasion , Candida produces proteases and phospholipases ( i.e. , exoenzymes ) .
One of these proteases degrades keratin , a structural protein found on epithelial cells , enhancing the ability of the fungus to invade host tissue .
In animal studies , it has been shown that the addition of a protease inhibitor led to attenuation of Candida infection .
Similarly , the phospholipases can affect the integrity of host cell membranes to facilitate invasion .
The main virulence factor for Cryptococcus , a fungus that causes pneumonia and meningitis , is capsule production .
The polysaccharide glucuronoxylomannan is the principal constituent of the Cryptococcus capsule .
Similar to encapsulated bacterial cells , encapsulated Cryptococcus cells are more resistant to phagocytosis than nonencapsulated Cryptococcus , which are effectively phagocytosed and , therefore , less virulent .
Like some bacteria , many fungi produce exotoxins .
Fungal toxins are called mycotoxins .
Claviceps purpurea , a fungus that grows on rye and related grains , produces a mycotoxin called ergot toxin , an alkaloid responsible for the disease known as ergotism .
There are two forms of ergotism : gangrenous and convulsive .
In gangrenous ergotism , the ergot toxin causes vasoconstriction , resulting in improper blood flow to the extremities , eventually leading to gangrene .
A famous outbreak of gangrenous ergotism occurred in Eastern Europe during the 5th century AD due to the consumption of rye contaminated with C. purpurea .
In convulsive ergotism , the toxin targets the central nervous system , causing mania and hallucinations .
The mycotoxin aflatoxin is a virulence factor produced by the fungus Aspergillus , an opportunistic pathogen that can enter the body via contaminated food or by inhalation .
Inhalation of the fungus can lead to the chronic pulmonary disease aspergillosis , characterized by fever , bloody sputum , and/or asthma .
Aflatoxin acts in the host as both a mutagen ( a substance that causes mutations in DNA ) and a carcinogen ( a substance involved in causing cancer ) , and has been associated with the development of liver cancer .
Aflatoxin has also been shown to cross the blood-placental barrier .
A second mycotoxin produced by Aspergillus is gliotoxin .
This toxin promotes virulence by inducing host cells to self-destruct and by evading the host ’ s immune response by inhibiting the function of phagocytic cells as well as the pro-inflammatory response .
Like Candida , Aspergillus also produces several proteases .
One is elastase , which breaks down the protein elastin found in the connective tissue of the lung , leading to the development of lung disease .
Another is catalase , an enzyme that protects the fungus from hydrogen peroxide produced by the immune system to destroy pathogens .
Protozoan pathogens are unicellular eukaryotic parasites that have virulence factors and pathogenic mechanisms analogous to prokaryotic and viral pathogens , including adhesins , toxins , antigenic variation , and the ability to survive inside phagocytic vesicles .
Protozoans often have unique features for attaching to host cells .
The protozoan Giardia lamblia , which causes the intestinal disease giardiasis , uses a large adhesive disc composed of microtubules to attach to the intestinal mucosa .
During adhesion , the flagella of G. lamblia move in a manner that draws fluid out from under the disc , resulting in an area of lower pressure that facilitates adhesion to epithelial cells .
Giardia does not invade the intestinal cells but rather causes inflammation ( possibly through the release of cytopathic substances that cause damage to the cells ) and shortens the intestinal villi , inhibiting absorption of nutrients .
Some protozoans are capable of antigenic variation .
The obligate intracellular pathogen Plasmodium falciparum ( one of the causative agents of malaria ) resides inside red blood cells , where it produces an adhesin membrane protein known as PfEMP1 .
This protein is expressed on the surface of the infected erythrocytes , causing blood cells to stick to each other and to the walls of blood vessels .
This process impedes blood flow , sometimes leading to organ failure , anemia , jaundice ( yellowing of skin and sclera of the eyes due to buildup of bilirubin from lysed red blood cells ) , and , subsequently , death .
Although PfEMP1 can be recognized by the host ’ s immune system , antigenic variations in the structure of the protein over time prevent it from being easily recognized and eliminated .
This allows malaria to persist as a chronic infection in many individuals .
The virulence factors of Trypanosoma brucei , the causative agent of African sleeping sickness , include the abilities to form capsules and undergo antigenic variation .
T. brucei evades phagocytosis by producing a dense glycoprotein coat that resembles a bacterial capsule .
Over time , host antibodies are produced that recognize this coat , but T. brucei is able to alter the structure of the glycoprotein to evade recognition .
Helminths , or parasitic worms , are multicellular eukaryotic parasites that depend heavily on virulence factors that allow them to gain entry to host tissues .
For example , the aquatic larval form of Schistosoma mansoni , which causes schistosomiasis , penetrates intact skin with the aid of proteases that degrade skin proteins , including elastin .
To survive within the host long enough to perpetuate their often-complex life cycles , helminths need to evade the immune system .
Some helminths are so large that the immune system is ineffective against them .
Others , such as adult roundworms ( which cause trichinosis , ascariasis , and other diseases ) , are protected by a tough outer cuticle .
Over the course of their life cycles , the surface characteristics of the parasites vary , which may help prevent an effective immune response .
Some helminths express polysaccharides called glycans on their external surface ; because these glycans resemble molecules produced by host cells , the immune system fails to recognize and attack the helminth as a foreign body .
This “ glycan gimmickry , ” as it has been called , serves as a protective cloak that allows the helminth to escape detection by the immune system .
In addition to evading host defenses , helminths can actively suppress the immune system .
S. mansoni , for example , degrades host antibodies with proteases .
Helminths produce many other substances that suppress elements of both innate nonspecific and adaptive specific host defenses .
They also release large amounts of material into the host that may locally overwhelm the immune system or cause it to respond inappropriately .
In the United States and other developed nations , public health is a key function of government .
A healthy citizenry is more productive , content , and prosperous ; high rates of death and disease , on the other hand , can severely hamper economic productivity and foster social and political instability .
The burden of disease makes it difficult for citizens to work consistently , maintain employment , and accumulate wealth to better their lives and support a growing economy .
In this chapter , we will explore the intersections between microbiology and epidemiology , the science that underlies public health .
Epidemiology studies how disease originates and spreads throughout a population , with the goal of preventing outbreaks and containing them when they do occur .
Over the past two centuries , discoveries in epidemiology have led to public health policies that have transformed life in developed nations , leading to the eradication ( or near eradication ) of many diseases that were once causes of great human suffering and premature death .
However , the work of epidemiologists is far from finished .
Numerous diseases continue to plague humanity , and new diseases are always emerging .
Moreover , in the developing world , lack of infrastructure continues to pose many challenges to efforts to contain disease .
The science of epidemiology includes etiology ( the study of the causes of disease ) and investigation of disease transmission ( mechanisms by which a disease is spread ) .
Epidemiological analyses are always carried out with reference to a population , which is the group of individuals that are at risk for the disease or condition .
The population can be defined geographically , but if only a portion of the individuals in that area are susceptible , additional criteria may be required .
Susceptible individuals may be defined by particular behaviors , such as intravenous drug use , owning particular pets , or membership in an institution , such as a college .
Being able to define the population is important because most measures of interest in epidemiology are made with reference to the size of the population .
The state of being diseased is called morbidity .
Morbidity in a population can be expressed in a few different ways .
Morbidity or total morbidity is expressed in numbers of individuals without reference to the size of the population .
The morbidity rate can be expressed as the number of diseased individuals out of a standard number of individuals in the population , such as 100,000 , or as a percent of the population .
There are two aspects of morbidity that are relevant to an epidemiologist : a disease ’ s prevalence and its incidence .
Prevalence is the number , or proportion , of individuals with a particular illness in a given population at a point in time .
For example , the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ( CDC ) estimated that in 2012 , there were about 1.2 million people 13 years and older with an active human immunodeficiency virus ( HIV ) infection .
Expressed as a proportion , or rate , this is a prevalence of 467 infected persons per 100,000 in the population .
On the other hand , incidence is the number or proportion of new cases in a period of time .
For the same year and population , the CDC estimates that there were 43,165 newly diagnosed cases of HIV infection , which is an incidence of 13.7 new cases per 100,000 in the population .
The relationship between incidence and prevalence can be seen in .
For a chronic disease like HIV infection , prevalence will generally be higher than incidence because it represents the cumulative number of new cases over many years minus the number of cases that are no longer active ( e.g. , because the patient died or was cured ) .
In addition to morbidity rates , the incidence and prevalence of mortality ( death ) may also be reported .
A mortality rate can be expressed as the percentage of the population that has died from a disease or as the number of deaths per 100,000 persons ( or other suitable standard number ) .
Diseases that are seen only occasionally , and usually without geographic concentration , are called sporadic diseases .
Examples of sporadic diseases include tetanus , rabies , and plague .
Likewise in the United States there are a few scattered cases of plague each year , usually contracted from rodents in rural areas in the western states .
Diseases that are constantly present ( often at a low level ) in a population within a particular geographic region are called endemic diseases .
For example , malaria is endemic to some regions of Brazil , but is not endemic to the United States .
Diseases for which a larger than expected number of cases occurs in a short time within a geographic region are called epidemic diseases .
Influenza is a good example of a commonly epidemic disease .
Incidence patterns of influenza tend to rise each winter in the northern hemisphere .
These seasonal increases are expected , so it would not be accurate to say that influenza is epidemic every winter ; however , some winters have an usually large number of seasonal influenza cases in particular regions , and such situations would qualify as epidemics ( and ) .
An epidemic disease signals the breakdown of an equilibrium in disease frequency , often resulting from some change in environmental conditions or in the population .
In the case of influenza , the disruption can be due to antigenic shift or drift ( see ) , which allows influenza virus strains to circumvent the acquired immunity of their human hosts .
An epidemic that occurs on a worldwide scale is called a pandemic disease .
For example , HIV/AIDS is a pandemic disease and novel influenza virus strains often become pandemic .
When studying an epidemic , an epidemiologist ’ s first task is to determinate the cause of the disease , called the etiologic agent or causative agent .
Connecting a disease to a specific pathogen can be challenging because of the extra effort typically required to demonstrate direct causation as opposed to a simple association .
It is not enough to observe an association between a disease and a suspected pathogen ; controlled experiments are needed to eliminate other possible causes .
In addition , pathogens are typically difficult to detect when there is no immediate clue as to what is causing the outbreak .
Signs and symptoms of disease are also commonly nonspecific , meaning that many different agents can give rise to the same set of signs and symptoms .
This complicates diagnosis even when a causative agent is familiar to scientists .
Robert Koch was the first scientist to specifically demonstrate the causative agent of a disease ( anthrax ) in the late 1800s .
Koch developed four criteria , now known as Koch ’ s postulates , which had to be met in order to positively link a disease with a pathogenic microbe .
Without Koch ’ s postulates , the Golden Age of Microbiology would not have occurred .
Between 1876 and 1905 , many common diseases were linked with their etiologic agents , including cholera , diphtheria , gonorrhea , meningitis , plague , syphilis , tetanus , and tuberculosis .
Today , we use the molecular Koch ’ s postulates , a variation of Koch ’ s original postulates that can be used to establish a link between the disease state and virulence traits unique to a pathogenic strain of a microbe .
Koch ’ s original postulates and molecular Koch ’ s postulates were described in more detail in .
The main national public health agency in the United States is the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ( CDC ) , an agency of the Department of Health and Human Services .
The CDC is charged with protecting the public from disease and injury .
One way that the CDC carries out this mission is by overseeing the National Notifiable Disease Surveillance System ( NNDSS ) in cooperation with regional , state , and territorial public health departments .
The NNDSS monitors diseases considered to be of public health importance on a national scale .
Such diseases are called notifiable diseases or reportable diseases because all cases must be reported to the CDC .
A physician treating a patient with a notifiable disease is legally required to submit a report on the case .
Notifiable diseases include HIV infection , measles , West Nile virus infections , and many others .
Some states have their own lists of notifiable diseases that include diseases beyond those on the CDC ’ s list .
Notifiable diseases are tracked by epidemiological studies and the data is used to inform health-care providers and the public about possible risks .
The CDC publishes the Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report ( MMWR ) , which provides physicians and health-care workers with updates on public health issues and the latest data pertaining to notifiable diseases .
is an example of the kind of data contained in the MMWR .
The idea that disease could be transmitted was an important precursor to making sense of some of the patterns .
In 1546 , Girolamo Fracastoro first proposed the germ theory of disease in his essay De Contagione et Contagiosis Morbis , but this theory remained in competition with other theories , such as the miasma hypothesis , for many years ( see ) .
Uncertainty about the cause of disease was not an absolute barrier to obtaining useful knowledge from patterns of disease .
Some important researchers , such as Florence Nightingale , subscribed to the miasma hypothesis .
The transition to acceptance of the germ theory during the 19th century provided a solid mechanistic grounding to the study of disease patterns .
The studies of 19th century physicians and researchers such as John Snow , Florence Nightingale , Ignaz Semmelweis , Joseph Lister , Robert Koch , Louis Pasteur , and others sowed the seeds of modern epidemiology .
John Snow was a British physician known as the father of epidemiology for determining the source of the 1854 Broad Street cholera epidemic in London .
Based on observations he had made during an earlier cholera outbreak ( 1848–1849 ) , Snow proposed that cholera was spread through a fecal-oral route of transmission and that a microbe was the infectious agent .
He investigated the 1854 cholera epidemic in two ways .
First , suspecting that contaminated water was the source of the epidemic , Snow identified the source of water for those infected .
He found a high frequency of cholera cases among individuals who obtained their water from the River Thames downstream from London .
This water contained the refuse and sewage from London and settlements upstream .
He also noted that brewery workers did not contract cholera and on investigation found the owners provided the workers with beer to drink and stated that they likely did not drink water .
Second , he also painstakingly mapped the incidence of cholera and found a high frequency among those individuals using a particular water pump located on Broad Street .
In response to Snow ’ s advice , local officials removed the pump ’ s handle , resulting in the containment of the Broad Street cholera epidemic .
Snow ’ s work represents an early epidemiological study and it resulted in the first known public health response to an epidemic .
Snow ’ s meticulous case-tracking methods are now common practice in studying disease outbreaks and in associating new diseases with their causes .
His work further shed light on unsanitary sewage practices and the effects of waste dumping in the Thames .
Additionally , his work supported the germ theory of disease , which argued disease could be transmitted through contaminated items , including water contaminated with fecal matter .
Snow ’ s work illustrated what is referred to today as a common source spread of infectious disease , in which there is a single source for all of the individuals infected .
In this case , the single source was the contaminated well below the Broad Street pump .
Types of common source spread include point source spread , continuous common source spread , and intermittent common source spread .
In point source spread of infectious disease , the common source operates for a short time period—less than the incubation period of the pathogen .
An example of point source spread is a single contaminated potato salad at a group picnic .
In continuous common source spread , the infection occurs for an extended period of time , longer than the incubation period .
An example of continuous common source spread would be the source of London water taken downstream of the city , which was continuously contaminated with sewage from upstream .
Finally , with intermittent common source spread , infections occur for a period , stop , and then begin again .
This might be seen in infections from a well that was contaminated only after large rainfalls and that cleared itself of contamination after a short period .
In contrast to common source spread , propagated spread occurs through direct or indirect person-to-person contact .
With propagated spread , there is no single source for infection ; each infected individual becomes a source for one or more subsequent infections .
With propagated spread , unless the spread is stopped immediately , infections occur for longer than the incubation period .
Although point sources often lead to large-scale but localized outbreaks of short duration , propagated spread typically results in longer duration outbreaks that can vary from small to large , depending on the population and the disease .
In addition , because of person-to-person transmission , propagated spread can not be easily stopped at a single source like point source spread .
Florence Nightingale ’ s work is another example of an early epidemiological study .
In 1854 , Nightingale was part of a contingent of nurses dispatched by the British military to care for wounded soldiers during the Crimean War .
Nightingale kept meticulous records regarding the causes of illness and death during the war .
Her recordkeeping was a fundamental task of what would later become the science of epidemiology .
Her analysis of the data she collected was published in 1858 .
In this book , she presented monthly frequency data on causes of death in a wedge chart histogram .
This graphical presentation of data , unusual at the time , powerfully illustrated that the vast majority of casualties during the war occurred not due to wounds sustained in action but to what Nightingale deemed preventable infectious diseases .
Often these diseases occurred because of poor sanitation and lack of access to hospital facilities .
Nightingale ’ s findings led to many reforms in the British military ’ s system of medical care .
Joseph Lister provided early epidemiological evidence leading to good public health practices in clinics and hospitals .
These settings were notorious in the mid-1800s for fatal infections of surgical wounds at a time when the germ theory of disease was not yet widely accepted ( see ) .
Most physicians did not wash their hands between patient visits or clean and sterilize their surgical tools .
Lister , however , discovered the disinfecting properties of carbolic acid , also known as phenol ( see ) .
He introduced several disinfection protocols that dramatically lowered post-surgical infection rates .
He demanded that surgeons who worked for him use a 5 % carbolic acid solution to clean their surgical tools between patients , and even went so far as to spray the solution onto bandages and over the surgical site during operations .
He also took precautions not to introduce sources of infection from his skin or clothing by removing his coat , rolling up his sleeves , and washing his hands in a dilute solution of carbolic acid before and during the surgery .
Today , epidemiologists make use of study designs , the manner in which data are gathered to test a hypothesis , similar to those of researchers studying other phenomena that occur in populations .
These approaches can be divided into observational studies ( in which subjects are not manipulated ) and experimental studies ( in which subjects are manipulated ) .
Collectively , these studies give modern-day epidemiologists multiple tools for exploring the connections between infectious diseases and the populations of susceptible individuals they might infect .
In an observational study , data are gathered from study participants through measurements ( such as physiological variables like white blood cell count ) , or answers to questions in interviews ( such as recent travel or exercise frequency ) .
The subjects in an observational study are typically chosen at random from a population of affected or unaffected individuals .
However , the subjects in an observational study are in no way manipulated by the researcher .
Observational studies are typically easier to carry out than experimental studies , and in certain situations they may be the only studies possible for ethical reasons .
Observational studies are only able to measure associations between disease occurrence and possible causative agents ; they do not necessarily prove a causal relationship .
For example , suppose a study finds an association between heavy coffee drinking and lower incidence of skin cancer .
This might suggest that coffee prevents skin cancer , but there may be another unmeasured factor involved , such as the amount of sun exposure the participants receive .
The observational study can not distinguish between these two potential causes .
There are several useful approaches in observational studies .
These include methods classified as descriptive epidemiology and analytical epidemiology .
Descriptive epidemiology gathers information about a disease outbreak , the affected individuals , and how the disease has spread over time in an exploratory stage of study .
This type of study will involve interviews with patients , their contacts , and their family members ; examination of samples and medical records ; and even histories of food and beverages consumed .
Such a study might be conducted while the outbreak is still occurring .
Descriptive studies might form the basis for developing a hypothesis of causation that could be tested by more rigorous observational and experimental studies .
Analytical epidemiology employs carefully selected groups of individuals in an attempt to more convincingly evaluate hypotheses about potential causes for a disease outbreak .
The selection of cases is generally made at random , so the results are not biased because of some common characteristic of the study participants .
Analytical studies may gather their data by going back in time ( retrospective studies ) , or as events unfold forward in time ( prospective studies ) .
Retrospective studies gather data from the past on present-day cases .
Data can include things like the medical history , age , gender , or occupational history of the affected individuals .
This type of study examines associations between factors chosen or available to the researcher and disease occurrence .
Prospective studies follow individuals and monitor their disease state during the course of the study .
Data on the characteristics of the study subjects and their environments are gathered at the beginning and during the study so that subjects who become ill may be compared with those who do not .
Again , the researchers can look for associations between the disease state and variables that were measured during the study to shed light on possible causes .
Analytical studies incorporate groups into their designs to assist in teasing out associations with disease .
Approaches to group-based analytical studies include cohort studies , case-control studies , and cross-sectional studies .
The cohort method examines groups of individuals ( called cohorts ) who share a particular characteristic .
For example , a cohort might consist of individuals born in the same year and the same place ; or it might consist of people who practice or avoid a particular behavior , e.g. , smokers or nonsmokers .
In a cohort study , cohorts can be followed prospectively or studied retrospectively .
If only a single cohort is followed , then the affected individuals are compared with the unaffected individuals in the same group .
Disease outcomes are recorded and analyzed to try to identify correlations between characteristics of individuals in the cohort and disease incidence .
Cohort studies are a useful way to determine the causes of a condition without violating the ethical prohibition of exposing subjects to a risk factor .
Cohorts are typically identified and defined based on suspected risk factors to which individuals have already been exposed through their own choices or circumstances .
Case-control studies are typically retrospective and compare a group of individuals with a disease to a similar group of individuals without the disease .
Case-control studies are far more efficient than cohort studies because researchers can deliberately select subjects who are already affected with the disease as opposed to waiting to see which subjects from a random sample will develop a disease .
A cross-sectional study analyzes randomly selected individuals in a population and compares individuals affected by a disease or condition to those unaffected at a single point in time .
Subjects are compared to look for associations between certain measurable variables and the disease or condition .
Cross-sectional studies are also used to determine the prevalence of a condition .
Experimental epidemiology uses laboratory or clinical studies in which the investigator manipulates the study subjects to study the connections between diseases and potential causative agents or to assess treatments .
Examples of treatments might be the administration of a drug , the inclusion or exclusion of different dietary items , physical exercise , or a particular surgical procedure .
Animals or humans are used as test subjects .
Because experimental studies involve manipulation of subjects , they are typically more difficult and sometimes impossible for ethical reasons .
Koch ’ s postulates require experimental interventions to determine the causative agent for a disease .
Unlike observational studies , experimental studies can provide strong evidence supporting cause because other factors are typically held constant when the researcher manipulates the subject .
The outcomes for one group receiving the treatment are compared to outcomes for a group that does not receive the treatment but is treated the same in every other way .
For example , one group might receive a regimen of a drug administered as a pill , while the untreated group receives a placebo ( a pill that looks the same but has no active ingredient ) .
Both groups are treated as similarly as possible except for the administration of the drug .
Because other variables are held constant in both the treated and the untreated groups , the researcher is more certain that any change in the treated group is a result of the specific manipulation .
Experimental studies provide the strongest evidence for the etiology of disease , but they must also be designed carefully to eliminate subtle effects of bias .
Typically , experimental studies with humans are conducted as doubleblind studies , meaning neither the subjects nor the researchers know who is a treatment case and who is not .
This design removes a well-known cause of bias in research called the placebo effect , in which knowledge of the treatment by either the subject or the researcher can influence the outcomes .
Identify important disease vectors Describe the different types of disease reservoirs Compare contact , vector , and vehicle modes of transmission Explain the prevalence of nosocomial infections Understanding how infectious pathogens spread is critical to preventing infectious disease .
Many pathogens require a living host to survive , while others may be able to persist in a dormant state outside of a living host .
But having infected one host , all pathogens must also have a mechanism of transfer from one host to another or they will die when their host dies .
Pathogens often have elaborate adaptations to exploit host biology , behavior , and ecology to live in and move between hosts .
Hosts have evolved defenses against pathogens , but because their rates of evolution are typically slower than their pathogens ( because their generation times are longer ) , hosts are usually at an evolutionary disadvantage .
This section will explore where pathogens survive—both inside and outside hosts—and some of the many ways they move from one host to another .
For pathogens to persist over long periods of time they require reservoirs where they normally reside .
Reservoirs can be living organisms or nonliving sites .
Nonliving reservoirs can include soil and water in the environment .
These may naturally harbor the organism because it may grow in that environment .
These environments may also become contaminated with pathogens in human feces , pathogens shed by intermediate hosts , or pathogens contained in the remains of intermediate hosts .
Pathogens may have mechanisms of dormancy or resilience that allow them to survive ( but typically not to reproduce ) for varying periods of time in nonliving environments .
For example , Clostridium tetani survives in the soil and in the presence of oxygen as a resistant endospore .
Although many viruses are soon destroyed once in contact with air , water , or other non-physiological conditions , certain types are capable of persisting outside of a living cell for varying amounts of time .
For example , a study that looked at the ability of influenza viruses to infect a cell culture after varying amounts of time on a banknote showed survival times from 48 hours to 17 days , depending on how they were deposited on the banknote .
On the other hand , cold-causing rhinoviruses are somewhat fragile , typically surviving less than a day outside of physiological fluids .
A human acting as a reservoir of a pathogen may or may not be capable of transmitting the pathogen , depending on the stage of infection and the pathogen .
To help prevent the spread of disease among school children , the CDC has developed guidelines based on the risk of transmission during the course of the disease .
For example , children with chickenpox are considered contagious for five days from the start of the rash , whereas children with most gastrointestinal illnesses should be kept home for 24 hours after the symptoms disappear .
An individual capable of transmitting a pathogen without displaying symptoms is referred to as a carrier .
A passive carrier is contaminated with the pathogen and can mechanically transmit it to another host ; however , a passive carrier is not infected .
For example , a health-care professional who fails to wash his hands after seeing a patient harboring an infectious agent could become a passive carrier , transmitting the pathogen to another patient who becomes infected .
By contrast , an active carrier is an infected individual who can transmit the disease to others .
An active carrier may or may not exhibit signs or symptoms of infection .
For example , active carriers may transmit the disease during the incubation period ( before they show signs and symptoms ) or the period of convalescence ( after symptoms have subsided ) .
Active carriers who do not present signs or symptoms of disease despite infection are called asymptomatic carriers .
Pathogens such as hepatitis B virus , herpes simplex virus , and HIV are frequently transmitted by asymptomatic carriers .
Mary Mallon , better known as Typhoid Mary , is a famous historical example of an asymptomatic carrier .
An Irish immigrant , Mallon worked as a cook for households in and around New York City between 1900 and 1915 .
In each household , the residents developed typhoid fever ( caused by Salmonella typhi ) a few weeks after Mallon started working .
Later investigations determined that Mallon was responsible for at least 122 cases of typhoid fever , five of which were fatal .
See for more about the Mallon case .
A pathogen may have more than one living reservoir .
In zoonotic diseases , animals act as reservoirs of human disease and transmit the infectious agent to humans through direct or indirect contact .
In some cases , the disease also affects the animal , but in other cases the animal is asymptomatic .
In parasitic infections , the parasite ’ s preferred host is called the definitive host .
In parasites with complex life cycles , the definitive host is the host in which the parasite reaches sexual maturity .
Some parasites may also infect one or more intermediate hosts in which the parasite goes through several immature life cycle stages or reproduces asexually .
Regardless of the reservoir , transmission must occur for an infection to spread .
First , transmission from the reservoir to the individual must occur .
Then , the individual must transmit the infectious agent to other susceptible individuals , either directly or indirectly .
Pathogenic microorganisms employ diverse transmission mechanisms .
Contact transmission includes direct contact or indirect contact .
Person-to-person transmission is a form of direct contact transmission .
Here the agent is transmitted by physical contact between two individuals through actions such as touching , kissing , sexual intercourse , or droplet sprays .
Direct contact can be categorized as vertical , horizontal , or droplet transmission .
Vertical direct contact transmission occurs when pathogens are transmitted from mother to child during pregnancy , birth , or breastfeeding .
Other kinds of direct contact transmission are called horizontal direct contact transmission .
Often , contact between mucous membranes is required for entry of the pathogen into the new host , although skin-to-skin contact can lead to mucous membrane contact if the new host subsequently touches a mucous membrane .
Contact transmission may also be site-specific ; for example , some diseases can be transmitted by sexual contact but not by other forms of contact .
When an individual coughs or sneezes , small droplets of mucus that may contain pathogens are ejected .
This leads to direct droplet transmission , which refers to droplet transmission of a pathogen to a new host over distances of one meter or less .
A wide variety of diseases are transmitted by droplets , including influenza and many forms of pneumonia .
Transmission over distances greater than one meter is called airborne transmission .
Indirect contact transmission involves inanimate objects called fomites that become contaminated by pathogens from an infected individual or reservoir .
For example , an individual with the common cold may sneeze , causing droplets to land on a fomite such as a tablecloth or carpet , or the individual may wipe her nose and then transfer mucus to a fomite such as a doorknob or towel .
Transmission occurs indirectly when a new susceptible host later touches the fomite and transfers the contaminated material to a susceptible portal of entry .
Fomites can also include objects used in clinical settings that are not properly sterilized , such as syringes , needles , catheters , and surgical equipment .
Pathogens transmitted indirectly via such fomites are a major cause of healthcare-associated infections ( see ) .
The term vehicle transmission refers to the transmission of pathogens through vehicles such as water , food , and air .
Water contamination through poor sanitation methods leads to waterborne transmission of disease .
Waterborne disease remains a serious problem in many regions throughout the world .
The World Health Organization ( WHO ) estimates that contaminated drinking water is responsible for more than 500,000 deaths each year .
Similarly , food contaminated through poor handling or storage can lead to foodborne transmission of disease .
Dust and fine particles known as aerosols , which can float in the air , can carry pathogens and facilitate the airborne transmission of disease .
For example , dust particles are the dominant mode of transmission of hantavirus to humans .
Hantavirus is found in mouse feces , urine , and saliva , but when these substances dry , they can disintegrate into fine particles that can become airborne when disturbed ; inhalation of these particles can lead to a serious and sometimes fatal respiratory infection .
Although droplet transmission over short distances is considered contact transmission as discussed above , longer distance transmission of droplets through the air is considered vehicle transmission .
Unlike larger particles that drop quickly out of the air column , fine mucus droplets produced by coughs or sneezes can remain suspended for long periods of time , traveling considerable distances .
In certain conditions , droplets desiccate quickly to produce a droplet nucleus that is capable of transmitting pathogens ; air temperature and humidity can have an impact on effectiveness of airborne transmission .
Tuberculosis is often transmitted via airborne transmission when the causative agent , Mycobacterium tuberculosis , is released in small particles with coughs .
Because tuberculosis requires as few as 10 microbes to initiate a new infection , patients with tuberculosis must be treated in rooms equipped with special ventilation , and anyone entering the room should wear a mask .
Diseases can also be transmitted by a mechanical or biological vector , an animal ( typically an arthropod ) that carries the disease from one host to another .
Mechanical transmission is facilitated by a mechanical vector , an animal that carries a pathogen from one host to another without being infected itself .
For example , a fly may land on fecal matter and later transmit bacteria from the feces to food that it lands on ; a human eating the food may then become infected by the bacteria , resulting in a case of diarrhea or dysentery .
Biological transmission occurs when the pathogen reproduces within a biological vector that transmits the pathogen from one host to another .
Arthropods are the main vectors responsible for biological transmission .
Most arthropod vectors transmit the pathogen by biting the host , creating a wound that serves as a portal of entry .
The pathogen may go through part of its reproductive cycle in the gut or salivary glands of the arthropod to facilitate its transmission through the bite .
For example , hemipterans ( called “ kissing bugs ” or “ assassin bugs ” ) transmit Chagas disease to humans by defecating when they bite , after which the human scratches or rubs the infected feces into a mucous membrane or break in the skin .
Biological insect vectors include mosquitoes , which transmit malaria and other diseases , and lice , which transmit typhus .
Other arthropod vectors can include arachnids , primarily ticks , which transmit Lyme disease and other diseases , and mites , which transmit scrub typhus and rickettsial pox .
Biological transmission , because it involves survival and reproduction within a parasitized vector , complicates the biology of the pathogen and its transmission .
There are also important non-arthropod vectors of disease , including mammals and birds .
Various species of mammals can transmit rabies to humans , usually by means of a bite that transmits the rabies virus .
Chickens and other domestic poultry can transmit avian influenza to humans through direct or indirect contact with avian influenza virus A shed in the birds ’ saliva , mucous , and feces .
Individuals suspected or known to have been exposed to certain contagious pathogens may be quarantined , or isolated to prevent transmission of the disease to others .
Hospitals and other health-care facilities generally set up special wards to isolate patients with particularly hazardous diseases such as tuberculosis or Ebola .
Depending on the setting , these wards may be equipped with special air-handling methods , and personnel may implement special protocols to limit the risk of transmission , such as personal protective equipment or the use of chemical disinfectant sprays upon entry and exit of medical personnel .
The duration of the quarantine depends on factors such as the incubation period of the disease and the evidence suggestive of an infection .
The patient may be released if signs and symptoms fail to materialize when expected or if preventive treatment can be administered in order to limit the risk of transmission .
If the infection is confirmed , the patient may be compelled to remain in isolation until the disease is no longer considered contagious .
In the United States , public health authorities may only quarantine patients for certain diseases , such as cholera , diphtheria , infectious tuberculosis , and strains of influenza capable of causing a pandemic .
Individuals entering the United States or moving between states may be quarantined by the CDC if they are suspected of having been exposed to one of these diseases .
Although the CDC routinely monitors entry points to the United States for crew or passengers displaying illness , quarantine is rarely implemented .
Hospitals , retirement homes , and prisons attract the attention of epidemiologists because these settings are associated with increased incidence of certain diseases .
Higher rates of transmission may be caused by characteristics of the environment itself , characteristics of the population , or both .
Consequently , special efforts must be taken to limit the risks of infection in these settings .
Infections acquired in health-care facilities , including hospitals , are called nosocomial infections or healthcareassociated infections ( HAI ) .
HAIs are often connected with surgery or other invasive procedures that provide the pathogen with access to the portal of infection .
For an infection to be classified as an HAI , the patient must have been admitted to the health-care facility for a reason other than the infection .
In these settings , patients suffering from primary disease are often afflicted with compromised immunity and are more susceptible to secondary infection and opportunistic pathogens .
In 2011 , more than 720,000 HAIs occurred in hospitals in the United States , according to the CDC .
About 22 % of these HAIs occurred at a surgical site , and cases of pneumonia accounted for another 22 % ; urinary tract infections accounted for an additional 13 % , and primary bloodstream infections 10 % .
Such HAIs often occur when pathogens are introduced to patients ’ bodies through contaminated surgical or medical equipment , such as catheters and respiratory ventilators .
Health-care facilities seek to limit nosocomial infections through training and hygiene protocols such as those described in .
Describe the entities involved in international public health and their activities Identify and differentiate between emerging and reemerging infectious diseases A large number of international programs and agencies are involved in efforts to promote global public health .
Among their goals are developing infrastructure in health care , public sanitation , and public health capacity ; monitoring infectious disease occurrences around the world ; coordinating communications between national public health agencies in various countries ; and coordinating international responses to major health crises .
In large part , these international efforts are necessary because disease-causing microorganisms know no national boundaries .
International public health issues are coordinated by the World Health Organization ( WHO ) , an agency of the United Nations .
Of its roughly $ 4 billion budget for 2015–16 , about $ 1 billion was funded by member states and the remaining $ 3 billion by voluntary contributions .
In addition to monitoring and reporting on infectious disease , WHO also develops and implements strategies for their control and prevention .
WHO has had a number of successful international public health campaigns .
It also runs programs to reduce illness and mortality that occur as a result of violence , accidents , lifestyle-associated illnesses such as diabetes , and poor health-care infrastructure .
WHO maintains a global alert and response system that coordinates information from member nations .
In the event of a public health emergency or epidemic , it provides logistical support and coordinates international response to the emergency .
The United States contributes to this effort through the CDC .
The CDC carries out international monitoring and public health efforts , mainly in the service of protecting US public health in an increasingly connected world .
Similarly , the European Union maintains a Health Security Committee that monitors disease outbreaks within its member countries and internationally , coordinating with WHO .
Both WHO and some national public health agencies such as the CDC monitor and prepare for emerging infectious diseases .
An emerging infectious disease is either new to the human population or has shown an increase in prevalence in the previous twenty years .
Whether the disease is new or conditions have changed to cause an increase in frequency , its status as emerging implies the need to apply resources to understand and control its growing impact .
Emerging diseases may change their frequency gradually over time , or they may experience sudden epidemic growth .
The importance of vigilance was made clear during the Ebola hemorrhagic fever epidemic in western Africa through 2014–2015 .
Although health experts had been aware of the Ebola virus since the 1970s , an outbreak on such a large scale had never happened before .
Previous human epidemics had been small , isolated , and contained .
Indeed , the gorilla and chimpanzee populations of western Africa had suffered far worse from Ebola than the human population .
The pattern of small isolated human epidemics changed in 2014 .
Its high transmission rate , coupled with cultural practices for treatment of the dead and perhaps its emergence in an urban setting , caused the disease to spread rapidly , and thousands of people died .
The international public health community responded with a large emergency effort to treat patients and contain the epidemic .
Emerging diseases are found in all countries , both developed and developing .
Some nations are better equipped to deal with them .
National and international public health agencies watch for epidemics like the Ebola outbreak in developing countries because those countries rarely have the health-care infrastructure and expertise to deal with large outbreaks effectively .
Even with the support of international agencies , the systems in western Africa struggled to identify and care for the sick and control spread .
In addition to the altruistic goal of saving lives and assisting nations lacking in resources , the global nature of transportation means that an outbreak anywhere can spread quickly to every corner of the planet .
Managing an epidemic in one location—its source—is far easier than fighting it on many fronts .
Ebola is not the only disease that needs to be monitored in the global environment .
In 2015 , WHO set priorities on several emerging diseases that had a high probability of causing epidemics and that were poorly understood ( and thus urgently required research and development efforts ) .
A reemerging infectious disease is a disease that is increasing in frequency after a previous period of decline .
Its reemergence may be a result of changing conditions or old prevention regimes that are no longer working .
Examples of such diseases are drug-resistant forms of tuberculosis , bacterial pneumonia , and malaria .
Drug-resistant strains of the bacteria causing gonorrhea and syphilis are also becoming more widespread , raising concerns of untreatable infections .
Despite relatively constant exposure to pathogenic microbes in the environment , humans do not generally suffer from constant infection or disease .
Under most circumstances , the body is able to defend itself from the threat of infection thanks to a complex immune system designed to repel , kill , and expel disease-causing invaders .
Immunity as a whole can be described as two interrelated parts : nonspecific innate immunity , which is the subject of this chapter , and specific adaptive host defenses , which are discussed in the next chapter .
The nonspecific innate immune response provides a first line of defense that can often prevent infections from gaining a solid foothold in the body .
These defenses are described as nonspecific because they do not target any specific pathogen ; rather , they defend against a wide range of potential pathogens .
They are called innate because they are built-in mechanisms of the human organism .
Unlike the specific adaptive defenses , they are not acquired over time and they have no “ memory ” ( they do not improve after repeated exposures to specific pathogens ) .
Broadly speaking , nonspecific innate defenses provide an immediate ( or very rapid ) response against potential pathogens .
However , these responses are neither perfect nor impenetrable .
They can be circumvented by pathogens on occasion , and sometimes they can even cause damage to the body , contributing to the signs and symptoms of infection .
In this chapter , we have divided the numerous defenses that make up this system into three categories : physical defenses , chemical defenses , and cellular defenses .
However , it is important to keep in mind that these defenses do not function independently , and the categories often overlap .
provides an overview of the nonspecific defenses discussed in this chapter .
Physical defenses provide the body ’ s most basic form of nonspecific defense .
They include physical barriers to microbes , such as the skin and mucous membranes , as well as mechanical defenses that physically remove microbes and debris from areas of the body where they might cause harm or infection .
In addition , the microbiome provides a measure of physical protection against disease , as microbes of the normal microbiota compete with pathogens for nutrients and cellular binding sites necessary to cause infection .
Physical barriers play an important role in preventing microbes from reaching tissues that are susceptible to infection .
At the cellular level , barriers consist of cells that are tightly joined to prevent invaders from crossing through to deeper tissue .
For example , the endothelial cells that line blood vessels have very tight cell-to-cell junctions , blocking microbes from gaining access to the bloodstream .
Cell junctions are generally composed of cell membrane proteins that may connect with the extracellular matrix or with complementary proteins from neighboring cells .
Tissues in various parts of the body have different types of cell junctions .
These include tight junctions , desmosomes , and gap junctions , as illustrated in .
Invading microorganisms may attempt to break down these substances chemically , using enzymes such as proteases that can cause structural damage to create a point of entry for pathogens .
One of the body ’ s most important physical barriers is the skin barrier , which is composed of three layers of closely packed cells .
The thin upper layer is called the epidermis .
A second , thicker layer , called the dermis , contains hair follicles , sweat glands , nerves , and blood vessels .
A layer of fatty tissue called the hypodermis lies beneath the dermis and contains blood and lymph vessels .
The topmost layer of skin , the epidermis , consists of cells that are packed with keratin .
These dead cells remain as a tightly connected , dense layer of protein-filled cell husks on the surface of the skin .
The keratin makes the skin ’ s surface mechanically tough and resistant to degradation by bacterial enzymes .
Fatty acids on the skin ’ s surface create a dry , salty , and acidic environment that inhibits the growth of some microbes and is highly resistant to breakdown by bacterial enzymes .
In addition , the dead cells of the epidermis are frequently shed , along with any microbes that may be clinging to them .
Shed skin cells are continually replaced with new cells from below , providing a new barrier that will soon be shed in the same way .
Infections can occur when the skin barrier is compromised or broken .
A wound can serve as a point of entry for opportunistic pathogens , which can infect the skin tissue surrounding the wound and possibly spread to deeper tissues .
The mucous membranes lining the nose , mouth , lungs , and urinary and digestive tracts provide another nonspecific barrier against potential pathogens .
Mucous membranes consist of a layer of epithelial cells bound by tight junctions .
The epithelial cells secrete a moist , sticky substance called mucus , which covers and protects the more fragile cell layers beneath it and traps debris and particulate matter , including microbes .
Mucus secretions also contain antimicrobial peptides .
In many regions of the body , mechanical actions serve to flush mucus ( along with trapped or dead microbes ) out of the body or away from potential sites of infection .
For example , in the respiratory system , inhalation can bring microbes , dust , mold spores , and other small airborne debris into the body .
This debris becomes trapped in the mucus lining the respiratory tract , a layer known as the mucociliary blanket .
The epithelial cells lining the upper parts of the respiratory tract are called ciliated epithelial cells because they have hair-like appendages known as cilia .
Movement of the cilia propels debris-laden mucus out and away from the lungs .
The expelled mucus is then swallowed and destroyed in the stomach , or coughed up , or sneezed out .
This system of removal is often called the mucociliary escalator .
The mucociliary escalator is such an effective barrier to microbes that the lungs , the lowermost ( and most sensitive ) portion of the respiratory tract , were long considered to be a sterile environment in healthy individuals .
Only recently has research suggested that healthy lungs may have a small normal microbiota .
Disruption of the mucociliary escalator by the damaging effects of smoking or diseases such as cystic fibrosis can lead to increased colonization of bacteria in the lower respiratory tract and frequent infections , which highlights the importance of this physical barrier to host defenses .
Like the respiratory tract , the digestive tract is a portal of entry through which microbes enter the body , and the mucous membranes lining the digestive tract provide a nonspecific physical barrier against ingested microbes .
The intestinal tract is lined with epithelial cells , interspersed with mucus-secreting goblet cells .
This mucus mixes with material received from the stomach , trapping foodborne microbes and debris .
The mechanical action of peristalsis , a series of muscular contractions in the digestive tract , moves the sloughed mucus and other material through the intestines , rectum , and anus , excreting the material in feces .
The epithelial cells lining the urogenital tract , blood vessels , lymphatic vessels , and certain other tissues are known as endothelia .
These tightly packed cells provide a particularly effective frontline barrier against invaders .
The endothelia of the blood-brain barrier , for example , protect the central nervous system ( CNS ) , which consists of the brain and the spinal cord .
The CNS is one of the most sensitive and important areas of the body , as microbial infection of the CNS can quickly lead to serious and often fatal inflammation .
The cell junctions in the blood vessels traveling through the CNS are some of the tightest and toughest in the body , preventing any transient microbes in the bloodstream from entering the CNS .
This keeps the cerebrospinal fluid that surrounds and bathes the brain and spinal cord sterile under normal conditions .
In addition to physical barriers that keep microbes out , the body has a number of mechanical defenses that physically remove pathogens from the body , preventing them from taking up residence .
We have already discussed several examples of mechanical defenses , including the shedding of skin cells , the expulsion of mucus via the mucociliary escalator , and the excretion of feces through intestinal peristalsis .
Other important examples of mechanical defenses include the flushing action of urine and tears , which both serve to carry microbes away from the body .
The flushing action of urine is largely responsible for the normally sterile environment of the urinary tract , which includes the kidneys , ureters , and urinary bladder .
Urine passing out of the body washes out transient microorganisms , preventing them from taking up residence .
The eyes also have physical barriers and mechanical mechanisms for preventing infections .
The eyelashes and eyelids prevent dust and airborne microorganisms from reaching the surface of the eye .
Any microbes or debris that make it past these physical barriers may be flushed out by the mechanical action of blinking , which bathes the eye in tears , washing debris away .
In various regions of the body , resident microbiota serve as an important first-line defense against invading pathogens .
Through their occupation of cellular binding sites and competition for available nutrients , the resident microbiota prevent the critical early steps of pathogen attachment and proliferation required for the establishment of an infection .
For example , in the vagina , members of the resident microbiota compete with opportunistic pathogens like the yeast Candida .
This competition prevents infections by limiting the availability of nutrients , thus inhibiting the growth of Candida , keeping its population in check .
Similar competitions occur between the microbiota and potential pathogens on the skin , in the upper respiratory tract , and in the gastrointestinal tract .
As will be discussed later in this chapter , the resident microbiota also contribute to the chemical defenses of the innate nonspecific host defenses .
The importance of the normal microbiota in host defenses is highlighted by the increased susceptibility to infectious diseases when the microbiota is disrupted or eliminated .
Treatment with antibiotics can significantly deplete the normal microbiota of the gastrointestinal tract , providing an advantage for pathogenic bacteria to colonize and cause diarrheal infection .
In the case of diarrhea caused by Clostridium difficile , the infection can be severe and potentially lethal .
One strategy for treating C. difficile infections is fecal transplantation , which involves the transfer of fecal material from a donor ( screened for potential pathogens ) into the intestines of the recipient patient as a method of restoring the normal microbiota and combating C. difficile infections .
provides a summary of the physical defenses discussed in this section .
The term “ chemical mediators ” encompasses a wide array of substances found in various body fluids and tissues throughout the body .
Chemical mediators may work alone or in conjunction with each other to inhibit microbial colonization and infection .
Some chemical mediators are endogenously produced , meaning they are produced by human body cells ; others are produced exogenously , meaning that they are produced by certain microbes that are part of the microbiome .
Some mediators are produced continually , bathing the area in the antimicrobial substance ; others are produced or activated primarily in response to some stimulus , such as the presence of microbes .
Fluids produced by the skin include examples of both endogenous and exogenous mediators .
Sebaceous glands in the dermis secrete an oil called sebum that is released onto the skin surface through hair follicles .
This sebum is an endogenous mediator , providing an additional layer of defense by helping seal off the pore of the hair follicle , preventing bacteria on the skin ’ s surface from invading sweat glands and surrounding tissue .
Certain members of the microbiome , such as the bacterium Propionibacterium acnes and the fungus Malassezia , among others , can use lipase enzymes to degrade sebum , using it as a food source .
This produces oleic acid , which creates a mildly acidic environment on the surface of the skin that is inhospitable to many pathogenic microbes .
Oleic acid is an example of an exogenously produced mediator because it is produced by resident microbes and not directly by body cells .
Environmental factors that affect the microbiota of the skin can have a direct impact on the production of chemical mediators .
Low humidity or decreased sebum production , for example , could make the skin less habitable for microbes that produce oleic acid , thus making the skin more susceptible to pathogens normally inhibited by the skin ’ s low pH .
Many skin moisturizers are formulated to counter such effects by restoring moisture and essential oils to the skin .
The digestive tract also produces a large number of chemical mediators that inhibit or kill microbes .
In the oral cavity , saliva contains mediators such as lactoperoxidase enzymes , and mucus secreted by the esophagus contains the antibacterial enzyme lysozyme .
In the stomach , highly acidic gastric fluid kills most microbes .
In the lower digestive tract , the intestines have pancreatic and intestinal enzymes , antibacterial peptides ( cryptins ) , bile produced from the liver , and specialized Paneth cells that produce lysozyme .
Together , these mediators are able to eliminate most pathogens that manage to survive the acidic environment of the stomach .
In the urinary tract , urine flushes microbes out of the body during urination .
Furthermore , the slight acidity of urine ( the average pH is about 6 ) inhibits the growth of many microbes and potential pathogens in the urinary tract .
The female reproductive system employs lactate , an exogenously produced chemical mediator , to inhibit microbial growth .
The cells and tissue layers composing the vagina produce glycogen , a branched and more complex polymer of glucose .
Lactobacilli in the area ferment glycogen to produce lactate , lowering the pH in the vagina and inhibiting transient microbiota , opportunistic pathogens like Candida ( a yeast associated with vaginal infections ) , and other pathogens responsible for sexually transmitted diseases .
In the eyes , tears contain the chemical mediators lysozyme and lactoferrin , both of which are capable of eliminating microbes that have found their way to the surface of the eyes .
Lysozyme cleaves the bond between NAG and NAM in peptidoglycan , a component of the cell wall in bacteria .
It is more effective against gram-positive bacteria , which lack the protective outer membrane associated with gram-negative bacteria .
Lactoferrin inhibits microbial growth by chemically binding and sequestering iron .
This effectually starves many microbes that require iron for growth .
In the ears , cerumen ( earwax ) exhibits antimicrobial properties due to the presence of fatty acids , which lower the pH to between 3 and 5 .
The respiratory tract uses various chemical mediators in the nasal passages , trachea , and lungs .
The mucus produced in the nasal passages contains a mix of antimicrobial molecules similar to those found in tears and saliva ( e.g. , lysozyme , lactoferrin , lactoperoxidase ) .
Secretions in the trachea and lungs also contain lysozyme and lactoferrin , as well as a diverse group of additional chemical mediators , such as the lipoprotein complex called surfactant , which has antibacterial properties .
The antimicrobial peptides ( AMPs ) are a special class of nonspecific cell-derived mediators with broad-spectrum antimicrobial properties .
Some AMPs are produced routinely by the body , whereas others are primarily produced ( or produced in greater quantities ) in response to the presence of an invading pathogen .
Research has begun exploring how AMPs can be used in the diagnosis and treatment of disease .
AMPs may induce cell damage in microorganisms in a variety of ways , including by inflicting damage to membranes , destroying DNA and RNA , or interfering with cell-wall synthesis .
Depending on the specific antimicrobial mechanism , a particular AMP may inhibit only certain groups of microbes ( e.g. , gram-positive or gram-negative bacteria ) or it may be more broadly effective against bacteria , fungi , protozoa , and viruses .
Many AMPs are found on the skin , but they can also be found in other regions of the body .
A family of AMPs called defensins can be produced by epithelial cells throughout the body as well as by cellular defenses such as macrophages and neutrophils ( see ) .
Defensins may be secreted or act inside host cells ; they combat microorganisms by damaging their plasma membranes .
AMPs called bacteriocins are produced exogenously by certain members of the resident microbiota within the gastrointestinal tract .
The genes coding for these types of AMPs are often carried on plasmids and can be passed between different species within the resident microbiota through lateral or horizontal gene transfer .
There are numerous other AMPs throughout the body .
The characteristics of a few of the more significant AMPs are summarized in .
Many nonspecific innate immune factors are found in plasma , the fluid portion of blood .
Plasma contains electrolytes , sugars , lipids , and proteins , each of which helps to maintain homeostasis ( i.e. , stable internal body functioning ) , and contains the proteins involved in the clotting of blood .
Additional proteins found in blood plasma , such as acute-phase proteins , complement proteins , and cytokines , are involved in the nonspecific innate immune response .
The acute-phase proteins are another class of antimicrobial mediators .
Acute-phase proteins are primarily produced in the liver and secreted into the blood in response to inflammatory molecules from the immune system .
Examples of acute-phase proteins include C-reactive protein , serum amyloid A , ferritin , transferrin , fibrinogen , and mannosebinding lectin .
Each of these proteins has a different chemical structure and inhibits or destroys microbes in some way .
The complement system is a group of plasma protein mediators that can act as an innate nonspecific defense while also serving to connect innate and adaptive immunity ( discussed in the next chapter ) .
The complement system is composed of more than 30 proteins ( including C1 through C9 ) that normally circulate as precursor proteins in blood .
These precursor proteins become activated when stimulated or triggered by a variety of factors , including the presence of microorganisms .
Complement proteins are considered part of innate nonspecific immunity because they are always present in the blood and tissue fluids , allowing them to be activated quickly .
Also , when activated through the alternative pathway ( described later in this section ) , complement proteins target pathogens in a nonspecific manner .
The process by which circulating complement precursors become functional is called complement activation .
This process is a cascade that can be triggered by one of three different mechanisms , known as the alternative , classical , and lectin pathways .
The alternative pathway is initiated by the spontaneous activation of the complement protein C3 .
The hydrolysis of C3 produces two products , C3a and C3b .
When no invader microbes are present , C3b is very quickly degraded in a hydrolysis reaction using the water in the blood .
However , if invading microbes are present , C3b attaches to the surface of these microbes .
Once attached , C3b will recruit other complement proteins in a cascade .
The classical pathway provides a more efficient mechanism of activating the complement cascade , but it depends upon the production of antibodies by the specific adaptive immune defenses .
To initiate the classical pathway , a specific antibody must first bind to the pathogen to form an antibody-antigen complex .
This activates the first protein in the complement cascade , the C1 complex .
The C1 complex is a multipart protein complex , and each component participates in the full activation of the overall complex .
Following recruitment and activation of the C1 complex , the remaining classical pathway complement proteins are recruited and activated in a cascading sequence .
The lectin activation pathway is similar to the classical pathway , but it is triggered by the binding of mannose-binding lectin , an acute-phase protein , to carbohydrates on the microbial surface .
Like other acute-phase proteins , lectins are produced by liver cells and are commonly upregulated in response to inflammatory signals received by the body during an infection .
Although each complement activation pathway is initiated in a different way , they all provide the same protective outcomes : opsonization , inflammation , chemotaxis , and cytolysis .
The term opsonization refers to the coating of a pathogen by a chemical substance ( called an opsonin ) that allows phagocytic cells to recognize , engulf , and destroy it more easily .
Opsonins from the complement cascade include C1q , C3b , and C4b .
Additional important opsonins include mannose-binding proteins and antibodies .
The complement fragments C3a and C5a are well-characterized anaphylatoxins with potent proinflammatory functions .
Anaphylatoxins activate mast cells , causing degranulation and the release of inflammatory chemical signals , including mediators that cause vasodilation and increased vascular permeability .
C5a is also one of the most potent chemoattractants for neutrophils and other white blood cells , cellular defenses that will be discussed in the next section .
The complement proteins C6 , C7 , C8 , and C9 assemble into a membrane attack complex ( MAC ) , which allows C9 to polymerize into pores in the membranes of gram-negative bacteria .
These pores allow water , ions , and other molecules to move freely in and out of the targeted cells , eventually leading to cell lysis and death of the pathogen .
However , the MAC is only effective against gram-negative bacteria ; it can not penetrate the thick layer of peptidoglycan associated with cell walls of gram-positive bacteria .
Since the MAC does not pose a lethal threat to gram-positive bacterial pathogens , complement-mediated opsonization is more important for their clearance .
Cytokines are soluble proteins that act as communication signals between cells .
In a nonspecific innate immune response , various cytokines may be released to stimulate production of chemical mediators or other cell functions , such as cell proliferation , cell differentiation , inhibition of cell division , apoptosis , and chemotaxis .
When a cytokine binds to its target receptor , the effect can vary widely depending on the type of cytokine and the type of cell or receptor to which it has bound .
The function of a particular cytokine can be described as autocrine , paracrine , or endocrine .
In autocrine function , the same cell that releases the cytokine is the recipient of the signal ; in other words , autocrine function is a form of self-stimulation by a cell .
In contrast , paracrine function involves the release of cytokines from one cell to other nearby cells , stimulating some response from the recipient cells .
Last , endocrine function occurs when cells release cytokines into the bloodstream to be carried to target cells much farther away .
Three important classes of cytokines are the interleukins , chemokines , and interferons .
The interleukins were originally thought to be produced only by leukocytes ( white blood cells ) and to only stimulate leukocytes , thus the reasons for their name .
Although interleukins are involved in modulating almost every function of the immune system , their role in the body is not restricted to immunity .
Interleukins are also produced by and stimulate a variety of cells unrelated to immune defenses .
The chemokines are chemotactic factors that recruit leukocytes to sites of infection , tissue damage , and inflammation .
In contrast to more general chemotactic factors , like complement factor C5a , chemokines are very specific in the subsets of leukocytes they recruit .
Interferons are a diverse group of immune signaling molecules and are especially important in our defense against viruses .
Type I interferons ( interferon-α and interferon-β ) are produced and released by cells infected with virus .
These interferons stimulate nearby cells to stop production of mRNA , destroy RNA already produced , and reduce protein synthesis .
These cellular changes inhibit viral replication and production of mature virus , slowing the spread of the virus .
Type I interferons also stimulate various immune cells involved in viral clearance to more aggressively attack virus-infected cells .
Type II interferon ( interferon-γ ) is an important activator of immune cells .
Many of the chemical mediators discussed in this section contribute in some way to inflammation and fever , which are nonspecific immune responses discussed in more detail in .
Cytokines stimulate the production of acute-phase proteins such as C-reactive protein and mannose-binding lectin in the liver .
These acutephase proteins act as opsonins , activating complement cascades through the lectin pathway .
Some cytokines also bind mast cells and basophils , inducing them to release histamine , a proinflammatory compound .
Histamine receptors are found on a variety of cells and mediate proinflammatory events , such as bronchoconstriction ( tightening of the airways ) and smooth muscle contraction .
In addition to histamine , mast cells may release other chemical mediators , such as leukotrienes .
Leukotrienes are lipid-based proinflammatory mediators that are produced from the metabolism of arachidonic acid in the cell membrane of leukocytes and tissue cells .
Compared with the proinflammatory effects of histamine , those of leukotrienes are more potent and longer lasting .
Together , these chemical mediators can induce coughing , vomiting , and diarrhea , which serve to expel pathogens from the body .
Certain cytokines also stimulate the production of prostaglandins , chemical mediators that promote the inflammatory effects of kinins and histamines .
Prostaglandins can also help to set the body temperature higher , leading to fever , which promotes the activities of white blood cells and slightly inhibits the growth of pathogenic microbes ( see ) .
Another inflammatory mediator , bradykinin , contributes to edema , which occurs when fluids and leukocytes leak out of the bloodstream and into tissues .
It binds to receptors on cells in the capillary walls , causing the capillaries to dilate and become more permeable to fluids .
provides a summary of the chemical defenses discussed in this section .
The nonfluid portion of blood consists of various types of formed elements , so called because they are all formed from the same stem cells found in bone marrow .
The three major categories of formed elements are : red blood cells ( RBCs ) , also called erythrocytes ; platelets , also called thrombocytes ; and white blood cells ( WBCs ) , also called leukocytes .
Red blood cells are primarily responsible for carrying oxygen to tissues .
Platelets are cellular fragments that participate in blood clot formation and tissue repair .
Several different types of WBCs participate in various nonspecific mechanisms of innate and adaptive immunity .
In this section , we will focus primarily on the innate mechanisms of various types of WBCs .
All of the formed elements of blood are derived from pluripotent hematopoietic stem cells ( HSCs ) in the bone marrow .
As the HSCs make copies of themselves in the bone marrow , individual cells receive different cues from the body that control how they develop and mature .
As a result , the HSCs differentiate into different types of blood cells that , once mature , circulate in peripheral blood .
This process of differentiation , called hematopoiesis , is shown in more detail in .
In terms of sheer numbers , the vast majority of HSCs become erythrocytes .
Much smaller numbers become leukocytes and platelets .
Leukocytes can be further subdivided into granulocytes , which are characterized by numerous granules visible in the cytoplasm , and agranulocytes , which lack granules .
provides an overview of the various types of formed elements , including their relative numbers , primary function , and lifespans .
The various types of granulocytes can be distinguished from one another in a blood smear by the appearance of their nuclei and the contents of their granules , which confer different traits , functions , and staining properties .
The neutrophils , also called polymorphonuclear neutrophils ( PMNs ) , have a nucleus with three to five lobes and small , numerous , lilac-colored granules .
Each lobe of the nucleus is connected by a thin strand of material to the other lobes .
The eosinophils have fewer lobes in the nucleus ( typically 2–3 ) and larger granules that stain reddish-orange .
The basophils have a two-lobed nucleus and large granules that stain dark blue or purple .
Neutrophils ( PMNs ) are frequently involved in the elimination and destruction of extracellular bacteria .
They are capable of migrating through the walls of blood vessels to areas of bacterial infection and tissue damage , where they seek out and kill infectious bacteria .
This is called degranulation .
Another mechanism used by neutrophils is neutrophil extracellular traps ( NETs ) , which are extruded meshes of chromatin that are closely associated with antimicrobial granule proteins and components .
Chromatin is DNA with associated proteins ( usually histone proteins , around which DNA wraps for organization and packing within a cell ) .
By creating and releasing a mesh or lattice-like structure of chromatin that is coupled with antimicrobial proteins , the neutrophils can mount a highly concentrated and efficient attack against nearby pathogens .
Proteins frequently associated with NETs include lactoferrin , gelatinase , cathepsin G , and myeloperoxidase .
Each has a different means of promoting antimicrobial activity , helping neutrophils eliminate pathogens .
The toxic proteins in NETs may kill some of the body ’ s own cells along with invading pathogens .
However , this collateral damage can be repaired after the danger of the infection has been eliminated .
As neutrophils fight an infection , a visible accumulation of leukocytes , cellular debris , and bacteria at the site of infection can be observed .
This buildup is what we call pus ( also known as purulent or suppurative discharge or drainage ) .
The presence of pus is a sign that the immune defenses have been activated against an infection ; historically , some physicians believed that inducing pus formation could actually promote the healing of wounds .
Today , this method is no longer practiced because we now know that it is not effective .
Although a small amount of pus formation can indicate a strong immune response , artificially inducing pus formation does not promote recovery .
Eosinophils are granulocytes that protect against protozoa and helminths ; they also play a role in allergic reactions .
The granules of eosinophils , which readily absorb the acidic reddish dye eosin , contain histamine , degradative enzymes , and a compound known as major basic protein ( MBP ) .
MBP binds to the surface carbohydrates of parasites , and this binding is associated with disruption of the cell membrane and membrane permeability .
Basophils have cytoplasmic granules of varied size and are named for their granules ’ ability to absorb the basic dye methylene blue .
Their stimulation and degranulation can result from multiple triggering events .
Activated complement fragments C3a and C5a , produced in the activation cascades of complement proteins , act as anaphylatoxins by inducing degranulation of basophils and inflammatory responses .
This cell type is important in allergic reactions and other responses that involve inflammation .
One of the most abundant components of basophil granules is histamine , which is released along with other chemical factors when the basophil is stimulated .
These chemicals can be chemotactic and can help to open the gaps between cells in the blood vessels .
Other mechanisms for basophil triggering require the assistance of antibodies , as discussed in .
Hematopoiesis also gives rise to mast cells , which appear to be derived from the same common myeloid progenitor cell as neutrophils , eosinophils , and basophils .
Functionally , mast cells are very similar to basophils , containing many of the same components in their granules ( e.g. , histamine ) and playing a similar role in allergic responses and other inflammatory reactions .
However , unlike basophils , mast cells leave the circulating blood and are most frequently found residing in tissues .
They are often associated with blood vessels and nerves or found close to surfaces that interface with the external environment , such as the skin and mucous membranes in various regions of the body .
As their name suggests , agranulocytes lack visible granules in the cytoplasm .
Agranulocytes can be categorized as lymphocytes or monocytes .
Among the lymphocytes are natural killer cells , which play an important role in nonspecific innate immune defenses .
Lymphocytes also include the B cells and T cells , which are discussed in the next chapter because they are central players in the specific adaptive immune defenses .
The monocytes differentiate into macrophages and dendritic cells , which are collectively referred to as the mononuclear phagocyte system .
Most lymphocytes are primarily involved in the specific adaptive immune response , and thus will be discussed in the following chapter .
An exception is the natural killer cells ( NK cells ) ; these mononuclear lymphocytes use nonspecific mechanisms to recognize and destroy cells that are abnormal in some way .
Cancer cells and cells infected with viruses are two examples of cellular abnormalities that are targeted by NK cells .
Recognition of such cells involves a complex process of identifying inhibitory and activating molecular markers on the surface of the target cell .
Molecular markers that make up the major histocompatibility complex ( MHC ) are expressed by healthy cells as an indication of “ self. ” This will be covered in more detail in next chapter .
NK cells are able to recognize normal MHC markers on the surface of healthy cells , and these MHC markers serve as an inhibitory signal preventing NK cell activation .
However , cancer cells and virus-infected cells actively diminish or eliminate expression of MHC markers on their surface .
When these MHC markers are diminished or absent , the NK cell interprets this as an abnormality and a cell in distress .
This is one part of the NK cell activation process .
NK cells are also activated by binding to activating molecular molecules on the target cell .
These activating molecular molecules include “ altered self ” or “ nonself ” molecules .
When a NK cell recognizes a decrease in inhibitory normal MHC molecules and an increase in activating molecules on the surface of a cell , the NK cell will be activated to eliminate the cell in distress .
Once a cell has been recognized as a target , the NK cell can use several different mechanisms to kill its target .
For example , it may express cytotoxic membrane proteins and cytokines that stimulate the target cell to undergo apoptosis , or controlled cell suicide .
NK cells may also use perforin-mediated cytotoxicity to induce apoptosis in target cells .
The NK cell binds to the abnormal target cell , releases its destructive payload , and detaches from the target cell .
While the target cell undergoes apoptosis , the NK cell synthesizes more perforin and proteases to use on its next target .
NK cells contain these toxic compounds in granules in their cytoplasm .
When stained , the granules are azurophilic and can be visualized under a light microscope .
Even though they have granules , NK cells are not considered granulocytes because their granules are far less numerous than those found in true granulocytes .
Furthermore , NK cells have a different lineage than granulocytes , arising from lymphoid rather than myeloid stem cells .
The largest of the white blood cells , monocytes have a nucleus that lacks lobes , and they also lack granules in the cytoplasm .
Nevertheless , they are effective phagocytes , engulfing pathogens and apoptotic cells to help fight infection .
When monocytes leave the bloodstream and enter a specific body tissue , they differentiate into tissue-specific phagocytes called macrophages and dendritic cells .
They are particularly important residents of lymphoid tissue , as well as nonlymphoid sites and organs .
Macrophages and dendritic cells can reside in body tissues for significant lengths of time .
Macrophages in specific body tissues develop characteristics suited to the particular tissue .
Not only do they provide immune protection for the tissue in which they reside but they also support normal function of their neighboring tissue cells through the production of cytokines .
Macrophages are given tissue-specific names , and a few examples of tissue-specific macrophages are listed in .
Dendritic cells are important sentinels residing in the skin and mucous membranes , which are portals of entry for many pathogens .
Monocytes , macrophages , and dendritic cells are all highly phagocytic and important promoters of the immune response through their production and release of cytokines .
These cells provide an essential bridge between innate and adaptive immune responses , as discussed in the next section as well as the next chapter .
This process , called phagocytosis , was first observed in starfish in the 1880s by Nobel Prize-winning zoologist Ilya Metchnikoff ( 1845–1916 ) , who made the connection to white blood cells ( WBCs ) in humans and other animals .
At the time , Pasteur and other scientists believed that WBCs were spreading pathogens rather than killing them ( which is true for some diseases , such as tuberculosis ) .
But in most cases , phagocytes provide a strong , swift , and effective defense against a broad range of microbes , making them a critical component of innate nonspecific immunity .
This section will focus on the mechanisms by which phagocytes are able to seek , recognize , and destroy pathogens .
Some phagocytes are leukocytes ( WBCs ) that normally circulate in the bloodstream .
To reach pathogens located in infected tissue , leukocytes must pass through the walls of small capillary blood vessels within tissues .
This process , called extravasation , or diapedesis , is initiated by complement factor C5a , as well as cytokines released into the immediate vicinity by resident macrophages and tissue cells responding to the presence of the infectious agent .
Similar to C5a , many of these cytokines are proinflammatory and chemotactic , and they bind to cells of small capillary blood vessels , initiating a response in the endothelial cells lining the inside of the blood vessel walls .
This response involves the upregulation and expression of various cellular adhesion molecules and receptors .
Leukocytes passing through will stick slightly to the adhesion molecules , slowing down and rolling along the blood vessel walls near the infected area .
When they reach a cellular junction , they will bind to even more of these adhesion molecules , flattening out and squeezing through the cellular junction in a process known as transendothelial migration .
This mechanism of “ rolling adhesion ” allows leukocytes to exit the bloodstream and enter the infected areas , where they can begin phagocytosing the invading pathogens .
Note that extravasation does not occur in arteries or veins .
These blood vessels are surrounded by thicker , multilayer protective walls , in contrast to the thin single-cell-layer walls of capillaries .
Furthermore , the blood flow in arteries is too turbulent to allow for rolling adhesion .
Also , some leukocytes tend to respond to an infection more quickly than others .
The first to arrive typically are neutrophils , often within hours of a bacterial infection .
By contract , monocytes may take several days to leave the bloodstream and differentiate into macrophages .
As described in the previous section , opsonization of pathogens by antibody ; complement factors C1q , C3b , and C4b ; and lectins can assist phagocytic cells in recognition of pathogens and attachment to initiate phagocytosis .
However , not all pathogen recognition is opsonin dependent .
Phagocytes can also recognize molecular structures that are common to many groups of pathogenic microbes .
Such structures are called pathogen-associated molecular patterns ( PAMPs ) .
Like numerous other PAMPs , these substances are integral to the structure of broad classes of microbes .
The structures that allow phagocytic cells to detect PAMPs are called pattern recognition receptors ( PRRs ) .
One group of PRRs is the toll-like receptors ( TLRs ) , which bind to various PAMPs and communicate with the nucleus of the phagocyte to elicit a response .
Many TLRs ( and other PRRs ) are located on the surface of a phagocyte , but some can also be found embedded in the membranes of interior compartments and organelles .
These interior PRRs can be useful for the binding and recognition of intracellular pathogens that may have gained access to the inside of the cell before phagocytosis could take place .
Viral nucleic acids , for example , might encounter an interior PRR , triggering production of the antiviral cytokine interferon .
PRRs on macrophages also respond to chemical distress signals from damaged or stressed cells .
This allows macrophages to extend their responses beyond protection from infectious diseases to a broader role in the inflammatory response initiated from injuries or other diseases .
Once pathogen recognition and attachment occurs , the pathogen is engulfed in a vesicle and brought into the internal compartment of the phagocyte in a process called phagocytosis .
PRRs can aid in phagocytosis by first binding to the pathogen ’ s surface , but phagocytes are also capable of engulfing nearby items even if they are not bound to specific receptors .
To engulf the pathogen , the phagocyte forms a pseudopod that wraps around the pathogen and then pinches it off into a membrane vesicle called a phagosome .
Acidification of the phagosome ( pH decreases to the range of 4–5 ) provides an important early antibacterial mechanism .
The phagosome containing the pathogen fuses with one or more lysosomes , forming a phagolysosome .
Formation of the phagolysosome enhances the acidification , which is essential for activation of pH-dependent digestive lysosomal enzymes and production of hydrogen peroxide and toxic reactive oxygen species .
Lysosomal enzymes such as lysozyme , phospholipase , and proteases digest the pathogen .
Other enzymes are involved a respiratory burst .
During the respiratory burst , phagocytes will increase their uptake and consumption of oxygen , but not for energy production .
The increased oxygen consumption is focused on the production of superoxide anion , hydrogen peroxide , hydroxyl radicals , and other reactive oxygen species that are antibacterial .
In addition to the reactive oxygen species produced by the respiratory burst , reactive nitrogen compounds with cytotoxic ( cell-killing ) potential can also form .
For example , nitric oxide can react with superoxide to form peroxynitrite , a highly reactive nitrogen compound with degrading capabilities similar to those of the reactive oxygen species .
Some phagocytes even contain an internal storehouse of microbicidal defensin proteins ( e.g. , neutrophil granules ) .
These destructive forces can be released into the area around the cell to degrade microbes externally .
Neutrophils , especially , can be quite efficient at this secondary antimicrobial mechanism .
Once degradation is complete , leftover waste products are excreted from the cell in an exocytic vesicle .
However , it is important to note that not all remains of the pathogen are excreted as waste .
Macrophages and dendritic cells are also antigen-presenting cells involved in the specific adaptive immune response .
These cells further process the remains of the degraded pathogen and present key antigens ( specific pathogen proteins ) on their cellular surface .
This is an important step for stimulation of some adaptive immune responses , as will be discussed in more detail in the next chapter .
Although inflammation is typically associated with negative consequences of injury or disease , it is a necessary process insofar as it allows for recruitment of the cellular defenses needed to eliminate pathogens , remove damaged and dead cells , and initiate repair mechanisms .
Excessive inflammation , however , can result in local tissue damage and , in severe cases , may even become deadly .
An early , if not immediate , response to tissue injury is acute inflammation .
Immediately following an injury , vasoconstriction of blood vessels will occur to minimize blood loss .
The amount of vasoconstriction is related to the amount of vascular injury , but it is usually brief .
Vasoconstriction is followed by vasodilation and increased vascular permeability , as a direct result of the release of histamine from resident mast cells .
Increased blood flow and vascular permeability can dilute toxins and bacterial products at the site of injury or infection .
They also contribute to the five observable signs associated with the inflammatory response : erythema ( redness ) , edema ( swelling ) , heat , pain , and altered function .
Vasodilation and increased vascular permeability are also associated with an influx of phagocytes at the site of injury and/or infection .
This can enhance the inflammatory response because phagocytes may release proinflammatory chemicals when they are activated by cellular distress signals released from damaged cells , by PAMPs , or by opsonins on the surface of pathogens .
Activation of the complement system can further enhance the inflammatory response through the production of the anaphylatoxin C5a .
illustrates a typical case of acute inflammation at the site of a skin wound .
During the period of inflammation , the release of bradykinin causes capillaries to remain dilated , flooding tissues with fluids and leading to edema .
Increasing numbers of neutrophils are recruited to the area to fight pathogens .
As the fight rages on , pus forms from the accumulation of neutrophils , dead cells , tissue fluids , and lymph .
Typically , after a few days , macrophages will help to clear out this pus .
Eventually , tissue repair can begin in the wounded area .
When acute inflammation is unable to clear an infectious pathogen , chronic inflammation may occur .
This often results in an ongoing ( and sometimes futile ) lower-level battle between the host organism and the pathogen .
The wounded area may heal at a superficial level , but pathogens may still be present in deeper tissues , stimulating ongoing inflammation .
Additionally , chronic inflammation may be involved in the progression of degenerative neurological diseases such as Alzheimer ’ s and Parkinson ’ s , heart disease , and metastatic cancer .
Chronic inflammation may lead to the formation of granulomas , pockets of infected tissue walled off and surrounded by WBCs .
Macrophages and other phagocytes wage an unsuccessful battle to eliminate the pathogens and dead cellular materials within a granuloma .
One example of a disease that produces chronic inflammation is tuberculosis , which results in the formation of granulomas in lung tissues .
A tubercular granuloma is called a tubercle .
Tuberculosis will be covered in more detail in .
Chronic inflammation is not just associated with bacterial infections .
Chronic inflammation can be an important cause of tissue damage from viral infections .
The extensive scarring observed with hepatitis C infections and liver cirrhosis is the result of chronic inflammation .
A fever is an inflammatory response that extends beyond the site of infection and affects the entire body , resulting in an overall increase in body temperature .
Body temperature is normally regulated and maintained by the hypothalamus , an anatomical section of the brain that functions to maintain homeostasis in the body .
However , certain bacterial or viral infections can result in the production of pyrogens , chemicals that effectively alter the “ thermostat setting ” of the hypothalamus to elevate body temperature and cause fever .
Pyrogens may be exogenous or endogenous .
In a cascading effect , these molecules can then lead to the release of prostaglandin E2 ( PGE ) from other cells , resetting the hypothalamus to initiate fever .
Like other forms of inflammation , a fever enhances the innate immune defenses by stimulating leukocytes to kill pathogens .
The rise in body temperature also may inhibit the growth of many pathogens since human pathogens are mesophiles with optimum growth occurring around 35 °C ( 95 °F ) .
In addition , some studies suggest that fever may also stimulate release of iron-sequestering compounds from the liver , thereby starving out microbes that rely on iron for growth .
During fever , the skin may appear pale due to vasoconstriction of the blood vessels in the skin , which is mediated by the hypothalamus to divert blood flow away from extremities , minimizing the loss of heat and raising the core temperature .
The hypothalamus will also stimulate shivering of muscles , another effective mechanism of generating heat and raising the core temperature .
The crisis phase occurs when the fever breaks .
The hypothalamus stimulates vasodilation , resulting in a return of blood flow to the skin and a subsequent release of heat from the body .
The hypothalamus also stimulates sweating , which cools the skin as the sweat evaporates .
Although a low-level fever may help an individual overcome an illness , in some instances , this immune response can be too strong , causing tissue and organ damage and , in severe cases , even death .
The inflammatory response to bacterial superantigens is one scenario in which a life-threatening fever may develop .
Superantigens are bacterial or viral proteins that can cause an excessive activation of T cells from the specific adaptive immune defense , as well as an excessive release of cytokines that overstimulates the inflammatory response .
For example , Staphylococcus aureus and Streptococcus pyogenes are capable of producing superantigens that cause toxic shock syndrome and scarlet fever , respectively .
Both of these conditions can be associated with very high , life-threatening fevers in excess of 42 °C ( 108 °F ) .
People living in developed nations and born in the 1960s or later may have difficulty understanding the once heavy burden of devastating infectious diseases .
For example , smallpox , a deadly viral disease , once destroyed entire civilizations but has since been eradicated .
Thanks to the vaccination efforts by multiple groups , including the World Health Organization , Rotary International , and the United Nations Children ’ s Fund ( UNICEF ) , smallpox has not been diagnosed in a patient since 1977 .
Polio is another excellent example .
This crippling viral disease paralyzed patients , who were often kept alive in “ iron lung wards ” as recently as the 1950s .
Today , vaccination against polio has nearly eradicated the disease .
Vaccines have also reduced the prevalence of once-common infectious diseases such as chickenpox , German measles , measles , mumps , and whooping cough .
The success of these and other vaccines is due to the very specific and adaptive host defenses that are the focus of this chapter .
described innate immunity against microbial pathogens .
Higher animals , such as humans , also possess an adaptive immune defense , which is highly specific for individual microbial pathogens .
This specific adaptive immunity is acquired through active infection or vaccination and serves as an important defense against pathogens that evade the defenses of innate immunity .
Specificity refers to the adaptive immune system ’ s ability to target specific pathogens , and memory refers to its ability to quickly respond to pathogens to which it has previously been exposed .
For example , when an individual recovers from chickenpox , the body develops a memory of the infection that will specifically protect it from the causative agent , the varicella-zoster virus , if it is exposed to the virus again later .
Specificity and memory are achieved by essentially programming certain cells involved in the immune response to respond rapidly to subsequent exposures of the pathogen .
This programming occurs as a result of the first exposure to a pathogen or vaccine , which triggers a primary response .
Subsequent exposures result in a secondary response that is faster and stronger as a result of the body ’ s memory of the first exposure .
This secondary response , however , is specific to the pathogen in question .
For example , exposure to one virus ( e.g. , varicella-zoster virus ) will not provide protection against other viral diseases ( e.g. , measles , mumps , or polio ) .
Adaptive specific immunity involves the actions of two distinct cell types : B lymphocytes ( B cells ) and T lymphocytes ( T cells ) .
Although B cells and T cells arise from a common hematopoietic stem cell differentiation pathway ( see ) , their sites of maturation and their roles in adaptive immunity are very different .
B cells mature in the bone marrow and are responsible for the production of glycoproteins called antibodies , or immunoglobulins .
Antibodies are involved in the body ’ s defense against pathogens and toxins in the extracellular environment .
Mechanisms of adaptive specific immunity that involve B cells and antibody production are referred to as humoral immunity .
The maturation of T cells occurs in the thymus .
T cells function as the central orchestrator of both innate and adaptive immune responses .
They are also responsible for destruction of cells infected with intracellular pathogens .
The targeting and destruction of intracellular pathogens by T cells is called cell-mediated immunity , or cellular immunity .
Activation of the adaptive immune defenses is triggered by pathogen-specific molecular structures called antigens .
Antigens are similar to the pathogen-associated molecular patterns ( PAMPs ) discussed in ; however , whereas PAMPs are molecular structures found on numerous pathogens , antigens are unique to a specific pathogen .
The antigens that stimulate adaptive immunity to chickenpox , for example , are unique to the varicella-zoster virus but significantly different from the antigens associated with other viral pathogens .
The term antigen was initially used to describe molecules that stimulate the production of antibodies ; in fact , the term comes from a combination of the words antibody and generator , and a molecule that stimulates antibody production is said to be antigenic .
However , the role of antigens is not limited to humoral immunity and the production of antibodies ; antigens also play an essential role in stimulating cellular immunity , and for this reason antigens are sometimes more accurately referred to as immunogens .
In this text , however , we will typically refer to them as antigens .
Pathogens possess a variety of structures that may contain antigens .
For example , antigens from bacterial cells may be associated with their capsules , cell walls , fimbriae , flagella , or pili .
Bacterial antigens may also be associated with extracellular toxins and enzymes that they secrete .
Viruses possess a variety of antigens associated with their capsids , envelopes , and the spike structures they use for attachment to cells .
Antigens may belong to any number of molecular classes , including carbohydrates , lipids , nucleic acids , proteins , and combinations of these molecules .
Antigens of different classes vary in their ability to stimulate adaptive immune defenses as well as in the type of response they stimulate ( humoral or cellular ) .
The structural complexity of an antigenic molecule is an important factor in its antigenic potential .
In general , more complex molecules are more effective as antigens .
For example , the three-dimensional complex structure of proteins make them the most effective and potent antigens , capable of stimulating both humoral and cellular immunity .
In comparison , carbohydrates are less complex in structure and therefore less effective as antigens ; they can only stimulate humoral immune defenses .
Lipids and nucleic acids are the least antigenic molecules , and in some cases may only become antigenic when combined with proteins or carbohydrates to form glycolipids , lipoproteins , or nucleoproteins .
One reason the three-dimensional complexity of antigens is so important is that antibodies and T cells do not recognize and interact with an entire antigen but with smaller exposed regions on the surface of antigens called epitopes .
A single antigen may possess several different epitopes , and different antibodies may bind to different epitopes on the same antigen .
For example , the bacterial flagellum is a large , complex protein structure that can possess hundreds or even thousands of epitopes with unique three-dimensional structures .
Moreover , flagella from different bacterial species ( or even strains of the same species ) contain unique epitopes that can only be bound by specific antibodies .
An antigen ’ s size is another important factor in its antigenic potential .
Whereas large antigenic structures like flagella possess multiple epitopes , some molecules are too small to be antigenic by themselves .
Such molecules , called haptens , are essentially free epitopes that are not part of the complex three-dimensional structure of a larger antigen .
For a hapten to become antigenic , it must first attach to a larger carrier molecule ( usually a protein ) to produce a conjugate antigen .
The hapten-specific antibodies produced in response to the conjugate antigen are then able to interact with unconjugated free hapten molecules .
Haptens are not known to be associated with any specific pathogens , but they are responsible for some allergic responses .
For example , the hapten urushiol , a molecule found in the oil of plants that cause poison ivy , causes an immune response that can result in a severe rash ( called contact dermatitis ) .
Similarly , the hapten penicillin can cause allergic reactions to drugs in the penicillin class .
Antibodies ( also called immunoglobulins ) are glycoproteins that are present in both the blood and tissue fluids .
The basic structure of an antibody monomer consists of four protein chains held together by disulfide bonds .
A disulfide bond is a covalent bond between the sulfhydryl R groups found on two cysteine amino acids .
The two largest chains are identical to each other and are called the heavy chains .
The two smaller chains are also identical to each other and are called the light chains .
Joined together , the heavy and light chains form a basic Yshaped structure .
The two ‘ arms ’ of the Y-shaped antibody molecule are known as the Fab region , for “ fragment of antigen binding. ” The far end of the Fab region is the variable region , which serves as the site of antigen binding .
The amino acid sequence in the variable region dictates the three-dimensional structure , and thus the specific three-dimensional epitope to which the Fab region is capable of binding .
Although the epitope specificity of the Fab regions is identical for each arm of a single antibody molecule , this region displays a high degree of variability between antibodies with different epitope specificities .
Binding to the Fab region is necessary for neutralization of pathogens , agglutination or aggregation of pathogens , and antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity .
The constant region of the antibody molecule includes the trunk of the Y and lower portion of each arm of the Y .
The trunk of the Y is also called the Fc region , for “ fragment of crystallization , ” and is the site of complement factor binding and binding to phagocytic cells during antibody-mediated opsonization .
The constant region of an antibody molecule determines its class , or isotype .
The five classes of antibodies are IgG , IgM , IgA , IgD , and IgE .
Each class possesses unique heavy chains designated by Greek letters γ , μ , α , δ , and ε , respectively .
Antibody classes also exhibit important differences in abundance in serum , arrangement , body sites of action , functional roles , and size .
IgG is a monomer that is by far the most abundant antibody in human blood , accounting for about 80 % of total serum antibody .
IgG penetrates efficiently into tissue spaces , and is the only antibody class with the ability to cross the placental barrier , providing passive immunity to the developing fetus during pregnancy .
IgG is also the most versatile antibody class in terms of its role in the body ’ s defense against pathogens .
IgM is initially produced in a monomeric membrane-bound form that serves as an antigen-binding receptor on B cells .
The secreted form of IgM assembles into a pentamer with five monomers of IgM bound together by a protein structure called the J chain .
IgM is the first antibody produced and secreted by B cells during the primary and secondary immune responses , making pathogen-specific IgM a valuable diagnostic marker during active or recent infections .
IgA accounts for about 13 % of total serum antibody , and secretory IgA is the most common and abundant antibody class found in the mucus secretions that protect the mucous membranes .
IgA can also be found in other secretions such as breast milk , tears , and saliva .
Secretory IgA is assembled into a dimeric form with two monomers joined by a protein structure called the secretory component .
One of the important functions of secretory IgA is to trap pathogens in mucus so that they can later be eliminated from the body .
Similar to IgM , IgD is a membrane-bound monomer found on the surface of B cells , where it serves as an antigenbinding receptor .
However , IgD is not secreted by B cells , and only trace amounts are detected in serum .
These trace amounts most likely come from the degradation of old B cells and the release of IgD molecules from their cytoplasmic membranes .
IgE is the least abundant antibody class in serum .
Like IgG , it is secreted as a monomer , but its role in adaptive immunity is restricted to anti-parasitic defenses .
The Fc region of IgE binds to basophils and mast cells .
The Fab region of the bound IgE then interacts with specific antigen epitopes , causing the cells to release potent proinflammatory mediators .
The inflammatory reaction resulting from the activation of mast cells and basophils aids in the defense against parasites , but this reaction is also central to allergic reactions ( see .
Different classes of antibody play important roles in the body ’ s defense against pathogens .
These functions include neutralization of pathogens , opsonization for phagocytosis , agglutination , complement activation , and antibodydependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity .
For most of these functions , antibodies also provide an important link between adaptive specific immunity and innate nonspecific immunity .
Neutralization involves the binding of certain antibodies ( IgG , IgM , or IgA ) to epitopes on the surface of pathogens or toxins , preventing their attachment to cells .
For example , Secretory IgA can bind to specific pathogens and block initial attachment to intestinal mucosal cells .
Similarly , specific antibodies can bind to certain toxins , blocking them from attaching to target cells and thus neutralizing their toxic effects .
Viruses can be neutralized and prevented from infecting a cell by the same mechanism .
As described in , opsonization is the coating of a pathogen with molecules , such as complement factors , C-reactive protein , and serum amyloid A , to assist in phagocyte binding to facilitate phagocytosis .
IgG antibodies also serve as excellent opsonins , binding their Fab sites to specific epitopes on the surface of pathogens .
Phagocytic cells such as macrophages , dendritic cells , and neutrophils have receptors on their surfaces that recognize and bind to the Fc portion of the IgG molecules ; thus , IgG helps such phagocytes attach to and engulf the pathogens they have bound .
Agglutination or aggregation involves the cross-linking of pathogens by antibodies to create large aggregates .
IgG has two Fab antigen-binding sites , which can bind to two separate pathogen cells , clumping them together .
When multiple IgG antibodies are involved , large aggregates can develop ; these aggregates are easier for the kidneys and spleen to filter from the blood and easier for phagocytes to ingest for destruction .
The pentameric structure of IgM provides ten Fab binding sites per molecule , making it the most efficient antibody for agglutination .
Another important function of antibodies is activation of the complement cascade .
Complement activation can occur through three different pathways ( see ) , but the most efficient is the classical pathway , which requires the initial binding of IgG or IgM antibodies to the surface of a pathogen cell , allowing for recruitment and activation of the C1 complex .
Yet another important function of antibodies is antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity ( ADCC ) , which enhances killing of pathogens that are too large to be phagocytosed .
This process is best characterized for natural killer cells ( NK cells ) , as shown in , but it can also involve macrophages and eosinophils .
ADCC occurs when the Fab region of an IgG antibody binds to a large pathogen ; Fc receptors on effector cells ( e.g. , NK cells ) then bind to the Fc region of the antibody , bringing them into close proximity with the target pathogen .
The effector cell then secretes powerful cytotoxins ( e.g. , perforin and granzymes ) that kill the pathogen .
MHC molecules also play an important role in the presentation of foreign antigens , which is a critical step in the activation of T cells and thus an important mechanism of the adaptive immune system .
The major histocompatibility complex ( MHC ) is a collection of genes coding for MHC molecules found on the surface of all nucleated cells of the body .
In humans , the MHC genes are also referred to as human leukocyte antigen ( HLA ) genes .
Mature red blood cells , which lack a nucleus , are the only cells that do not express MHC molecules on their surface .
There are two classes of MHC molecules involved in adaptive immunity , MHC I and MHC II .
MHC I molecules are found on all nucleated cells ; they present normal self-antigens as well as abnormal or nonself pathogens to the effector T cells involved in cellular immunity .
In contrast , MHC II molecules are only found on macrophages , dendritic cells , and B cells ; they present abnormal or nonself pathogen antigens for the initial activation of T cells .
Both types of MHC molecules are transmembrane glycoproteins that assemble as dimers in the cytoplasmic membrane of cells , but their structures are quite different .
MHC I molecules are composed of a longer α protein chain coupled with a smaller β microglobulin protein , and only the α chain spans the cytoplasmic membrane .
The α chain of the MHC I molecule folds into three separate domains : α , α and α .
MHC II molecules are composed of two protein chains ( an α and a β chain ) that are approximately similar in length .
Both chains of the MHC II molecule possess portions that span the plasma membrane , and each chain folds into two separate domains : α and α , and β , and β .
In order to present abnormal or non-self-antigens to T cells , MHC molecules have a cleft that serves as the antigen-binding site near the “ top ” ( or outermost ) portion of the MHC-I or MHC-II dimer .
For MHC I , the antigenbinding cleft is formed by the α and α domains , whereas for MHC II , the cleft is formed by the α and β domains .
All nucleated cells in the body have mechanisms for processing and presenting antigens in association with MHC molecules .
This signals the immune system , indicating whether the cell is normal and healthy or infected with an intracellular pathogen .
However , only macrophages , dendritic cells , and B cells have the ability to present antigens specifically for the purpose of activating T cells ; for this reason , these types of cells are sometimes referred to as antigen-presenting cells ( APCs ) .
While all APCs play a similar role in adaptive immunity , there are some important differences to consider .
Macrophages and dendritic cells are phagocytes that ingest and kill pathogens that penetrate the first-line barriers ( i.e. , skin and mucous membranes ) .
B cells , on the other hand , do not function as phagocytes but play a primary role in the production and secretion of antibodies .
When the immunoglobulin receptors bind to an antigen , the B cell internalizes the antigen by endocytosis before processing and presentting the antigen to T cells .
MHC II molecules are only found on the surface of APCs .
Macrophages and dendritic cells use similar mechanisms for processing and presentation of antigens and their epitopes in association with MHC II ; B cells use somewhat different mechanisms that will be described further in .
For now , we will focus on the steps of the process as they pertain to dendritic cells .
After a dendritic cell recognizes and attaches to a pathogen cell , the pathogen is internalized by phagocytosis and is initially contained within a phagosome .
Lysosomes containing antimicrobial enzymes and chemicals fuse with the phagosome to create a phagolysosome , where degradation of the pathogen for antigen processing begins .
Proteases ( protein-degrading ) are especially important in antigen processing because only protein antigen epitopes are presented to T cells by MHC II .
APCs do not present all possible epitopes to T cells ; only a selection of the most antigenic or immunodominant epitopes are presented .
MHC I molecules , found on all normal , healthy , nucleated cells , signal to the immune system that the cell is a normal “ self ” cell .
Immune cells , such as NK cells , recognize these self-antigens and do not target the cell for destruction .
However , if a cell becomes infected with an intracellular pathogen ( e.g. , a virus ) , protein antigens specific to the pathogen are processed in the proteasomes and bind with MHC I molecules for presentation on the cell surface .
This presentation of pathogenspecific antigens with MHC I signals that the infected cell must be targeted for destruction along with the pathogen .
Before elimination of infected cells can begin , APCs must first activate the T cells involved in cellular immunity .
If an intracellular pathogen directly infects the cytoplasm of an APC , then the processing and presentation of antigens can occur as described ( in proteasomes and on the cell surface with MHC I ) .
However , if the intracellular pathogen does not directly infect APCs , an alternative strategy called cross-presentation is utilized .
In cross-presentation , antigens are brought into the APC by mechanisms normally leading to presentation with MHC II ( i.e. , through phagocytosis ) , but the antigen is presented on an MHC I molecule for CD8 T cells .
The exact mechanisms by which cross-presentation occur are not yet well understood , but it appears that cross-presentation is primarily a function of dendritic cells and not macrophages or B cells .
Thus , humoral immunity is primarily concerned with fighting pathogens in extracellular spaces .
However , pathogens that have already gained entry to host cells are largely protected from the humoral antibody-mediated defenses .
Cellular immunity , on the other hand , targets and eliminates intracellular pathogens through the actions of T lymphocytes , or T cells .
T cells also play a more central role in orchestrating the overall adaptive immune response ( humoral as well as cellular ) along with the cellular defenses of innate immunity .
T cells , like all other white blood cells involved in innate and adaptive immunity , are formed from multipotent hematopoietic stem cells ( HSCs ) in the bone marrow ( see ) .
However , unlike the white blood cells of innate immunity , eventual T cells differentiate first into lymphoid stem cells that then become small , immature lymphocytes , sometimes called lymphoblasts .
The first steps of differentiation occur in the red marrow of bones , after which immature T lymphocytes enter the bloodstream and travel to the thymus for the final steps of maturation .
Once in the thymus , the immature T lymphocytes are referred to as thymocytes .
The maturation of thymocytes within the thymus can be divided into tree critical steps of positive and negative selection , collectively referred to as thymic selection .
The first step of thymic selection occurs in the cortex of the thymus and involves the development of a functional T-cell receptor ( TCR ) that is required for activation by APCs .
Thymocytes with defective TCRs are removed by negative selection through the induction of apoptosis ( programmed controlled cell death ) .
The second step of thymic selection also occurs in the cortex and involves the positive selection of thymocytes that will interact appropriately with MHC molecules .
Thymocytes that can interact appropriately with MHC molecules receive a positive stimulation that moves them further through the process of maturation , whereas thymocytes that do not interact appropriately are not stimulated and are eliminated by apoptosis .
The third and final step of thymic selection occurs in both the cortex and medulla and involves negative selection to remove selfreacting thymocytes , those that react to self-antigens , by apoptosis .
This final step is sometimes referred to as central tolerance because it prevents self-reacting T cells from reaching the bloodstream and potentially causing autoimmune disease , which occurs when the immune system attacks healthy “ self ” cells .
Despite central tolerance , some self-reactive T cells generally escape the thymus and enter the peripheral bloodstream .
Therefore , a second line of defense called peripheral tolerance is needed to protect against autoimmune disease .
Peripheral tolerance involves mechanisms of anergy and inhibition of self-reactive T cells by regulatory T cells .
Anergy refers to a state of nonresponsiveness to antigen stimulation .
In the case of self-reactive T cells that escape the thymus , lack of an essential co-stimulatory signal required for activation causes anergy and prevents autoimmune activation .
Regulatory T cells participate in peripheral tolerance by inhibiting the activation and function of selfreactive T cells and by secreting anti-inflammatory cytokines .
It is not completely understood what events specifically direct maturation of thymocytes into regulatory T cells .
Current theories suggest the critical events may occur during the third step of thymic selection , when most selfreactive T cells are eliminated .
Regulatory T cells may receive a unique signal that is below the threshold required to target them for negative selection and apoptosis .
Consequently , these cells continue to mature and then exit the thymus , armed to inhibit the activation of self-reactive T cells .
It has been estimated that the three steps of thymic selection eliminate 98 % of thymocytes .
The remaining 2 % that exit the thymus migrate through the bloodstream and lymphatic system to sites of secondary lymphoid organs/tissues , such as the lymph nodes , spleen , and tonsils , where they await activation through the presentation of specific antigens by APCs .
Until they are activated , they are known as mature naïve T cells .
T cells can be categorized into three distinct classes : helper T cells , regulatory T cells , and cytotoxic T cells .
These classes are differentiated based on their expression of certain surface molecules , their mode of activation , and their functional roles in adaptive immunity .
All T cells produce cluster of differentiation ( CD ) molecules , cell surface glycoproteins that can be used to identify and distinguish between the various types of white blood cells .
Although T cells can produce a variety of CD molecules , CD4 and CD8 are the two most important used for differentiation of the classes .
Helper T cells and regulatory T cells are characterized by the expression of CD4 on their surface , whereas cytotoxic T cells are characterized by the expression of CD8 .
Classes of T cells can also be distinguished by the specific MHC molecules and APCs with which they interact for activation .
Helper T cells and regulatory T cells can only be activated by APCs presenting antigens associated with MHC II .
In contrast , cytotoxic T cells recognize antigens presented in association with MHC I , either by APCs or by nucleated cells infected with an intracellular pathogen .
The different classes of T cells also play different functional roles in the immune system .
Helper T cells serve as the central orchestrators that help activate and direct functions of humoral and cellular immunity .
In addition , helper T cells enhance the pathogen-killing functions of macrophages and NK cells of innate immunity .
In contrast , the primary role of regulatory T cells is to prevent undesirable and potentially damaging immune responses .
Their role in peripheral tolerance , for example , protects against autoimmune disorders , as discussed earlier .
Finally , cytotoxic T cells are the primary effector cells for cellular immunity .
They recognize and target cells that have been infected by intracellular pathogens , destroying infected cells along with the pathogens inside .
For both helper T cells and cytotoxic T cells , activation is a complex process that requires the interactions of multiple molecules and exposure to cytokines .
The T-cell receptor ( TCR ) is involved in the first step of pathogen epitope recognition during the activation process .
The TCR comes from the same receptor family as the antibodies IgD and IgM , the antigen receptors on the B cell membrane surface , and thus shares common structural elements .
Similar to antibodies , the TCR has a variable region and a constant region , and the variable region provides the antigen-binding site .
However , the structure of TCR is smaller and less complex than the immunoglobulin molecules .
Whereas immunoglobulins have four peptide chains and Y-shaped structures , the TCR consists of just two peptide chains ( α and β chains ) , both of which span the cytoplasmic membrane of the T cell .
TCRs are epitope-specific , and it has been estimated that 25 million T cells with unique epitope-binding TCRs are required to protect an individual against a wide range of microbial pathogens .
Because the human genome only contains about 25,000 genes , we know that each specific TCR can not be encoded by its own set of genes .
This raises the question of how such a vast population of T cells with millions of specific TCRs can be achieved .
The answer is a process called genetic rearrangement , which occurs in the thymus during the first step of thymic selection .
The genes that code for the variable regions of the TCR are divided into distinct gene segments called variable ( V ) , diversity ( D ) , and joining ( J ) segments .
The genes segments associated with the α chain of the TCR consist 70 or more different V segments and 61 different J segments .
The gene segments associated with the β chain of the TCR consist of 52 different V segments , two different D segments , and 13 different J segments .
During the development of the functional TCR in the thymus , genetic rearrangement in a T cell brings together one V segment and one J segment to code for the variable region of the α chain .
Similarly , genetic rearrangement brings one of the V segments together with one of the D segments and one of thetJ segments to code for the variable region of the β chain .
All the possible combinations of rearrangements between different segments of V , D , and J provide the genetic diversity required to produce millions of TCRs with unique epitope-specific variable regions .
Helper T cells can only be activated by APCs presenting processed foreign epitopes in association with MHC II .
The first step in the activation process is TCR recognition of the specific foreign epitope presented within the MHC II antigen-binding cleft .
The second step involves the interaction of CD4 on the helper T cell with a region of the MHC II molecule separate from the antigen-binding cleft .
This second interaction anchors the MHC II-TCR complex and ensures that the helper T cell is recognizing both the foreign ( “ nonself ” ) epitope and “ self ” antigen of the APC ; both recognitions are required for activation of the cell .
In the third step , the APC and T cell secrete cytokines that activate the helper T cell .
The activated helper T cell then proliferates , dividing by mitosis to produce clonal naïve helper T cells that differentiate into subtypes with different functions .
Activated helper T cells can differentiate into one of four distinct subtypes , summarized in .
The differentiation process is directed by APC-secreted cytokines .
Depending on which APC-secreted cytokines interact with an activated helper T cell , the cell may differentiate into a T helper 1 ( T 1 ) cell , a T helper 2 ( T 2 ) cell , or a memory helper T cell .
The two types of helper T cells are relatively short-lived effector cells , meaning that they perform various functions of the immediate immune response .
In contrast , memory helper T cells are relatively long lived ; they are programmed to “ remember ” a specific antigen or epitope in order to mount a rapid , strong , secondary response to subsequent exposures .
T 1 cells secrete their own cytokines that are involved in stimulating and orchestrating other cells involved in adaptive and innate immunity .
For example , they stimulate cytotoxic T cells , enhancing their killing of infected cells and promoting differentiation into memory cytotoxic T cells .
T 1 cells also stimulate macrophages and neutrophils to become more effective in their killing of intracellular bacteria .
They can also stimulate NK cells to become more effective at killing target cells .
T 2 cells play an important role in orchestrating the humoral immune response through their secretion of cytokines that activate B cells and direct B cell differentiation and antibody production .
Various cytokines produced by T 2 cells orchestrate antibody class switching , which allows B cells to switch between the production of IgM , IgG , IgA , and IgE as needed to carry out specific antibody functions and to provide pathogen-specific humoral immune responses .
A third subtype of helper T cells called T 17 cells was discovered through observations that immunity to some infections is not associated with T 1 or T 2 cells .
T 17 cells and the cytokines they produce appear to be specifically responsible for the body ’ s defense against chronic mucocutaneous infections .
Patients who lack sufficient T 17 cells in the mucosa ( e.g. , HIV patients ) may be more susceptible to bacteremia and gastrointestinal infections .
Cytotoxic T cells ( also referred to as cytotoxic T lymphocytes , or CTLs ) are activated by APCs in a three-step process similar to that of helper T cells .
The key difference is that the activation of cytotoxic T cells involves recognition of an antigen presented with MHC I ( as opposed to MHC II ) and interaction of CD8 ( as opposed to CD4 ) with the receptor complex .
After the successful co-recognition of foreign epitope and self-antigen , the production of cytokines by the APC and the cytotoxic T cell activate clonal proliferation and differentiation .
Activated cytotoxic T cells can differentiate into effector cytotoxic T cells that target pathogens for destruction or memory cells that are ready to respond to subsequent exposures .
As noted , proliferation and differentiation of cytotoxic T cells is also stimulated by cytokines secreted from T 1 cells activated by the same foreign epitope .
The co-stimulation that comes from these T 1 cells is provided by secreted cytokines .
Although it is possible for activation of cytotoxic T cells to occur without stimulation from T 1 cells , the activation is not as effective or long-lasting .
Once activated , cytotoxic T cells serve as the effector cells of cellular immunity , recognizing and kill cells infected with intracellular pathogens through a mechanism very similar to that of NK cells .
However , whereas NK cells recognize nonspecific signals of cell stress or abnormality , cytotoxic T cells recognize infected cells through antigen presentation of pathogen-specific epitopes associated with MHC I .
Once an infected cell is recognized , the TCR of the cytotoxic T cell binds to the epitope and releases perforin and granzymes that destroy the infected cell .
Perforin is a protein that creates pores in the target cell , and granzymes are proteases that enter the pores and induce apoptosis .
This mechanism of programmed cell death is a controlled and efficient means of destroying and removing infected cells without releasing the pathogens inside to infect neighboring cells , as might occur if the infected cells were simply lysed .
When T cell activation is controlled and regulated , the result is a protective response that is effective in combating infections .
However , if T cell activation is unregulated and excessive , the result can be a life-threatening .
Certain bacterial and viral pathogens produce toxins known as superantigens ( see ) that can trigger such an unregulated response .
Known bacterial superantigens include toxic shock syndrome toxin ( TSST ) , staphylococcal enterotoxins , streptococcal pyrogenic toxins , streptococcal superantigen , and the streptococcal mitogenic exotoxin .
Viruses known to produce superantigens include Epstein-Barr virus ( human herpesvirus 4 ) , cytomegalovirus ( human herpesvirus 5 ) , and others .
The mechanism of T cell activation by superantigens involves their simultaneous binding to MHC II molecules of APCs and the variable region of the TCR β chain .
This binding occurs outside of the antigen-binding cleft of MHC II , so the superantigen will bridge together and activate MHC II and TCR without specific foreign epitope recognition .
The result is an excessive , uncontrolled release of cytokines , often called a cytokine storm , which stimulates an excessive inflammatory response .
This can lead to a dangerous decrease in blood pressure , shock , multiorgan failure , and potentially , death .
This section will focus on B cells and discuss their production and maturation , receptors , and mechanisms of activation .
Like T cells , B cells are formed from multipotent hematopoietic stem cells ( HSCs ) in the bone marrow and follow a pathway through lymphoid stem cell and lymphoblast ( see ) .
Unlike T cells , however , lymphoblasts destined to become B cells do not leave the bone marrow and travel to the thymus for maturation .
Rather , eventual B cells continue to mature in the bone marrow .
The first step of B cell maturation is an assessment of the functionality of their antigen-binding receptors .
This occurs through positive selection for B cells with normal functional receptors .
A mechanism of negative selection is then used to eliminate self-reacting B cells and minimize the risk of autoimmunity .
Negative selection of self-reacting B cells can involve elimination by apoptosis , editing or modification of the receptors so they are no longer self-reactive , or induction of anergy in the B cell .
Immature B cells that pass the selection in the bone marrow then travel to the spleen for their final stages of maturation .
There they become naïve mature B cells , i.e. , mature B cells that have not yet been activated .
Like T cells , B cells possess antigen-specific receptors with diverse specificities .
Although they rely on T cells for optimum function , B cells can be activated without help from T cells .
B-cell receptors ( BCRs ) for naïve mature B cells are membrane-bound monomeric forms of IgD and IgM .
They have two identical heavy chains and two identical light chains connected by disulfide bonds into a basic “ Y ” shape .
The trunk of the Y-shaped molecule , the constant region of the two heavy chains , spans the B cell membrane .
The two antigen-binding sites exposed to the exterior of the B cell are involved in the binding of specific pathogen epitopes to initiate the activation process .
It is estimated that each naïve mature B cell has upwards of 100,000 BCRs on its membrane , and each of these BCRs has an identical epitope-binding specificity .
In order to be prepared to react to a wide range of microbial epitopes , B cells , like T cells , use genetic rearrangement of hundreds of gene segments to provide the necessary diversity of receptor specificities .
The variable region of the BCR heavy chain is made up of V , D , and J segments , similar to the β chain of the TCR .
The variable region of the BCR light chain is made up of V and J segments , similar to the α chain of the TCR .
Genetic rearrangement of all possible combinations of V-J-D ( heavy chain ) and V-J ( light chain ) provides for millions of unique antigen-binding sites for the BCR and for the antibodies secreted after activation .
One important difference between BCRs and TCRs is the way they can interact with antigenic epitopes .
Another important difference is that TCRs only recognize protein epitopes , whereas BCRs can recognize epitopes associated with different molecular classes ( e.g. , proteins , polysaccharides , lipopolysaccharides ) .
Activation of B cells occurs through different mechanisms depending on the molecular class of the antigen .
Activation of a B cell by a protein antigen requires the B cell to function as an APC , presenting the protein epitopes with MHC II to helper T cells .
Because of their dependence on T cells for activation of B cells , protein antigens are classified as Tdependent antigens .
In contrast , polysaccharides , lipopolysaccharides , and other nonprotein antigens are considered T-independent antigens because they can activate B cells without antigen processing and presentation to T cells .
Activation of B cells without the cooperation of helper T cells is referred to as T cell-independent activation and occurs when BCRs interact with T-independent antigens .
T-independent antigens ( e.g. , polysaccharide capsules , lipopolysaccharide ) have repetitive epitope units within their structure , and this repetition allows for the cross-linkage of multiple BCRs , providing the first signal for activation .
Because T cells are not involved , the second signal has to come from other sources , such as interactions of toll-like receptors with PAMPs or interactions with factors from the complement system .
Once a B cell is activated , it undergoes clonal proliferation and daughter cells differentiate into plasma cells .
Plasma cells are antibody factories that secrete large quantities of antibodies .
After differentiation , the surface BCRs disappear and the plasma cell secretes pentameric IgM molecules that have the same antigen specificity as the BCRs .
The T cell-independent response is short-lived and does not result in the production of memory B cells .
Thus it will not result in a secondary response to subsequent exposures to T-independent antigens .
T cell-dependent activation of B cells is more complex than T cell-independent activation , but the resulting immune response is stronger and develops memory .
T cell-dependent activation can occur either in response to free protein antigens or to protein antigens associated with an intact pathogen .
Interaction between the BCRs on a naïve mature B cell and a free protein antigen stimulate internalization of the antigen , whereas interaction with antigens associated with an intact pathogen initiates the extraction of the antigen from the pathogen before internalization .
Once internalized inside the B cell , the protein antigen is processed and presented with MHC II .
The presented antigen is then recognized by helper T cells specific to the same antigen .
The TCR of the helper T cell recognizes the foreign antigen , and the T cell ’ s CD4 molecule interacts with MHC II on the B cell .
The coordination between B cells and helper T cells that are specific to the same antigen is referred to as linked recognition .
Once activated by linked recognition , T 2 cells produce and secrete cytokines that activate the B cell and cause proliferation into clonal daughter cells .
After initial secretion of IgM , cytokines secreted by T 2 cells stimulate the plasma cells to switch from IgM production to production of IgG , IgA , or IgE .
This process , called class switching or isotype switching , allows plasma cells cloned from the same activated B cell to produce a variety of antibody classes with the same epitope specificity .
Class switching is accomplished by genetic rearrangement of gene segments encoding the constant region , which determines an antibody ’ s class .
The variable region is not changed , so the new class of antibody retains the original epitope specificity .
T cell-dependent activation of B cells plays an important role in both the primary and secondary responses associated with adaptive immunity .
With the first exposure to a protein antigen , a T cell-dependent primary antibody response occurs .
The initial stage of the primary response is a lag period , or latent period , of approximately 10 days , during which no antibody can be detected in serum .
This lag period is the time required for all of the steps of the primary response , including naïve mature B cell binding of antigen with BCRs , antigen processing and presentation , helper T cell activation , B cell activation , and clonal proliferation .
The end of the lag period is characterized by a rise in IgM levels in the serum , as T 2 cells stimulate B cell differentiation into plasma cells .
IgM levels reach their peak around 14 days after primary antigen exposure ; at about this same time , T 2 stimulates antibody class switching , and IgM levels in serum begin to decline .
Meanwhile , levels of IgG increase until they reach a peak about three weeks into the primary response .
During the primary response , some of the cloned B cells are differentiated into memory B cells programmed to respond to subsequent exposures .
This secondary response occurs more quickly and forcefully than the primary response .
The lag period is decreased to only a few days and the production of IgG is significantly higher than observed for the primary response .
In addition , the antibodies produced during the secondary response are more effective and bind with higher affinity to the targeted epitopes .
Plasma cells produced during secondary responses live longer than those produced during the primary response , so levels of specific antibody remain elevated for a longer period of time .
Compare the various kinds of artificial immunity Differentiate between variolation and vaccination Describe different types of vaccines and explain their respective advantages and disadvantages For many diseases , prevention is the best form of treatment , and few strategies for disease prevention are as effective as vaccination .
Vaccination is a form of artificial immunity .
By artificially stimulating the adaptive immune defenses , a vaccine triggers memory cell production similar to that which would occur during a primary response .
In so doing , the patient is able to mount a strong secondary response upon exposure to the pathogen—but without having to first suffer through an initial infection .
In this section , we will explore several different kinds of artificial immunity along with various types of vaccines and the mechanisms by which they induce artificial immunity .
All forms of adaptive immunity can be described as either active or passive .
Active immunity refers to the activation of an individual ’ s own adaptive immune defenses , whereas passive immunity refers to the transfer of adaptive immune defenses from another individual or animal .
Active and passive immunity can be further subdivided based on whether the protection is acquired naturally or artificially .
Natural active immunity is adaptive immunity that develops after natural exposure to a pathogen .
Examples would include the lifelong immunity that develops after recovery from a chickenpox or measles infection ( although an acute infection is not always necessary to activate adaptive immunity ) .
The length of time that an individual is protected can vary substantially depending upon the pathogen and antigens involved .
For example , activation of adaptive immunity by protein spike structures during an intracellular viral infection can activate lifelong immunity , whereas activation by carbohydrate capsule antigens during an extracellular bacterial infection may activate shorter-term immunity .
Natural passive immunity involves the natural passage of antibodies from a mother to her child before and after birth .
IgG is the only antibody class that can cross the placenta from mother ’ s blood to the fetal blood supply .
Placental transfer of IgG is an important passive immune defense for the infant , lasting up to six months after birth .
Secretory IgA can also be transferred from mother to infant through breast milk .
Artificial passive immunity refers to the transfer of antibodies produced by a donor ( human or animal ) to another individual .
This transfer of antibodies may be done as a prophylactic measure ( i.e. , to prevent disease after exposure to a pathogen ) or as a strategy for treating an active infection .
For example , artificial passive immunity is commonly used for post-exposure prophylaxis against rabies , hepatitis A , hepatitis B , and chickenpox ( in high risk individuals ) .
Active infections treated by artificial passive immunity include cytomegalovirus infections in immunocompromised patients and Ebola virus infections .
In 1995 , eight patients in the Democratic Republic of the Congo with active Ebola infections were treated with blood transfusions from patients who were recovering from Ebola .
Only one of the eight patients died ( a 12.5 % mortality rate ) , which was much lower than the expected 80 % mortality rate for Ebola in untreated patients .
Artificial passive immunity is also used for the treatment of diseases caused by bacterial toxins , including tetanus , botulism , and diphtheria .
Artificial active immunity is the foundation for vaccination .
It involves the activation of adaptive immunity through the deliberate exposure of an individual to weakened or inactivated pathogens , or preparations consisting of key pathogen antigens .
The four kinds of immunity just described result from an individual ’ s adaptive immune system .
For any given disease , an individual may be considered immune or susceptible depending on his or her ability to mount an effective immune response upon exposure .
Thus , any given population is likely to have some individuals who are immune and other individuals who are susceptible .
If a population has very few susceptible individuals , even those susceptible individuals will be protected by a phenomenon called herd immunity .
Herd immunity has nothing to do with an individual ’ s ability to mount an effective immune response ; rather , it occurs because there are too few susceptible individuals in a population for the disease to spread effectively .
Vaccination programs create herd immunity by greatly reducing the number of susceptible individuals in a population .
Even if some individuals in the population are not vaccinated , as long as a certain percentage is immune ( either naturally or artificially ) , the few susceptible individuals are unlikely to be exposed to the pathogen .
However , because new individuals are constantly entering populations ( for example , through birth or relocation ) , vaccination programs are necessary to maintain herd immunity .
Thousands of years ago , it was first recognized that individuals who survived a smallpox infection were immune to subsequent infections .
The practice of inoculating individuals to actively protect them from smallpox appears to have originated in the 10 century in China , when the practice of variolation was described .
Variolation refers to the deliberate inoculation of individuals with infectious material from scabs or pustules of smallpox victims .
Infectious materials were either injected into the skin or introduced through the nasal route .
The infection that developed was usually milder than naturally acquired smallpox , and recovery from the milder infection provided protection against the more serious disease .
Although the majority of individuals treated by variolation developed only mild infections , the practice was not without risks .
More serious and sometimes fatal infections did occur , and because smallpox was contagious , infections resulting from variolation could lead to epidemics .
Even so , the practice of variolation for smallpox prevention spread to other regions , including India , Africa , and Europe .
Although variolation had been practiced for centuries , the English physician Edward Jenner ( 1749–1823 ) is generally credited with developing the modern process of vaccination .
Jenner observed that milkmaids who developed cowpox , a disease similar to smallpox but milder , were immune to the more serious smallpox .
This led Jenner to hypothesize that exposure to a less virulent pathogen could provide immune protection against a more virulent pathogen , providing a safer alternative to variolation .
In 1796 , Jenner tested his hypothesis by obtaining infectious samples from a milkmaid ’ s active cowpox lesion and injecting the materials into a young boy .
The boy developed a mild infection that included a low-grade fever , discomfort in his axillae ( armpit ) and loss of appetite .
When the boy was later infected with infectious samples from smallpox lesions , he did not contract smallpox .
This new approach was termed vaccination , a name deriving from the use of cowpox ( Latin vacca meaning “ cow ” ) to protect against smallpox .
Today , we know that Jenner ’ s vaccine worked because the cowpox virus is genetically and antigenically related to the Variola viruses that caused smallpox .
Exposure to cowpox antigens resulted in a primary response and the production of memory cells that identical or related epitopes of Variola virus upon a later exposure to smallpox .
The success of Jenner ’ s smallpox vaccination led other scientists to develop vaccines for other diseases .
Perhaps the most notable was Louis Pasteur , who developed vaccines for rabies , cholera , and anthrax .
For a vaccine to provide protection against a disease , it must expose an individual to pathogen-specific antigens that will stimulate a protective adaptive immune response .
By its very nature , this entails some risk .
As with any pharmaceutical drug , vaccines have the potential to cause adverse effects .
However , the ideal vaccine causes no severe adverse effects and poses no risk of contracting the disease that it is intended to prevent .
Various types of vaccines have been developed with these goals in mind .
These different classes of vaccines are described in the next section and summarized in .
Live attenuated vaccines expose an individual to a weakened strain of a pathogen with the goal of establishing a subclinical infection that will activate the adaptive immune defenses .
Pathogens are attenuated to decrease their virulence using methods such as genetic manipulation ( to eliminate key virulence factors ) or long-term culturing in an unnatural host or environment ( to promote mutations and decrease virulence ) .
By establishing an active infection , live attenuated vaccines stimulate a more comprehensive immune response than some other types of vaccines .
Live attenuated vaccines activate both cellular and humoral immunity and stimulate the development of memory for long-lasting immunity .
In some cases , vaccination of one individual with a live attenuated pathogen can even lead to natural transmission of the attenuated pathogen to other individuals .
This can cause the other individuals to also develop an active , subclinical infection that activates their adaptive immune defenses .
Disadvantages associated with live attenuated vaccines include the challenges associated with long-term storage and transport as well as the potential for a patient to develop signs and symptoms of disease during the active infection ( particularly in immunocompromised patients ) .
There is also a risk of the attenuated pathogen reverting back to full virulence .
lists examples live attenuated vaccines .
Inactivated vaccines contain whole pathogens that have been killed or inactivated with heat , chemicals , or radiation .
For inactivated vaccines to be effective , the inactivation process must not affect the structure of key antigens on the pathogen .
Because the pathogen is killed or inactive , inactivated vaccines do not produce an active infection , and the resulting immune response is weaker and less comprehensive than that provoked by a live attenuated vaccine .
Typically the response involves only humoral immunity , and the pathogen can not be transmitted to other individuals .
In addition , inactivated vaccines usually require higher doses and multiple boosters , possibly causing inflammatory reactions at the site of injection .
Despite these disadvantages , inactivated vaccines do have the advantages of long-term storage stability and ease of transport .
Also , there is no risk of causing severe active infections .
However , inactivated vaccines are not without their side effects .
lists examples of inactivated vaccines .
Whereas live attenuated and inactive vaccines expose an individual to a weakened or dead pathogen , subunit vaccines only expose the patient to the key antigens of a pathogen—not whole cells or viruses .
Subunit vaccines can be produced either by chemically degrading a pathogen and isolating its key antigens or by producing the antigens through genetic engineering .
Because these vaccines contain only the essential antigens of a pathogen , the risk of side effects is relatively low .
lists examples of subunit vaccines .
Like subunit vaccines , toxoid vaccines do not introduce a whole pathogen to the patient ; they contain inactivated bacterial toxins , called toxoids .
Toxoid vaccines are used to prevent diseases in which bacterial toxins play an important role in pathogenesis .
These vaccines activate humoral immunity that neutralizes the toxins .
lists examples of toxoid vaccines .
A conjugate vaccine is a type of subunit vaccine that consists of a protein conjugated to a capsule polysaccharide .
Conjugate vaccines have been developed to enhance the efficacy of subunit vaccines against pathogens that have protective polysaccharide capsules that help them evade phagocytosis , causing invasive infections that can lead to meningitis and other serious conditions .
The subunit vaccines against these pathogens introduce T-independent capsular polysaccharide antigens that result in the production of antibodies that can opsonize the capsule and thus combat the infection ; however , children under the age of two years do not respond effectively to these vaccines .
Children do respond effectively when vaccinated with the conjugate vaccine , in which a protein with T-dependent antigens is conjugated to the capsule polysaccharide .
The conjugated protein-polysaccharide antigen stimulates production of antibodies against both the protein and the capsule polysaccharide .
lists examples of conjugate vaccines .
An allergic reaction is an immune response to a type of antigen called an allergen .
Allergens can be found in many different items , from peanuts and insect stings to latex and some drugs .
Unlike other kinds of antigens , allergens are not necessarily associated with pathogenic microbes , and many allergens provoke no immune response at all in most people .
Allergic responses vary in severity .
Some are mild and localized , like hay fever or hives , but others can result in systemic , life-threatening reactions .
Anaphylaxis , for example , is a rapidly developing allergic reaction that can cause a dangerous drop in blood pressure and severe swelling of the throat that may close off the airway .
Allergies are just one example of how the immune system—the system normally responsible for preventing disease—can actually cause or mediate disease symptoms .
In this chapter , we will further explore allergies and other disorders of the immune system , including hypersensitivity reactions , autoimmune diseases , transplant rejection , and diseases associated with immunodeficiency .
Identify and compare the distinguishing characteristics , mechanisms , and major examples of type I , II , III , and IV hypersensitivities In , we discussed the mechanisms by which adaptive immune defenses , both humoral and cellular , protect us from infectious diseases .
However , these same protective immune defenses can also be responsible for undesirable reactions called hypersensitivity reactions .
Hypersensitivity reactions are classified by their immune mechanism .
Type I hypersensitivity reactions involve immunoglobulin E ( IgE ) antibody against soluble antigen , triggering mast cell degranulation .
Type II hypersensitivity reactions involve IgG and IgM antibodies directed against cellular antigens , leading to cell damage mediated by other immune system effectors .
Type III hypersensitivity reactions involve the interactions of IgG , IgM , and , occasionally , IgA antibodies with antigen to form immune complexes .
Accumulation of immune complexes in tissue leads to tissue damage mediated by other immune system effectors .
Type IV hypersensitivity reactions are T-cell–mediated reactions that can involve tissue damage mediated by activated macrophages and cytotoxic T cells .
When a presensitized individual is exposed to an allergen , it can lead to a rapid immune response that occurs almost immediately .
Such a response is called an allergy and is classified as a type I hypersensitivity .
Allergens may be seemingly harmless substances such as animal dander , molds , or pollen .
Allergens may also be substances considered innately more hazardous , such as insect venom or therapeutic drugs .
Food intolerances can also yield allergic reactions as individuals become sensitized to foods such as peanuts or shellfish .
Regardless of the allergen , the first exposure activates a primary IgE antibody response that sensitizes an individual to type I hypersensitivity reaction upon subsequent exposure .
For susceptible individuals , a first exposure to an allergen activates a strong T 2 cell response .
Cytokines interleukin ( IL ) -4 and IL-13 from the T 2 cells activate B cells specific to the same allergen , resulting in clonal proliferation , differentiation into plasma cells , and antibody-class switch from production of IgM to production of IgE .
The fragment crystallizable ( Fc ) regions of the IgE antibodies bind to specific receptors on the surface of mast cells throughout the body .
It is estimated that each mast cell can bind up to 500,000 IgE molecules , with each IgE molecule having two allergen-specific fragment antigen-binding ( Fab ) sites available for binding allergen on subsequent exposures .
By the time this occurs , the allergen is often no longer present and there is no allergic reaction , but the mast cells are primed for a subsequent exposure and the individual is sensitized to the allergen .
On subsequent exposure , allergens bind to multiple IgE molecules on mast cells , cross-linking the IgE molecules .
Within minutes , this cross-linking of IgE activates the mast cells and triggers degranulation , a reaction in which the contents of the granules in the mast cell are released into the extracellular environment .
Preformed components that are released from granules include histamine , serotonin , and bradykinin .
The activated mast cells also release newly formed lipid mediators ( leukotrienes and prostaglandins from membrane arachadonic acid metabolism ) and cytokines such as tumor necrosis factor .
The chemical mediators released by mast cells collectively cause the inflammation and signs and symptoms associated with type I hypersensitivity reactions .
Histamine stimulates mucus secretion in nasal passages and tear formation from lacrimal glands , promoting the runny nose and watery eyes of allergies .
Interaction of histamine with nerve endings causes itching and sneezing .
The vasodilation caused by several of the mediators can result in hives , headaches , angioedema ( swelling that often affects the lips , throat , and tongue ) , and hypotension ( low blood pressure ) .
Bronchiole constriction caused by some of the chemical mediators leads to wheezing , dyspnea ( difficulty breathing ) , coughing , and , in more severe cases , cyanosis ( bluish color to the skin or mucous membranes ) .
Vomiting can result from stimulation of the vomiting center in the cerebellum by histamine and serotonin .
Histamine can also cause relaxation of intestinal smooth muscles and diarrhea .
Type I hypersensitivity reactions can be either localized or systemic .
Localized type I hypersensitivity reactions include hay fever rhinitis , hives , and asthma .
Systemic type I hypersensitivity reactions are referred to as anaphylaxis or anaphylactic shock .
Although anaphylaxis shares many symptoms common with the localized type I hypersensitivity reactions , the swelling of the tongue and trachea , blockage of airways , dangerous drop in blood pressure , and development of shock can make anaphylaxis especially severe and life-threatening .
In fact , death can occur within minutes of onset of signs and symptoms .
Late-phase reactions in type I hypersensitivities may develop 4–12 hours after the early phase and are mediated by eosinophils , neutrophils , and lymphocytes that have been recruited by chemotactic factors released from mast cells .
Activation of these recruited cells leads to the release of more chemical mediators that cause tissue damage and latephase symptoms of swelling and redness of the skin , coughing , wheezing , and nasal discharge .
Individuals who possess genes for maladaptive traits , such as intense type I hypersensitivity reactions to otherwise harmless components of the environment , would be expected to suffer reduced reproductive success .
With this kind of evolutionary selective pressure , such traits would not be expected to persist in a population .
This suggests that type I hypersensitivities may have an adaptive function .
There is evidence that the IgE produced during type I hypersensitivity reactions is actually meant to counter helminth infections .
Helminths are one of few organisms that possess proteins that are targeted by IgE .
In addition , there is evidence that helminth infections at a young age reduce the likelihood of type I hypersensitivities to innocuous substances later in life .
Thus it may be that allergies are an unfortunate consequence of strong selection in the mammalian lineage or earlier for a defense against parasitic worms .
Immune reactions categorized as type II hypersensitivities , or cytotoxic hypersensitivities , are mediated by IgG and IgM antibodies binding to cell-surface antigens or matrix-associated antigens on basement membranes .
These antibodies can either activate complement , resulting in an inflammatory response and lysis of the targeted cells , or they can be involved in antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity ( ADCC ) with cytotoxic T cells .
In some cases , the antigen may be a self-antigen , in which case the reaction would also be described as an autoimmune disease .
( Autoimmune diseases are described in ) .
In other cases , antibodies may bind to naturally occurring , but exogenous , cell-surface molecules such as antigens associated with blood typing found on red blood cells ( RBCs ) .
This leads to the coating of the RBCs by antibodies , activation of the complement cascade , and complement-mediated lysis of RBCs , as well as opsonization of RBCs for phagocytosis .
Two examples of type II hypersensitivity reactions involving RBCs are hemolytic transfusion reaction ( HTR ) and hemolytic disease of the newborn ( HDN ) .
These type II hypersensitivity reactions , which will be discussed in greater detail , are summarized in .
Immunohematology is the study of blood and blood-forming tissue in relation to the immune response .
Antibodyinitiated responses against blood cells are type II hypersensitivities , thus falling into the field of immunohematology .
For students first learning about immunohematology , understanding the immunological mechanisms involved is made even more challenging by the complex nomenclature system used to identify different blood-group antigens , often called blood types .
The first blood-group antigens either used alphabetical names or were named for the first person known to produce antibodies to the red blood cell antigen ( e.g. , Kell , Duffy , or Diego ) .
However , in 1980 , the International Society of Blood Transfusion ( ISBT ) Working Party on Terminology created a standard for blood-group terminology in an attempt to more consistently identify newly discovered blood group antigens .
New antigens are now given a number and assigned to a blood-group system , collection , or series .
However , even with this effort , blood-group nomenclature is still inconsistent .
The recognition that individuals have different blood types was first described by Karl Landsteiner ( 1868–1943 ) in the early 1900s , based on his observation that serum from one person could cause a clumping of RBCs from another .
These studies led Landsteiner to the identification of four distinct blood types .
Subsequent research by other scientists determined that the four blood types were based on the presence or absence of surface carbohydrates “ A ” and “ B , ” and this provided the foundation for the ABO blood group system that is still in use today .
The functions of these antigens are unknown , but some have been associated with normal biochemical functions of the cell .
Furthermore , ABO blood types are inherited as alleles ( one from each parent ) , and they display patterns of dominant and codominant inheritance .
The alleles for A and B blood types are codominant to each other , and both are dominant over blood type O .
Therefore , individuals with genotypes of AA or AO have type A blood and express the A carbohydrate antigen on the surface of their RBCs .
People with genotypes of BB or BO have type B blood and express the B carbohydrate antigen on the surface of their RBCs .
Those with a genotype of AB have type AB blood and express both A and B carbohydrate antigens on the surface of their RBCs .
Finally , individuals with a genotype of OO have type O blood and lack A and B carbohydrate on the surface of their RBCs .
It is important to note that the RBCs of all four ABO blood types share a common protein receptor molecule , and it is the addition of specific carbohydrates to the protein receptors that determines A , B , and AB blood types .
The genes that are inherited for the A , B , and AB blood types encode enzymes that add the carbohydrate component to the protein receptor .
Individuals with O blood type still have the protein receptor but lack the enzymes that would add carbohydrates that would make their red blood cell type A , B , or AB .
IgM antibodies in plasma that cross-react with blood group antigens not present on an individual ’ s own RBCs are called isohemagglutinin s .
Isohemagglutinins are produced within the first few weeks after birth and persist throughout life .
These antibodies are produced in response to exposure to environmental antigens from food and microorganisms .
A person with type A blood has A antigens on the surface of their RBCs and will produce anti-B antibodies to environmental antigens that resemble the carbohydrate component of B antigens .
A person with type B blood has B antigens on the surface of their RBCs and will produce anti-A antibodies to environmental antigens that are similar to the carbohydrate component of A antigens .
People with blood type O lack both A and B antigens on their RBCs and , therefore , produce both anti-A and anti-B antibodies .
Conversely , people with AB blood type have both A and B antigens on their RBCs and , therefore , lack anti-A and anti-B antibodies .
A patient may require a blood transfusion because they lack sufficient RBCs ( anemia ) or because they have experienced significant loss of blood volume through trauma or disease .
Although the blood transfusion is given to help the patient , it is essential that the patient receive a transfusion with matching ABO blood type .
A transfusion with an incompatible ABO blood type may lead to a strong , potentially lethal type II hypersensitivity cytotoxic response called hemolytic transfusion reaction ( HTR ) .
For instance , if a person with type B blood receives a transfusion of type A blood , their anti-A antibodies will bind to and agglutinate the transfused RBCs .
In addition , activation of the classical complement cascade will lead to a strong inflammatory response , and the complement membrane attack complex ( MAC ) will mediate massive hemolysis of the transfused RBCs .
The debris from damaged and destroyed RBCs can occlude blood vessels in the alveoli of the lungs and the glomeruli of the kidneys .
Within 1 to 24 hours of an incompatible transfusion , the patient experiences fever , chills , pruritus ( itching ) , urticaria ( hives ) , dyspnea , hemoglobinuria ( hemoglobin in the urine ) , and hypotension ( low blood pressure ) .
In the most serious reactions , dangerously low blood pressure can lead to shock , multi-organ failure , and death of the patient .
Hospitals , medical centers , and associated clinical laboratories typically use hemovigilance systems to minimize the risk of HTRs due to clerical error .
Hemovigilance systems are procedures that track transfusion information from the donor source and blood products obtained to the follow-up of recipient patients .
Hemovigilance systems used in many countries identify HTRs and their outcomes through mandatory reporting ( e.g. , to the Food and Drug Administration in the United States ) , and this information is valuable to help prevent such occurrences in the future .
For example , if an HTR is found to be the result of laboratory or clerical error , additional blood products collected from the donor at that time can be located and labeled correctly to avoid additional HTRs .
As a result of these measures , HTRassociated deaths in the United States occur in about one per 2 million transfused units .
Many different types of erythrocyte antigens have been discovered since the description of the ABO red cell antigens .
The second most frequently described RBC antigens are Rh factor s , named after the rhesus macaque ( Macaca mulatta ) factors identified by Karl Landsteiner and Alexander Weiner in 1940 .
The Rh system of RBC antigens is the most complex and immunogenic blood group system , with more than 50 specificities identified to date .
Of all the Rh antigens , the one designated Rho ( Weiner ) or D ( Fisher-Race ) is the most immunogenic .
Cells are classified as Rh positive ( Rh+ ) if the Rho/D antigen is present or as Rh negative ( Rh− ) if the Rho/D antigen is absent .
In contrast to the carbohydrate molecules that distinguish the ABO blood groups and are the targets of IgM isohemagglutinins in HTRs , the Rh factor antigens are proteins .
As discussed in , protein antigens activate B cells and antibody production through a T-cell–dependent mechanism , and the T 2 cells stimulate class switching from IgM to other antibody classes .
In the case of Rh factor antigens , T 2 cells stimulate class switching to IgG , and this has important implications for the mechanism of HDN .
Like ABO incompatibilities , blood transfusions from a donor with the wrong Rh factor antigens can cause a type II hypersensitivity HTR .
However , in contrast to the IgM isohemagglutinins produced early in life through exposure to environmental antigens , production of anti-Rh factor antibodies requires the exposure of an individual with Rh− blood to Rh+ positive RBCs and activation of a primary antibody response .
Although this primary antibody response can cause an HTR in the transfusion patient , the hemolytic reaction would be delayed up to 2 weeks during the extended lag period of a primary antibody response .
However , if the patient receives a subsequent transfusion with Rh+ RBCs , a more rapid HTR would occur with anti-Rh factor antibody already present in the blood .
Furthermore , the rapid secondary antibody response would provide even more anti-Rh factor antibodies for the HTR .
Rh factor incompatibility between mother and fetus can also cause a type II hypersensitivity hemolytic reaction , referred to as hemolytic disease of the newborn ( HDN ) .
If an Rh− woman carries an Rh+ baby to term , the mother ’ s immune system can be exposed to Rh+ fetal red blood cells .
This exposure will usually occur during the last trimester of pregnancy and during the delivery process .
If this exposure occurs , the Rh+ fetal RBCs will activate a primary adaptive immune response in the mother , and anti-Rh factor IgG antibodies will be produced .
If a subsequent pregnancy with an Rh+ fetus occurs , however , the mother ’ s second exposure to the Rh factor antigens causes a strong secondary antibody response that produces larger quantities of anti-Rh factor IgG .
These antibodies can cross the placenta from mother to fetus and cause HDN , a potentially lethal condition for the baby .
Prior to the development of techniques for diagnosis and prevention , Rh factor incompatibility was the most common cause of HDN , resulting in thousands of infant deaths each year worldwide .
For this reason , the Rh factors of prospective parents are regularly screened , and treatments have been developed to prevent HDN caused by Rh incompatibility .
To prevent Rh factor-mediated HDN , human Rho ( D ) immune globulin ( e.g. , RhoGAM ) is injected intravenously or intramuscularly into the mother during the 28th week of pregnancy and within 72 hours after delivery .
Additional doses may be administered after events that may result in transplacental hemorrhage ( e.g. , umbilical blood sampling , chorionic villus sampling , abdominal trauma , amniocentesis ) .
This treatment is initiated during the first pregnancy with an Rh+ fetus .
The anti-Rh antibodies in Rho ( D ) immune globulin will bind to the Rh factor of any fetal RBCs that gain access to the mother ’ s bloodstream , preventing these Rh+ cells from activating the mother ’ s primary antibody response .
Without a primary anti-Rh factor antibody response , the next pregnancy with an Rh+ will have minimal risk of HDN .
However , the mother will need to be retreated with Rho ( D ) immune globulin during that pregnancy to prevent a primary anti-Rh antibody response that could threaten subsequent pregnancies .
Type III hypersensitivities are immune-complex reactions that were first characterized by Nicolas Maurice Arthus ( 1862–1945 ) in 1903 .
To produce antibodies for experimental procedures , Arthus immunized rabbits by injecting them with serum from horses .
However , while immunizing rabbits repeatedly with horse serum , Arthus noticed a previously unreported and unexpected localized subcutaneous hemorrhage with edema at the site of injection .
This reaction developed within 3 to10 hours after injection .
This localized reaction to non-self serum proteins was called an Arthus reaction .
An Arthus reaction occurs when soluble antigens bind with IgG in a ratio that results in the accumulation of antigen-antibody aggregates called immune complex es .
Activation of coagulation pathways also occurs , resulting in thrombi ( blood clots ) that occlude blood vessels and cause ischemia that can lead to vascular necrosis and localized hemorrhage .
Systemic type III hypersensitivity ( serum sickness ) occurs when immune complexes deposit in various body sites , resulting in a more generalized systemic inflammatory response .
These immune complexes involve non-self proteins such as antibodies produced in animals for artificial passive immunity ( see ) , certain drugs , or microbial antigens that are continuously released over time during chronic infections ( e.g. , subacute bacterial endocarditis , chronic viral hepatitis ) .
The mechanisms of serum sickness are similar to those described in localized type III hypersensitivity but involve widespread activation of mast cells , complement , neutrophils , and macrophages , which causes tissue destruction in areas such as the kidneys , joints , and blood vessels .
As a result of tissue destruction , symptoms of serum sickness include chills , fever , rash , vasculitis , and arthritis .
Development of glomerulonephritis or hepatitis is also possible .
Autoimmune diseases such as systemic lupus erythematosus ( SLE ) and rheumatoid arthritis can also involve damaging type III hypersensitivity reactions when auto-antibodies form immune complexes with self antigens .
These conditions are discussed in .
Type IV hypersensitivities are not mediated by antibodies like the other three types of hypersensitivities .
Rather , type IV hypersensitivities are regulated by T cells and involve the action of effector cells .
These types of hypersensitivities can be organized into three subcategories based on T-cell subtype , type of antigen , and the resulting effector mechanism .
In the first type IV subcategory , CD4 T 1-mediated reactions are described as delayed-type hypersensitivities ( DTH ) .
The sensitization step involves the introduction of antigen into the skin and phagocytosis by local antigen presenting cells ( APCs ) .
The APCs activate helper T cells , stimulating clonal proliferation and differentiation into memory T 1 cells .
Upon subsequent exposure to the antigen , these sensitized memory T 1 cells release cytokines that activate macrophages , and activated macrophages are responsible for much of the tissue damage .
Examples of this T 1-mediated hypersensitivity are observed in tuberculin the Mantoux skin test and contact dermatitis , such as occurs in latex allergy reactions .
In the second type IV subcategory , CD4 T 2-mediated reactions result in chronic asthma or chronic allergic rhinitis .
In these cases , the soluble antigen is first inhaled , resulting in eosinophil recruitment and activation with the release of cytokines and inflammatory mediators .
In the third type IV subcategory , CD8 cytotoxic T lymphocyte ( CTL ) -mediated reactions are associated with tissue transplant rejection and contact dermatitis .
For this form of cell-mediated hypersensitivity , APCs process and present the antigen with MHC I to naïve CD8 T cells .
When these naïve CD8 T cells are activated , they proliferate and differentiate into CTLs .
Activated T 1 cells can also enhance the activation of the CTLs .
The activated CTLs then target and induce granzyme-mediated apoptosis in cells presenting the same antigen with MHC I .
These target cells could be “ self ” cells that have absorbed the foreign antigen ( such as with contact dermatitis due to poison ivy ) , or they could be transplanted tissue cells displaying foreign antigen from the donor .
Some disease caused by hypersensitivities are not caused exclusively by one type .
For example , hypersensitivity pneumonitis ( HP ) , which is often an occupational or environmental disease , occurs when the lungs become inflamed due to an allergic reaction to inhaled dust , endospores , bird feathers , bird droppings , molds , or chemicals .
HP goes by many different names associated with various forms of exposure .
HP associated with bird droppings is sometimes called pigeon fancier ’ s lung or poultry worker ’ s lung—both common in bird breeders and handlers .
Cheese handler ’ s disease , farmer ’ s lung , sauna takers ' disease , and hot-tub lung are other names for HP associated with exposure to molds in various environments .
Pathology associated with HP can be due to both type III ( mediated by immune complexes ) and type IV ( mediated by T 1 cells and macrophages ) hypersensitivities .
Repeated exposure to allergens can cause alveolitis due to the formation of immune complexes in the alveolar wall of the lung accompanied by fluid accumulation , and the formation of granulomas and other lesions in the lung as a result of T 1-mediated macrophage activation .
Alveolitis with fluid and granuloma formation results in poor oxygen perfusion in the alveoli , which , in turn , can cause symptoms such as coughing , dyspnea , chills , fever , sweating , myalgias , headache , and nausea .
Symptoms may occur as quickly as 2 hours after exposure and can persist for weeks if left untreated .
summarizes the mechanisms and effects of each type of hypersensitivity discussed in this section .
Diagnosis of type I hypersensitivities is a complex process requiring several diagnostic tests in addition to a welldocumented patient history .
Serum IgE levels can be measured , but elevated IgE alone does not confirm allergic disease .
As part of the process to identify the antigens responsible for a type I reaction allergy , testing through a prick puncture skin test ( PPST ) or an intradermal test can be performed .
PPST is carried out with the introduction of allergens in a series of superficial skin pricks on the patient ’ s back or arms .
PPSTs are considered to be the most convenient and least expensive way to diagnose allergies , according to the US Joint Council of Allergy and the European Academy of Allergy and Immunology .
The second type of testing , the intradermal test , requires injection into the dermis with a small needle .
This needle , also known as a tuberculin needle , is attached to a syringe containing a small amount of allergen .
Both the PPST and the intradermal tests are observed for 15–20 minutes for a wheal-flare reaction to the allergens .
Measurement of any wheal ( a raised , itchy bump ) and flare ( redness ) within minutes indicates a type I hypersensitivity , and the larger the wheal-flare reaction , the greater the patient ’ s sensitivity to the allergen .
Type III hypersensitivities can often be misdiagnosed because of their nonspecific inflammatory nature .
The symptoms are easily visible , but they may be associated with any of a number of other diseases .
A strong , comprehensive patient history is crucial to proper and accurate diagnosis .
Tests used to establish the diagnosis of hypersensitivity pneumonitis ( resulting from type III hypersensitivity ) include bronchoalveolar lavage ( BAL ) , pulmonary function tests , and high-resolution computed tomography ( HRCT ) .
Allergic reactions can be treated in various ways .
Prevention of allergic reactions can be achieved by desensitization ( hyposensitization ) therapy , which can be used to reduce the hypersensitivity reaction through repeated injections of allergens .
Extremely dilute concentrations of known allergens ( determined from the allergen tests ) are injected into the patient at prescribed intervals ( e.g. , weekly ) .
The quantity of allergen delivered by the shots is slowly increased over a buildup period until an effective dose is determined and that dose is maintained for the duration of treatment , which can last years .
Patients are usually encouraged to remain in the doctor ’ s office for 30 minutes after receiving the injection in case the allergens administered cause a severe systemic reaction .
Doctors ’ offices that administer desensitization therapy must be prepared to provide resuscitation and drug treatment in the case of such an event .
Desensitization therapy is used for insect sting allergies and environmental allergies .
The allergy shots elicit the production of different interleukins and IgG antibody responses instead of IgE .
When excess allergen-specific IgG antibodies are produced and bind to the allergen , they can act as blocking antibodies to neutralize the allergen before it can bind IgE on mast cells .
There are early studies using oral therapy for desensitization of food allergies that are promising .
These studies involve feeding children who have allergies tiny amounts of the allergen ( e.g. , peanut flour ) or related proteins over time .
Many of the subjects show reduced severity of reaction to the food allergen after the therapy .
There are also therapies designed to treat severe allergic reactions .
Emergency systemic anaphylaxis is treated initially with an epinephrine injection , which can counteract the drop in blood pressure .
Individuals with known severe allergies often carry a self-administering auto-injector that can be used in case of exposure to the allergen ( e.g. , an insect sting or accidental ingestion of a food that causes a severe reaction ) .
By self-administering an epinephrine shot ( or sometimes two ) , the patient can stem the reaction long enough to seek medical attention .
Follow-up treatment generally involves giving the patient antihistamines and slow-acting corticosteroids for several days after the reaction to prevent potential late-phase reactions .
However , the effects of antihistamine and corticosteroid treatment are not well studied and are used based on theoretical considerations .
Treatment of milder allergic reactions typically involves antihistamines and other anti-inflammatory drugs .
A variety of antihistamine drugs are available , in both prescription and over-the-counter strengths .
There are also antileukotriene and antiprostaglandin drugs that can be used in tandem with antihistamine drugs in a combined ( and more effective ) therapy regime .
Treatments of type III hypersensitivities include preventing further exposure to the antigen and the use of antiinflammatory drugs .
Some conditions can be resolved when exposure to the antigen is prevented .
Anti-inflammatory corticosteroid inhalers can also be used to diminish inflammation to allow lung lesions to heal .
Systemic corticosteroid treatment , oral or intravenous , is also common for type III hypersensitivities affecting body systems .
Treatment of hypersensitivity pneumonitis includes avoiding the allergen , along with the possible addition of prescription steroids such as prednisone to reduce inflammation .
Treatment of type IV hypersensitivities includes antihistamines , anti-inflammatory drugs , analgesics , and , if possible , eliminating further exposure to the antigen .
Explain why autoimmune disorders develop Provide a few examples of organ-specific and systemic autoimmune diseases In 1970 , artist Walt Kelly developed a poster promoting Earth Day , featuring a character from Pogo , his daily newspaper comic strip .
In the poster , Pogo looks out across a litter-strewn forest and says wryly , “ We have met the enemy and he is us. ” Pogo was not talking about the human immune system , but he very well could have been .
Although the immune system protects the body by attacking invading “ enemies ” ( pathogens ) , in some cases , the immune system can mistakenly identify the body ’ s own cells as the enemy , resulting in autoimmune disease .
Autoimmune diseases are those in which the body is attacked by its own specific adaptive immune response .
In normal , healthy states , the immune system induces tolerance , which is a lack of an anti-self immune response .
However , with autoimmunity , there is a loss of immune tolerance , and the mechanisms responsible for autoimmune diseases include type II , III , and IV hypersensitivity reactions .
Autoimmune diseases can have a variety of mixed symptoms that flare up and disappear , making diagnosis difficult .
The causes of autoimmune disease are a combination of the individual 's genetic makeup and the effect of environmental influences , such as sunlight , infections , medications , and environmental chemicals .
However , the vagueness of this list reflects our poor understanding of the etiology of these diseases .
Except in a very few specific diseases , the initiation event ( s ) of most autoimmune states has not been fully characterized .
There are several possible causes for the origin of autoimmune diseases and autoimmunity is likely due to several factors .
Evidence now suggests that regulatory T and B cells play an essential role in the maintenance of tolerance and prevention of autoimmune responses .
The regulatory T cells are especially important for inhibiting autoreactive T cells that are not eliminated during thymic selection and escape the thymus ( see ) .
In addition , antigen mimicry between pathogen antigens and our own self antigens can lead to crossreactivity and autoimmunity .
Hidden self-antigens may become exposed because of trauma , drug interactions , or disease states , and trigger an autoimmune response .
All of these factors could contribute to autoimmunity .
Ultimately , damage to tissues and organs in the autoimmune disease state comes as a result of inflammatory responses that are inappropriate ; therefore , treatment often includes immunosuppressive drugs and corticosteroids .
Some autoimmune diseases are considered organ specific , meaning that the immune system targets specific organs or tissues .
Examples of organ-specific autoimmune diseases include celiac disease , Graves disease , Hashimoto thyroiditis , type I diabetes mellitus , and Addison disease .
Celiac disease is largely a disease of the small intestine , although other organs may be affected .
People in their 30s and 40s , and children are most commonly affected , but celiac disease can begin at any age .
It results from a reaction to proteins , commonly called gluten , found mainly in wheat , barley , rye , and some other grains .
The disease has several genetic causes ( predispositions ) and poorly understood environmental influences .
On exposure to gluten , the body produces various autoantibodies and an inflammatory response .
The inflammatory response in the small intestine leads to a reduction in the depth of the microvilli of the mucosa , which hinders absorption and can lead to weight loss and anemia .
The disease is also characterized by diarrhea and abdominal pain , symptoms that are often misdiagnosed as irritable bowel syndrome .
Diagnosis of celiac disease is accomplished from serological tests for the presence of primarily IgA antibodies to components of gluten , the transglutinaminase enzyme , and autoantibodies to endomysium , a connective tissue surrounding muscle fibers .
Serological tests are typically followed up with endoscopy and biopsy of the duodenal mucosa .
Serological screening surveys have found about 1 % of individuals in the United Kingdom are positive even though they do not all display symptoms .
This early recognition allows for more careful monitoring and prevention of severe disease .
Celiac disease is treated with complete removal of gluten-containing foods from the diet , which results in improved symptoms and reduced risk of complications .
Other theoretical approaches include breeding grains that do not contain the immunologically reactive components or developing dietary supplements that contain enzymes that break down the protein components that cause the immune response .
Graves disease is the most common cause of hyperthyroidism in the United States .
Symptoms of Graves disease result from the production of thyroid-stimulating immunoglobulin ( TSI ) also called TSH-receptor antibody .
TSI targets and binds to the receptor for thyroid stimulating hormone ( TSH ) , which is naturally produced by the pituitary gland .
TSI may cause conflicting symptoms because it may stimulate the thyroid to make too much thyroid hormone or block thyroid hormone production entirely , making diagnosis more difficult .
Signs and symptoms of Graves disease include heat intolerance , rapid and irregular heartbeat , weight loss , goiter ( a swollen thyroid gland , protruding under the skin of the throat [ ] ) and exophthalmia ( bulging eyes ) often referred to as Graves ophthalmopathy .
The most common cause of hypothyroidism in the United States is Hashimoto thyroiditis , also called chronic lymphocytic thyroiditis .
Patients with Hashimoto thyroiditis often develop a spectrum of different diseases because they are more likely to develop additional autoimmune diseases such as Addison disease ( discussed later in this section ) , type 1 diabetes , rheumatoid arthritis , and celiac disease .
Hashimoto thyroiditis is a T 1 cell-mediated disease that occurs when the thyroid gland is attacked by cytotoxic lymphocytes , macrophages , and autoantibodies .
This autoimmune response leads to numerous symptoms that include goiter , cold intolerance , muscle weakness , painful and stiff joints , depression , and memory loss .
Juvenile diabetes , or type 1 diabetes mellitus , is usually diagnosed in children and young adults .
It is a T-celldependent autoimmune disease characterized by the selective destruction of the β cells of the islets of Langerhans in the pancreas by CD4 T 1-mediated CD8 T cells , anti-β-cell antibodies , and macrophage activity .
There is also evidence that viral infections can have either a potentiating or inhibitory role in the development of type 1 diabetes ( T1D ) mellitus .
The destruction of the β cells causes a lack of insulin production by the pancreas .
( the glands lying above the kidneys Destruction of the adrenal glands that produce glucocorticoids , mineralocorticoids , and sex steroids ) is the cause of Addison disease , also called primary adrenal insufficiency ( PAI ) .
Today , up to 80 % of Addison disease cases are diagnosed as autoimmune Addison disease ( AAD ) , which is caused by an autoimmune response to adrenal tissues disrupting adrenal function .
Disruption of adrenal function causes impaired metabolic processes that require normal steroid hormone levels , causing signs and symptoms throughout the body .
There is evidence that both humoral and CD4 T 1-driven CD8 T-cell–mediated immune mechanisms are directed at the adrenal cortex in AAD .
There is also evidence that the autoimmune response is associated with autoimmune destruction of other endocrine glands as well , such as the pancreas and thyroid , conditions collectively referred to as autoimmune polyendocrine syndromes ( APS ) .
In up to 80 % of patients with AAD , antibodies are produced to three enzymes involved in steroid synthesis : 21-hydroxylase ( 21-OH ) , 17α-hydroxylase , and cholesterol side-chain–cleaving enzyme .
The most common autoantibody found in AAD is to 21-OH , and antibodies to any of the key enzymes for steroid production are diagnostic for AAD .
The adrenal cortex cells are targeted , destroyed , and replaced with fibrous tissue by immune-mediated inflammation .
In some patients , at least 90 % of the adrenal cortex is destroyed before symptoms become diagnostic .
Under extreme stress , such as surgery , accidental trauma , or infection , patients with AAD may experience an adrenal crisis that causes the patient to vomit , experience abdominal pain , back or leg cramps , and even severe hypotension leading to shock .
Whereas organ-specific autoimmune diseases target specific organs or tissues , systemic autoimmune disease s are more generalized , targeting multiple organs or tissues throughout the body .
Examples of systemic autoimmune diseases include multiple sclerosis , myasthenia gravis , psoriasis , rheumatoid arthritis , and systemic lupus erythematosus .
Multiple sclerosis ( MS ) is an autoimmune central nervous system disease that affects the brain and spinal cord .
Lesions in multiple locations within the central nervous system are a hallmark of multiple sclerosis and are caused by infiltration of immune cells across the blood-brain barrier .
The immune cells include T cells that promote inflammation , demyelination , and neuron degeneration , all of which disrupt neuronal signaling .
Symptoms of MS include visual disturbances ; muscle weakness ; difficulty with coordination and balance ; sensations such as numbness , prickling , or “ pins and needles ” ; and cognitive and memory problems .
Autoantibodies directed against acetylcholine receptors ( AChRs ) in the synaptic cleft of neuromuscular junctions lead to myasthenia gravis .
Anti-AChR antibodies are high-affinity IgGs and their synthesis requires activated CD4 T cells to interact with and stimulate B cells .
Psoriasis is a skin disease that causes itchy or sore patches of thick , red skin with silvery scales on elbows , knees , scalp , back , face , palms , feet , and sometimes other areas .
Some individuals with psoriasis also get a form of arthritis called psoriatic arthritis , in which the joints can become inflamed .
Psoriasis results from the complex interplay between keratinocytes , dendritic cells , and T cells , and the cytokines produced by these various cells .
In a process called cell turnover , skin cells that grow deep in the skin rise to the surface .
Normally , this process takes a month .
In psoriasis , as a result of cytokine activation , cell turnover happens in just a few days .
The thick inflamed patches of skin that are characteristic of psoriasis develop because the skin cells rise too fast .
The most common chronic inflammatory joint disease is rheumatoid arthritis ( RA ) and it is still a major medical challenge because of unsolved questions related to the environmental and genetic causes of the disease .
RA involves type III hypersensitivity reactions and the activation of CD4 T cells , resulting in chronic release of the inflammatory cytokines IL-1 , IL-6 , and tumor necrosis factor-α ( TNF-α ) .
The activated CD4 T cells also stimulate the production of rheumatoid factor ( RF ) antibodies and anticyclic citrullinated peptide antibodies ( antiCCP ) that form immune complexes .
Increased levels of acute-phase proteins , such as C-reactive protein ( CRP ) , are also produced as part of the inflammatory process and participate in complement fixation with the antibodies on the immune complexes .
The formation of immune complexes and reaction to the immune factors cause an inflammatory process in joints , particularly in the hands , feet , and legs .
Diagnosis of RA is based on elevated levels of RF , antiCCP , quantitative CRP , and the erythrocyte sedimentation rate ( ESR ) ( modified Westergren ) .
In addition , radiographs , ultrasound , or magnetic resonance imaging scans can identify joint damage , such as erosions , a loss of bone within the joint , and narrowing of joint space .
The damage and pathology of systemic lupus erythematosus ( SLE ) is caused by type III hypersensitivity reactions .
Autoantibodies produced in SLE are directed against nuclear and cytoplasmic proteins .
Anti-nuclear antibodies ( ANAs ) are present in more than 95 % of patients with SLE , with additional autoantibodies including antidouble–stranded DNA ( ds-DNA ) and anti-Sm antibodies ( antibodies to small nuclear ribonucleoprotein ) .
Anti-dsDNA and anti-Sm antibodies are unique to patients with SLE ; thus , their presence is included in the classification criteria of SLE .
Cellular interaction with autoantibodies leads to nuclear and cellular destruction , with components released after cell death leading to the formation of immune complexes .
Because autoantibodies in SLE can target a wide variety of cells , symptoms of SLE can occur in many body locations .
However , the most common symptoms include fatigue , fever with no other cause , hair loss , and a sunlight-sensitive `` butterfly '' or wolf-mask ( lupus ) rash that is found in about 50 % of people with SLE .
The rash is most often seen over the cheeks and bridge of the nose , but can be widespread .
Other symptoms may appear depending on affected areas .
The joints may be affected , leading to arthritis of the fingers , hands , wrists , and knees .
Effects on the brain and nervous system can lead to headaches , numbness , tingling , seizures , vision problems , and personality changes .
There may also be abdominal pain , nausea , vomiting , arrhythmias , shortness of breath , and blood in the sputum .
Effects on the skin can lead to additional areas of skin lesions , and vasoconstriction can cause color changes in the fingers when they are cold ( Raynaud phenomenon ) .
Effects on the kidneys can lead to edema in the legs and weight gain .
A diagnosis of SLE depends on identification of four of 11 of the most common symptoms and confirmed production of an array of autoantibodies unique to SLE .
A positive test for ANAs alone is not diagnostic .
summarizes the causes , signs , and symptoms of select autoimmune diseases .
Grafts are typically moved without their attachments to the circulatory system and must reestablish these , in addition to the other connections and interactions with their new surrounding tissues .
There are different types of grafts depending on the source of the new tissue or organ .
Tissues that are transplanted from one genetically distinct individual to another within the same species are called allografts .
An interesting variant of the allograft is an isograft , in which tissue from one twin is transplanted to another .
As long as the twins are monozygotic ( therefore , essentially genetically identical ) , the transplanted tissue is virtually never rejected .
If tissues are transplanted from one area on an individual to another area on the same individual ( e.g. , a skin graft on a burn patient ) , it is known as an autograft .
If tissues from an animal are transplanted into a human , this is called a xenograft .
The different types of grafts described above have varying risks for rejection .
Rejection occurs when the recipient ’ s immune system recognizes the donor tissue as foreign ( non-self ) , triggering an immune response .
The major histocompatibility complex markers MHC I and MHC II , more specifically identified as human leukocyte antigens ( HLAs ) , play a role in transplant rejection .
The HLAs expressed in tissue transplanted from a genetically different individual or species may be recognized as non-self molecules by the host ’ s dendritic cells .
If this occurs , the dendritic cells will process and present the foreign HLAs to the host ’ s helper T cells and cytotoxic T cells , thereby activating them .
Cytotoxic T cells then target and kill the grafted cells through the same mechanism they use to kill virus-infected cells ; helper T cells may also release cytokines that activate macrophages to kill graft cells .
This is why a parent or a sibling may be the best donor in many situations—a genetic match between the MHC genes is much more likely and the organ is much less likely to be rejected .
Although matching all of the MHC genes can lower the risk for rejection , there are a number of additional gene products that also play a role in stimulating responses against grafted tissue .
Because of this , no non-self grafted tissue is likely to completely avoid rejection .
However , the more similar the MHC gene match , the more likely the graft is to be tolerated for a longer time .
Most transplant recipients , even those with tissues well matched to their MHC genes , require treatment with immunosuppressant drugs for the rest of their lives .
This can make them more vulnerable than the general population to complications from infectious diseases .
It can also result in transplant-related malignancies because the body ’ s normal defenses against cancer cells are being suppressed .
A form of rejection called graft-versus-host disease ( GVHD ) primarily occurs in recipients of bone marrow transplants and peripheral blood stem cells .
GHVD presents a unique situation because the transplanted tissue is capable of producing immune cells ; APCs in the donated bone marrow may recognize the host cells as non-self , leading to activation of the donor cytotoxic T cells .
Once activated , the donor ’ s T cells attack the recipient cells , causing acute GVHD .
Acute GVHD typically develops within weeks after a bone marrow transplant , causing tissue damage affecting the skin , gastrointestinal tract , liver , and eyes .
In addition , acute GVHD may also lead to a cytokine storm , an unregulated secretion of cytokines that may be fatal .
In addition to acute GVHD , there is also the risk for chronic GVHD developing months after the bone marrow transplant .
The mechanisms responsible for chronic GVHD are not well understood .
To minimize the risk of GVHD , it is critically important to match the HLAs of the host and donor as closely as possible in bone marrow transplants .
In addition , the donated bone marrow is processed before grafting to remove as many donor APCs and T cells as possible , leaving mostly hematopoietic stem cells .
Historically speaking , the practice of transplanting tissues—and the complications that can accompany such procedures—is a relatively recent development .
It was not until 1954 that the first successful organ transplantation between two humans was achieved .
Yet the field of organ transplantation has progressed rapidly since that time .
Nonetheless , the practice of transplanting non-self tissues may soon become obsolete .
Scientists are now attempting to develop methods by which new organs may be grown in vitro from an individual ’ s own harvested cells to replace damaged or abnormal ones .
Because organs produced in this way would contain the individual ’ s own cells , they could be transplanted into the individual without risk for rejection .
An alternative approach that is gaining renewed research interest is genetic modification of donor animals , such as pigs , to provide transplantable organs that do not elicit an immune response in the recipient .
The approach involves excising the genes in the pig ( in the embryo ) that are most responsible for the rejection reaction after transplantation .
Finding these genes and effectively removing them is a challenge , however .
So too is identifying and neutralizing risks from viral sequences that might be embedded in the pig genome , posing a risk for infection in the human recipient .
Compare the causes of primary and secondary immunodeficiencies Describe treatments for primary and secondary immunodeficiencies Immunodeficiencies are inherited ( primary ) or acquired ( secondary ) disorders in which elements of host immune defenses are either absent or functionally defective .
In developed countries , most immunodeficiencies are inherited , and they are usually first seen in the clinic as recurrent or overwhelming infections in infants .
However , on a global scale , malnutrition is the most common cause of immunodeficiency and would be categorized as an acquired immunodeficiency .
Acquired immunodeficiencies are more likely to develop later in life , and the pathogenic mechanisms of many remain obscure .
Primary immunodeficiencies , which number more than 250 , are caused by inherited defects of either nonspecific innate or specific adaptive immune defenses .
In general , patients born with primary immunodeficiency ( PI ) commonly have an increased susceptibility to infection .
This susceptibility can become apparent shortly after birth or in early childhood for some individuals , whereas other patients develop symptoms later in life .
Some primary immunodeficiencies are due to a defect of a single cellular or humoral component of the immune system ; others may result from defects of more than one component .
Examples of primary immunodeficiencies include chronic granulomatous disease , X-linked agammaglobulinemia , selective IgA deficiency , and severe combined immunodeficiency disease .
The causes of chronic granulomatous disease ( CGD ) are defects in the NADPH oxidase system of phagocytic cells , including neutrophils and macrophages , that prevent the production of superoxide radicals in phagolysosomes .
The inability to produce superoxide radicals impairs the antibacterial activity of phagocytes .
As a result , infections in patients with CGD persist longer , leading to a chronic local inflammation called a granuloma .
Microorganisms that are the most common causes of infections in patients with CGD include Aspergillus spp. , Staphylococcus aureus , Chromobacterium violaceum , Serratia marcescens , and Salmonella typhimurium .
Deficiencies in B cells due to defective differentiation lead to a lack of specific antibody production known as X-linked agammaglobulinemia .
In 1952 , Ogden C. Bruton ( 1908–2003 ) described the first immunodeficiency in a boy whose immune system failed to produce antibodies .
This defect is inherited on the X chromosome and is characterized by the absence of immunoglobulin in the serum ; it is called Bruton X-linked agammaglobulinemia ( XLA ) .
The defective gene , BTK , in XLA is now known to encode a tyrosine kinase called Bruton tyrosine kinase ( Btk ) .
In patients whose B cells are unable to produce sufficient amounts of Btk , the B-cell maturation and differentiation halts at the pre-B-cell stage of growth .
B-cell maturation and differentiation beyond the pre-Bcell stage of growth is required for immunoglobulin production .
Patients who lack antibody production suffer from recurrent infections almost exclusively due to extracellular pathogens that cause pyogenic infections : Haemophilus influenzae , Streptococcus pneumoniae , S. pyogenes , and S. aureus .
Because cell-mediated immunity is not impaired , these patients are not particularly vulnerable to infections caused by viruses or intracellular pathogens .
The most common inherited form of immunoglobulin deficiency is selective IgA deficiency , affecting about one in 800 people .
Individuals with selective IgA deficiency produce normal levels of IgG and IgM , but are not able to produce secretory IgA .
IgA deficiency predisposes these individuals to lung and gastrointestinal infections for which secretory IgA is normally an important defense mechanism .
Infections in the lungs and gastrointestinal tract can involve a variety of pathogens , including H. influenzae , S. pneumoniae , Moraxella catarrhalis , S. aureus , Giardia lamblia , or pathogenic strains of Escherichia coli .
Patients who suffer from severe combined immunodeficiency ( SCID ) have B-cell and T-cell defects that impair T-cell dependent antibody responses as well as cell-mediated immune responses .
Patients with SCID also can not develop immunological memory , so vaccines provide them no protection , and live attenuated vaccines ( e.g. , for varicella-zoster , measles virus , rotavirus , poliovirus ) can actually cause the infection they are intended to prevent .
The most common form is X-linked SCID , which accounts for nearly 50 % of all cases and occurs primarily in males .
Patients with SCID are typically diagnosed within the first few months of life after developing severe , often lifethreatening , opportunistic infection by Candida spp. , Pneumocystis jirovecii , or pathogenic strains of E. coli .
Without treatment , babies with SCID do not typically survive infancy .
In some cases , a bone marrow transplant may successfully correct the defects in lymphocyte development that lead to the SCID phenotype , by replacing the defective component .
However , this treatment approach is not without risks , as demonstrated by the famous case of David Vetter ( 1971–1984 ) , better known as “ Bubble Boy ” .
Vetter , a patient with SCID who lived in a protective plastic bubble to prevent exposure to opportunistic microbes , received a bone marrow transplant from his sister .
Because of a latent Epstein-Barr virus infection in her bone marrow , however , he developed mononucleosis and died of Burkitt lymphoma at the age of 12 years .
A secondary immunodeficiency occurs as a result an acquired impairment of function of B cells , T cells , or both .
Patients with secondary immunodeficiencies develop an increased susceptibility to an otherwise benign infection by opportunistic pathogens such as Candida spp. , P. jirovecii , and Cryptosporidium .
HIV infection and the associated acquired immunodeficiency syndrome ( AIDS ) are the best-known secondary immunodeficiencies .
AIDS is characterized by profound CD4 T-cell lymphopenia ( decrease in lymphocytes ) .
The decrease in CD4 T cells is the result of various mechanisms , including HIV-induced pyroptosis ( a type of apoptosis that stimulates an inflammatory response ) , viral cytopathic effect , and cytotoxicity to HIV-infected cells .
The most common cause of secondary immunodeficiency worldwide is severe malnutrition , which affects both innate and adaptive immunity .
More research and information are needed for the more common causes of secondary immunodeficiency ; however , the number of new discoveries in AIDS research far exceeds that of any other single cause of secondary immunodeficiency .
AIDS research has paid off extremely well in terms of discoveries and treatments ; increased research into the most common cause of immunodeficiency , malnutrition , would likely be as beneficial .
summarizes primary and secondary immunodeficiencies , their effects on immune function , and typical outcomes .
Explain how the adaptive specific immune response responds to tumors Discuss the risks and benefits of tumor vaccines Cancer involves a loss of the ability of cells to control their cell cycle , the stages each eukaryotic cell goes through as it grows and then divides .
When this control is lost , the affected cells rapidly divide and often lose the ability to differentiate into the cell type appropriate for their location in the body .
In addition , they lose contact inhibition and can start to grow on top of each other .
This can result in formation of a tumor .
It is important to make a distinction here : The term “ cancer ” is used to describe the diseases resulting from loss of cell-cycle regulation and subsequent cell proliferation .
But the term “ tumor ” is more general .
A “ tumor ” is an abnormal mass of cells , and a tumor can be benign ( not cancerous ) or malignant ( cancerous ) .
Traditional cancer treatment uses radiation and/or chemotherapy to destroy cancer cells ; however , these treatments can have unwanted side effects because they harm normal cells as well as cancer cells .
Newer , promising therapies attempt to enlist the patient ’ s immune system to target cancer cells specifically .
This idea is not universally accepted by researchers , however , and needs further investigation for verification .
Cell-mediated immune responses can be directed against cancer cells , many of which do not have the normal complement of self-proteins , making them a target for elimination .
Abnormal cancer cells may also present tumor antigens .
These tumor antigens are not a part of the screening process used to eliminate lymphocytes during development ; thus , even though they are self-antigens , they can stimulate and drive adaptive immune responses against abnormal cells .
Presentation of tumor antigens can stimulate naïve helper T cells to become activated by cytokines such as IL-12 and differentiate into T 1 cells .
T 1 cells release cytokines that can activate natural killer ( NK ) cells and enhance the killing of activated cytotoxic T cells .
Both NK cells and cytotoxic T cells can recognize and target cancer cells , and induce apoptosis through the action of perforins and granzymes .
In addition , activated cytotoxic T cells can bind to cell-surface proteins on abnormal cells and induce apoptosis by a second killing mechanism called the CD95 ( Fas ) cytotoxic pathway .
Despite these mechanisms for removing cancerous cells from the body , cancer remains a common cause of death .
Unfortunately , malignant tumors tend to actively suppress the immune response in various ways .
In some cancers , the immune cells themselves are cancerous .
In leukemia , lymphocytes that would normally facilitate the immune response become abnormal .
In other cancers , the cancerous cells can become resistant to induction of apoptosis .
This may occur through the expression of membrane proteins that shut off cytotoxic T cells or that induce regulatory T cells that can shut down immune responses .
The mechanisms by which cancer cells alter immune responses are still not yet fully understood , and this is a very active area of research .
As scientists ’ understanding of adaptive immunity improves , cancer therapies that harness the body ’ s immune defenses may someday be more successful in treating and eliminating cancer .
There are two types of cancer vaccines : preventive and therapeutic .
Preventive vaccines are used to prevent cancer from occurring , whereas therapeutic vaccines are used to treat patients with cancer .
Most preventive cancer vaccines target viral infections that are known to lead to cancer .
These include vaccines against human papillomavirus ( HPV ) and hepatitis B , which help prevent cervical and liver cancer , respectively .
Most therapeutic cancer vaccines are in the experimental stage .
They exploit tumor-specific antigens to stimulate the immune system to selectively attack cancer cells .
Specifically , they aim to enhance T 1 function and interaction with cytotoxic T cells , which , in turn , results in more effective attack on abnormal tumor cells .
In some cases , researchers have used genetic engineering to develop antitumor vaccines in an approach similar to that used for DNA vaccines ( see ) .
The vaccine contains a recombinant plasmid with genes for tumor antigens ; theoretically , the tumor gene would not induce new cancer because it is not functional , but it could trick the immune system into targeting the tumor gene product as a foreign invader .
The first FDA-approved therapeutic cancer vaccine was sipuleucel-T ( Provenge ) , approved in 2010 to treat certain cases of prostate cancer .
This unconventional vaccine is custom designed using the patient ’ s own cells .
APCs are removed from the patient and cultured with a tumor-specific molecule ; the cells are then returned to the patient .
This approach appears to enhance the patient ’ s immune response against the cancer cells .
Another therapeutic cancer vaccine ( talimogene laherparepvec , also called T-VEC or Imlygic ) was approved by the FDA in 2015 for treatment of melanoma , a form of skin cancer .
This vaccine contains a virus that is injected into tumors , where it infects and lyses the tumor cells .
The virus also induces a response in lesions or tumors besides those into which the vaccine is injected , indicating that it is stimulating a more general ( as opposed to local ) antitumor immune response in the patient .
Many laboratory tests are designed to confirm a presumptive diagnosis by detecting antibodies specific to a suspected pathogen .
Unfortunately , many such tests are time-consuming and expensive .
That is now changing , however , with the development of new , miniaturized technologies that are fast and inexpensive .
For example , researchers at Columbia University are developing a “ lab-on-a-chip ” technology that will test a single drop of blood for 15 different infectious diseases , including HIV and syphilis , in a matter of minutes .
The blood is pulled through tiny capillaries into reaction chambers where the patient ’ s antibodies mix with reagents .
A chip reader that attaches to a cell phone analyzes the results and sends them to the patient ’ s healthcare provider .
Currently the device is being field tested in Rwanda to check pregnant women for chronic diseases .
Researchers estimate that the chip readers will sell for about $ 100 and individual chips for $ 1 .
The high specificity of antibodies makes them an excellent tool for detecting and quantifying a broad array of targets , from drugs to serum proteins to microorganisms .
With in vitro assays , antibodies can be used to precipitate soluble antigens , agglutinate ( clump ) cells , opsonize and kill bacteria with the assistance of complement , and neutralize drugs , toxins , and viruses .
An antibody ’ s specificity results from the antigen-binding site formed within the variable regions—regions of the antibody that have unique patterns of amino acids that can only bind to target antigens with a molecular sequence that provides complementary charges and noncovalent bonds .
There are limitations to antibody specificity , however .
Some antigens are so chemically similar that cross-reactivity occurs ; in other words , antibodies raised against one antigen bind to a chemically similar but different antigen .
Consider an antigen that consists of a single protein with multiple epitopes .
This single protein may stimulate the production of many different antibodies , some of which may bind to chemically identical epitopes on other proteins .
Cross-reactivity is more likely to occur between antibodies and antigens that have low affinity or avidity .
Avidity is influenced by affinity as well as the structural arrangements of the epitope and the variable regions of the antibody .
If an antibody has a high affinity/avidity for a specific antigen , it is less likely to cross-react with an antigen for which it has a lower affinity/avidity .
Antibodies used for research and diagnostic purposes are often obtained by injecting a lab animal such as a rabbit or a goat with a specific antigen .
Within a few weeks , the animal ’ s immune system will produce high levels of antibodies specific for the antigen .
These antibodies can be harvested in an antiserum , which is whole serum collected from an animal following exposure to an antigen .
Because most antigens are complex structures with multiple epitopes , they result in the production of multiple antibodies in the lab animal .
This so-called polyclonal antibody response is also typical of the response to infection by the human immune system .
Antiserum drawn from an animal will thus contain antibodies from multiple clones of B cells , with each B cell responding to a specific epitope on the antigen .
Lab animals are usually injected at least twice with antigen when being used to produce antiserum .
The second injection will activate memory cells that make class IgG antibodies against the antigen .
The memory cells also undergo affinity maturation , resulting in a pool of antibodies with higher average affinity .
Affinity maturation occurs because of mutations in the immunoglobulin gene variable regions , resulting in B cells with slightly altered antigenbinding sites .
On re-exposure to the antigen , those B cells capable of producing antibody with higher affinity antigenbinding sites will be stimulated to proliferate and produce more antibody than their lower-affinity peers .
An adjuvant , which is a chemical that provokes a generalized activation of the immune system that stimulates greater antibody production , is often mixed with the antigen prior to injection .
Antiserum obtained from animals will not only contain antibodies against the antigen artificially introduced in the laboratory , but it will also contain antibodies to any other antigens to which the animal has been exposed during its lifetime .
For this reason , antisera must first be “ purified ” to remove other antibodies before using the antibodies for research or diagnostic assays .
Polyclonal antisera are used in many clinical tests that are designed to determine whether a patient is producing antibodies in response to a particular pathogen .
While these tests are certainly powerful diagnostic tools , they have their limitations , because they are an indirect means of determining whether a particular pathogen is present .
Tests based on a polyclonal response can sometimes lead to a false-positive result—in other words , a test that confirms the presence of an antigen that is , in fact , not present .
Antibody-based tests can also result in a false-negative result , which occurs when the test fails to detect an antibody that is , in fact , present .
The accuracy of antibody tests can be described in terms of test sensitivity and test specificity .
Test sensitivity is the probability of getting a positive test result when the patient is indeed infected .
If a test has high sensitivity , the probability of a false negative is low .
Test specificity , on the other hand , is the probability of getting a negative test result when the patient is not infected .
If a test has high specificity , the probability of a false positive is low .
False positives often occur due to cross-reactivity , which can occur when epitopes from a different pathogen are similar to those found on the pathogen being tested for .
For this reason , antibody-based tests are often used only as screening tests ; if the results are positive , other confirmatory tests are used to make sure that the results were not a false positive .
For example , a blood sample from a patient suspected of having hepatitis C can be screened for the virus using antibodies that bind to antigens on hepatitis C virus .
If the patient is indeed infected with hepatitis C virus , the antibodies will bind to the antigens , yielding a positive test result .
Antibody tests for hepatitis C have high sensitivity ( a low probability of a false negative ) but low specificity ( a high probability of a false positive ) .
Thus , patients who test positive must have a second , confirmatory test to rule out the possibility of a false positive .
The confirmatory test is a more expensive and time-consuming test that directly tests for the presence of hepatitis C viral RNA in the blood .
Only after the confirmatory test comes back positive can the patient be definitively diagnosed with a hepatitis C infection .
Antibody-based tests can result in a false negative if , for any reason , the patient ’ s immune system has not produced detectable levels of antibodies .
For some diseases , it may take several weeks following infection before the immune system produces enough antibodies to cross the detection threshold of the assay .
In immunocompromised patients , the immune system may not be capable of producing a detectable level of antibodies .
Another limitation of using antibody production as an indicator of disease is that antibodies in the blood will persist long after the infection has been cleared .
Depending on the type of infection , antibodies will be present for many months ; sometimes , they may be present for the remainder of the patient ’ s life .
Thus , a positive antibody-based test only means that the patient was infected at some point in time ; it does not prove that the infection is active .
In addition to their role in diagnosis , polyclonal antisera can activate complement , detect the presence of bacteria in clinical and food industry settings , and perform a wide array of precipitation reactions that can detect and quantify serum proteins , viruses , or other antigens .
However , with the many specificities of antibody present in a polyclonal antiserum , there is a significant likelihood that the antiserum will cross-react with antigens to which the individual was never exposed .
Therefore , we must always account for the possibility of false-positive results when working with a polyclonal antiserum .
Some types of assays require better antibody specificity and affinity than can be obtained using a polyclonal antiserum .
To attain this high specificity , all of the antibodies must bind with high affinity to a single epitope .
This high specificity can be provided by monoclonal antibodies ( mAbs ) .
compares some of the important characteristics of monoclonal and polyclonal antibodies .
Unlike polyclonal antibodies , which are produced in live animals , monoclonal antibodies are produced in vitro using tissue-culture techniques .
mAbs are produced by immunizing an animal , often a mouse , multiple times with a specific antigen .
B cells from the spleen of the immunized animal are then removed .
Since normal B cells are unable to proliferate forever , they are fused with immortal , cancerous B cells called myeloma cells , to yield hybridoma cells .
All of the cells are then placed in a selective medium that allows only the hybridomas to grow ; unfused myeloma cells can not grow , and any unfused B cells die off .
The hybridomas , which are capable of growing continuously in culture while producing antibodies , are then screened for the desired mAb .
Those producing the desired mAb are grown in tissue culture ; the culture medium is harvested periodically and mAbs are purified from the medium .
This is a very expensive and time-consuming process .
It may take weeks of culturing and many liters of media to provide enough mAbs for an experiment or to treat a single patient .
mAbs are expensive .
Since the most common methods for producing monoclonal antibodies use mouse cells , it is necessary to create humanized monoclonal antibodies for human clinical use .
Mouse antibodies can not be injected repeatedly into humans , because the immune system will recognize them as being foreign and will respond to them with neutralizing antibodies .
This problem can be minimized by genetically engineering the antibody in the mouse B cell .
The variable regions of the mouse light and heavy chain genes are ligated to human constant regions , and the chimeric gene is then transferred into a host cell .
This allows production of a mAb that is mostly “ human ” with only the antigen-binding site being of mouse origin .
Humanized mAbs have been successfully used to treat cancer with minimal side effects .
For example , the humanized monoclonal antibody drug Herceptin has been helpful for the treatment of some types of breast cancer .
There have also been a few preliminary trials of humanized mAb for the treatment of infectious diseases , but none of these treatments are currently in use .
In some cases , mAbs have proven too specific to treat infectious diseases , because they recognize some serovars of a pathogen but not others .
Using a cocktail of multiple mAbs that target different strains of the pathogen can address this problem .
However , the great cost associated with mAb production is another challenge that has prevented mAbs from becoming practical for use in treating microbial infections .
One promising technology for inexpensive mAbs is the use of genetically engineered plants to produce antibodies ( or plantibodies ) .
This technology transforms plant cells into antibody factories rather than relying on tissue culture cells , which are expensive and technically demanding .
In some cases , it may even be possible to deliver these antibodies by having patients eat the plants rather than by extracting and injecting the antibodies .
For example , in 2013 , a research group cloned antibody genes into plants that had the ability to neutralize an important toxin from bacteria that can cause severe gastrointestinal disease .
Eating the plants could potentially deliver the antibodies directly to the toxin .
When both antibodies and their corresponding antigens are present in a solution , we can often observe a precipitation reaction in which large complexes ( lattices ) form and settle out of solution .
In the next several sections , we will discuss several common in vitro assays .
A visible antigen-antibody complex is called a precipitin , and in vitro assays that produce a precipitin are called precipitin reactions .
A precipitin reaction typically involves adding soluble antigens to a test tube containing a solution of antibodies .
Each antibody has two arms , each of which can bind to an epitope .
When an antibody binds to two antigens , the two antigens become bound together by the antibody .
A lattice can form as antibodies bind more and more antigens together , resulting in a precipitin .
Most precipitin tests use a polyclonal antiserum rather than monoclonal antibodies because polyclonal antibodies can bind to multiple epitopes , making lattice formation more likely .
Although mAbs may bind some antigens , the binding will occur less often , making it much less likely that a visible precipitin will form .
The amount of precipitation also depends on several other factors .
For example , precipitation is enhanced when the antibodies have a high affinity for the antigen .
While most antibodies bind antigen with high affinity , even highaffinity binding uses relatively weak noncovalent bonds , so that individual interactions will often break and new interactions will occur .
In addition , for precipitin formation to be visible , there must be an optimal ratio of antibody to antigen .
The optimal ratio is not likely to be a 1:1 antigen-to-antibody ratio ; it can vary dramatically , depending on the number of epitopes on the antigen and the class of antibody .
Some antigens may have only one or two epitopes recognized by the antiserum , whereas other antigens may have many different epitopes and/or multiple instances of the same epitope on a single antigen molecule .
illustrates how the ratio of antigen and antibody affects the amount of precipitation .
To achieve the optimal ratio , antigen is slowly added to a solution containing antibodies , and the amount of precipitin is determined qualitatively .
Initially , there is not enough antigen to produce visible lattice formation ; this is called the zone of antibody excess .
As more antigen is added , the reaction enters the equivalence zone ( or zone of equivalence ) , where both the optimal antigen-antibody interaction and maximal precipitation occur .
If even more antigen were added , the amount of antigen would become excessive and actually cause the amount of precipitation to decline .
A variety of techniques allow us to use precipitin formation to quantify either antigen concentration or the amount of antibody present in an antiserum .
One such technique is the precipitin ring test , which is used to determine the relative amount of antigen-specific antibody in a sample of serum .
To perform this test , a set of test tubes is prepared by adding an antigen solution to the bottom of each tube .
Each tube receives the same volume of solution , and the concentration of antigens is constant ( e.g. , 1 mg/mL ) .
Next , glycerol is added to the antigen solution in each test tube , followed by a serial dilution of the antiserum .
The glycerol prevents mixing of the antiserum with the antigen solution , allowing antigen-antibody binding to take place only at the interface of the two solutions .
The result is a visible ring of precipitin in the tubes that have an antigen-antibody ratio within the equivalence zone .
This highest dilution with a visible ring is used to determine the titer of the antibodies .
The titer is the reciprocal of the highest dilution showing a positive result , expressed as a whole number .
In , the titer is 16 .
While a measurement of titer does not tell us in absolute terms how much antibody is present , it does give a measure of biological activity , which is often more important than absolute amount .
While the precipitin ring test provides insights into antibody-antigen interactions , it also has some drawbacks .
It requires the use of large amounts of serum , and great care must be taken to avoid mixing the solutions and disrupting the ring .
Performing a similar test in an agar gel matrix can minimize these problems .
This type of assay is variously called double immunodiffusion or the Ouchterlony assay for Orjan Ouchterlony , who first described the technique in 1948 .
When agar is highly purified , it produces a clear , colorless gel .
Holes are punched in the gel to form wells , and antigen and antisera are added to neighboring wells .
Proteins are able to diffuse through the gel , and precipitin arcs form between the wells at the zone of equivalence .
Because the precipitin lattice is too large to diffuse through the gel , the arcs are firmly locked in place and easy to see .
Although there are now more sensitive and quantitative methods of detecting antibody-antigen interactions , the Ouchterlony test provides a rapid and qualitative way of determining whether an antiserum has antibodies against a particular antigen .
The Ouchterlony test is particularly useful when looking for cross-reactivity .
We can check an antiserum against a group of closely related antigens and see which combinations form precipitin arcs .
The radial immunodiffusion ( RID ) assay is similar to the Ouchterlony assay but is used to precisely quantify antigen concentration rather than to compare different antigens .
In this assay , the antiserum is added to tempered agar ( liquid agar at slightly above 45 °C ) , which is poured into a small petri dish or onto a glass slide and allowed to cool .
Wells are cut in the cooled agar , and antigen is then added to the wells and allowed to diffuse .
As the antigen and antibody interact , they form a zone of precipitation .
The square of the diameter of the zone of precipitation is directly proportional to the concentration of antigen .
By measuring the zones of precipitation produced by samples of known concentration ( see the outer ring of samples in ) , we can prepare a standard curve for determining the concentration of an unknown solution .
The RID assay is a also useful test for determining the concentration of many serum proteins such as the C3 and C4 complement proteins , among others .
A flocculation assay is similar to a precipitin reaction except that it involves insoluble antigens such as lipids .
A flocculant is similar to a precipitin in that there is a visible lattice of antigen and antibody , but because lipids are insoluble in aqueous solution , they can not precipitate .
Instead of precipitation , flocculation ( foaming ) is observed in the test tube fluid .
To cause infection , viruses must bind to receptors on host cells .
Antiviral antibodies can neutralize viral infections by coating the virions , blocking the binding .
This activity neutralizes virions and can result in the formation of large antibody-virus complexes ( which are readily removed by phagocytosis ) or by antibody binding to the virus and blocking its binding to host cell receptors .
This neutralization activity is the basis of neutralization assays , sensitive assays used for diagnoses of viral infections .
When viruses infect cells , they often cause damage ( cytopathic effects ) that may include lysis of the host cells .
Cytopathic effects can be visualized by growing host cells in a petri dish , covering the cells with a thin layer of agar , and then adding virus ( see ) .
The virus will diffuse very slowly through the agar .
A virus will enter a host cell , proliferate ( causing cell damage ) , be released from the dead host cell , and then move to neighboring cells .
As more and more cells die , plaques of dead cells will form .
During the course of a viral infection , the patient will mount an antibody response to the virus , and we can quantify those antibodies using a plaque reduction assay .
To perform the assay , a serial dilution is carried out on a serum sample .
Each dilution is then mixed with a standardized amount of the suspect virus .
Any virus-specific antibodies in the serum will neutralize some of the virus .
The suspensions are then added to host cells in culture to allow any nonneutralized virus to infect the cells and form plaques after several days .
The titer is defined as the reciprocal of the highest dilution showing a 50 % reduction in plaques .
Titer is always expressed as a whole number .
For example , if a 1/64 dilution was the highest dilution to show 50 % plaque reduction , then the titer is 64 .
The presence of antibodies in the patient ’ s serum does not tell us whether the patient is currently infected or was infected in the past .
Current infections can be identified by waiting two weeks and testing another serum sample .
A four-fold increase in neutralizing titer in this second sample indicates a new infection .
When a patient has elevated protein levels in the blood or is losing protein in the urine , a clinician will often order a polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis ( PAGE ) assay ( see ) .
This assay compares the relative abundance of the various types of serum proteins .
Abnormal protein electrophoresis patterns can be further studied using immunoelectrophoresis ( IEP ) .
The IEP begins by running a PAGE .
Antisera against selected serum proteins are added to troughs running parallel to the electrophoresis track , forming precipitin arcs similar to those seen in an Ouchterlony assay .
This allows the identification of abnormal immunoglobulin proteins in the sample .
IEP is particularly useful in the diagnosis of multiple myeloma , a cancer of antibody-secreting cells .
Patients with multiple myeloma can not produce healthy antibodies ; instead they produce abnormal antibodies that are monoclonal proteins ( M proteins ) .
Thus , patients with multiple myeloma will present with elevated serum protein levels that show a distinct band in the gamma globulin region of a protein electrophoresis gel and a sharp spike ( in M protein ) on the densitometer scan rather than the normal broad smear .
When antibodies against the various types of antibody heavy and light chains are used to form precipitin arcs , the M protein will cause distinctly skewed arcs against one class of heavy chain and one class of light chain as seen in .
After performing protein gel electrophoresis , specific proteins can be identified in the gel using antibodies .
This technique is known as the western blot .
Following separation of proteins by PAGE , the protein antigens in the gel are transferred to and immobilized on a nitrocellulose membrane .
This membrane can then be exposed to a primary antibody produced to specifically bind to the protein of interest .
A second antibody equipped with a molecular beacon will then bind to the first .
These secondary antibodies are coupled to another molecule such as an enzyme or a fluorophore ( a molecule that fluoresces when excited by light ) .
When using antibodies coupled to enzymes , a chromogenic substrate for the enzyme is added .
This substrate is usually colorless but will develop color in the presence of the antibody .
The fluorescence or substrate coloring identifies the location of the specific protein in the membrane to which the antibodies are bound .
Typically , polyclonal antibodies are used for western blot assays .
They are more sensitive than mAbs because of their ability to bind to various epitopes of the primary antigen , and the signal from polyclonal antibodies is typically stronger than that from mAbs .
Monoclonal antibodies can also be used ; however , they are much more expensive to produce and are less sensitive , since they are only able to recognize one specific epitope .
Several variations of the western blot are useful in research .
In a southwestern blot , proteins are separated by SDS-PAGE , blotted onto a nitrocellulose membrane , allowed to renature , and then probed with a fluorescently or radioactively labeled DNA probe ; the purpose of the southwestern is to identify specific DNA-protein interactions .
Far-western blots are carried out to determine protein-protein interactions between immobilized proteins ( separated by SDS-PAGE , blotted onto a nitrocellulose membrane , and allowed to renature ) and non-antibody protein probes .
The bound non-antibody proteins that interact with the immobilized proteins in a far-western blot may be detected by radiolabeling , fluorescence , or the use of an antibody with an enzymatic molecular beacon .
One of the key functions of antibodies is the activation ( fixation ) of complement .
When antibody binds to bacteria , for example , certain complement proteins recognize the bound antibody and activate the complement cascade .
In response , other complement proteins bind to the bacteria where some serve as opsonins to increase the efficiency of phagocytosis and others create holes in gram-negative bacterial cell membranes , causing lysis .
This lytic activity can be used to detect the presence of antibodies against specific antigens in the serum .
Red blood cells are good indicator cells to use when evaluating complement-mediated cytolysis .
Hemolysis of red blood cells releases hemoglobin , which is a brightly colored pigment , and hemolysis of even a small number of red cells will cause the solution to become noticeably pink .
This characteristic plays a role in the complement fixation test , which allows the detection of antibodies against specific pathogens .
The complement fixation test can be used to check for antibodies against pathogens that are difficult to culture in the lab such as fungi , viruses , or the bacteria Chlamydia .
To perform the complement fixation test , antigen from a pathogen is added to patient serum .
If antibodies to the antigen are present , the antibody will bind the antigen and fix all the available complement .
When red blood cells and antibodies against red blood cells are subsequently added to the mix , there will be no complement left to lyse the red cells .
Thus , if the solution remains clear , the test is positive .
If there are no antipathogen antibodies in the patient ’ s serum , the added antibodies will activate the complement to lyse the red cells , yielding a negative test .
summarizes the various types of antibody-antigen assays discussed in this section .
Agglutination can be used as an indicator of the presence of antibodies against bacteria or red blood cells .
Agglutination assays are usually quick and easy to perform on a glass slide or microtiter plate .
Microtiter plates have an array of wells to hold small volumes of reagents and to observe reactions ( e.g. , agglutination ) either visually or using a specially designed spectrophotometer .
The wells come in many different sizes for assays involving different volumes of reagents .
The use of agglutination tests to identify streptococcal bacteria was developed in the 1920s by Rebecca Lancefield working with her colleagues A.R .
Dochez and Oswald Avery .
She used antibodies to identify M protein , a virulence factor on streptococci that is necessary for the bacteria ’ s ability to cause strep throat .
Production of antibodies against M protein is crucial in mounting a protective response against the bacteria .
Lancefield used antisera to show that different strains of the same species of streptococci express different versions of M protein , which explains why children can come down with strep throat repeatedly .
Lancefield classified betahemolytic streptococci into many groups based on antigenic differences in group-specific polysaccharides located in the bacterial cell wall .
The strains are called serovars because they are differentiated using antisera .
Identifying the serovars present in a disease outbreak is important because some serovars may cause more severe disease than others .
The method developed by Lancefield is a direct agglutination assay , since the bacterial cells themselves agglutinate .
A similar strategy is more commonly used today when identifying serovars of bacteria and viruses ; however , to improve visualization of the agglutination , the antibodies may be attached to inert latex beads .
This technique is called an indirect agglutination assay ( or latex fixation assay ) , because the agglutination of the beads is a marker for antibody binding to some other antigen .
Indirect assays can be used to detect the presence of either antibodies or specific antigens .
To identify antibodies in a patient ’ s serum , the antigen of interest is attached to latex beads .
When mixed with patient serum , the antibodies will bind the antigen , cross-linking the latex beads and causing the beads to agglutinate indirectly ; this indicates the presence of the antibody .
This technique is most often used when looking for IgM antibodies , because their structure provides maximum cross-linking .
One widely used example of this assay is a test for rheumatoid factor ( RF ) to confirm a diagnosis of rheumatoid arthritis .
RF is , in fact , the presence of IgM antibodies that bind to the patient ’ s own IgG .
RF will agglutinate IgG-coated latex beads .
In the reverse test , soluble antigens can be detected in a patient ’ s serum by attaching specific antibodies ( commonly mAbs ) to the latex beads and mixing this complex with the serum .
Agglutination tests are widely used in underdeveloped countries that may lack appropriate facilities for culturing bacteria .
For example , the Widal test , used for the diagnosis of typhoid fever , looks for agglutination of Salmonella enterica subspecies typhi in patient sera .
The Widal test is rapid , inexpensive , and useful for monitoring the extent of an outbreak ; however , it is not as accurate as tests that involve culturing of the bacteria .
The Widal test frequently produces false positives in patients with previous infections with other subspecies of Salmonella , as well as false negatives in patients with hyperproteinemia or immune deficiencies .
In addition , agglutination tests are limited by the fact that patients generally do not produce detectable levels of antibody during the first week ( or longer ) of an infection .
A patient is said to have undergone seroconversion when antibody levels reach the threshold for detection .
Typically , seroconversion coincides with the onset of signs and symptoms of disease .
However , in an HIV infection , for example , it generally takes 3 weeks for seroconversion to take place , and in some instances , it may take much longer .
Similar to techniques for the precipitin ring test and plaque assays , it is routine to prepare serial two-fold dilutions of the patient ’ s serum and determine the titer of agglutinating antibody present .
Since antibody levels change over time in both primary and secondary immune responses , by checking samples over time , changes in antibody titer can be detected .
For example , a comparison of the titer during the acute phase of an infection versus the titer from the convalescent phase will distinguish whether an infection is current or has occurred in the past .
It is also possible to monitor how well the patient ’ s immune system is responding to the pathogen .
Agglutination of red blood cells is called hemagglutination .
One common assay that uses hemagglutination is the direct Coombs ’ test , also called the direct antihuman globulin test ( DAT ) , which generally looks for nonagglutinating antibodies .
The test can also detect complement attached to red blood cells .
The Coombs ’ test is often employed when a newborn has jaundice , yellowing of the skin caused by high blood concentrations of bilirubin , a product of the breakdown of hemoglobin in the blood .
The Coombs ’ test is used to determine whether the child ’ s red blood cells have been bound by the mother ’ s antibodies .
These antibodies would activate complement , leading to red blood cell lysis and the subsequent jaundice .
Other conditions that can cause positive direct Coombs ’ tests include hemolytic transfusion reactions , autoimmune hemolytic anemia , infectious mononucleosis ( caused by Epstein-Barr virus ) , syphilis , and Mycoplasma pneumonia .
A positive direct Coombs ’ test may also be seen in some cancers and as an allergic reaction to some drugs ( e.g. , penicillin ) .
The antibodies bound to red blood cells in these conditions are most often IgG , and because of the orientation of the antigen-binding sites on IgG and the comparatively large size of a red blood cell , it is unlikely that any visible agglutination will occur .
However , the presence of IgG bound to red blood cells can be detected by adding Coombs ’ reagent , an antiserum containing antihuman IgG antibodies ( that may be combined with anti-complement ) .
The Coombs ’ reagent links the IgG attached to neighboring red blood cells and thus promotes agglutination .
There is also an indirect Coombs ’ test known as the indirect antiglobulin test ( IAT ) .
This screens an individual for antibodies against red blood cell antigens ( other than the A and B antigens ) that are unbound in a patient ’ s serum .
IAT can be used to screen pregnant women for antibodies that may cause hemolytic disease of the newborn .
It can also be used prior to giving blood transfusions .
More detail on how the IAT is performed is discussed below .
Antibodies that bind to red blood cells are not the only cause of hemagglutination .
Some viruses also bind to red blood cells , and this binding can cause agglutination when the viruses cross-link the red blood cells .
For example , influenza viruses have two different types of viral spikes called neuraminidase ( N ) and hemagglutinin ( H ) , the latter named for its ability to agglutinate red blood cells ( see ) .
Thus , we can use red blood cells to detect the presence of influenza virus by direct hemagglutination assays ( HA ) , in which the virus causes visible agglutination of red blood cells .
The mumps and rubella viruses can also be detected using HA .
Most frequently , a serial dilution viral agglutination assay is used to measure the titer or estimate the amount of virus produced in cell culture or for vaccine production .
A viral titer can be determined using a direct HA by making a serial dilution of the sample containing the virus , starting with a high concentration of sample that is then diluted in a series of wells .
The highest dilution producing visible agglutination is the titer .
The assay is carried out in a microtiter plate with Vor round-bottomed wells .
In the presence of agglutinating viruses , the red blood cells and virus clump together and produce a diffuse mat over the bottom of the well .
In the absence of virus , the red blood cells roll or sediment to the bottom of the well and form a dense pellet , which is why flat-bottomed wells can not be used .
A modification of the HA assay can be used to determine the titer of antiviral antibodies .
The presence of these antibodies in a patient ’ s serum or in a lab-produced antiserum will neutralize the virus and block it from agglutinating the red cells , making this a viral hemagglutination inhibition assay ( HIA ) .
In this assay , patient serum is mixed with a standardized amount of virus .
After a short incubation , a standardized amount of red blood cells is added and hemagglutination is observed .
The titer of the patient ’ s serum is the highest dilution that blocks agglutination .
In addition to antibodies against bacteria and viruses to which they have previously been exposed , most individuals also carry antibodies against blood types other than their own .
There are presently 33 immunologically important blood-type systems , many of which are restricted within various ethnic groups or rarely result in the production of antibodies .
The most important and perhaps best known are the ABO and Rh blood groups ( see ) .
When units of blood are being considered for transfusion , pretransfusion blood testing must be performed .
For the blood unit , commercially prepared antibodies against the A , B , and Rh antigens are mixed with red blood cells from the units to initially confirm that the blood type on the unit is accurate .
Once a unit of blood has been requested for transfusion , it is vitally important to make sure the donor ( unit of blood ) and recipient ( patient ) are compatible for these crucial antigens .
In addition to confirming the blood type of the unit , the patient ’ s blood type is also confirmed using the same commercially prepared antibodies to A , B , and Rh .
For example , as shown in , if the donor blood is A-positive , it will agglutinate with the anti-A antiserum and with the anti-Rh antiserum .
If no agglutination is observed with any of the sera , then the blood type would be O-negative .
Following determination of the blood type , immediately prior to releasing the blood for transfusion , a cross-match is performed in which a small aliquot of the donor red blood cells are mixed with serum from the patient awaiting transfusion .
If the patient does have antibodies against the donor red blood cells , hemagglutination will occur .
To confirm any negative test results and check for sensitized red blood cells , Coombs ’ reagent may be added to the mix to facilitate visualization of the antibody-red blood cell interaction .
Under some circumstances , a minor cross-match may be performed as well .
In this assay , a small aliquot of donor serum is mixed with patient red blood cells .
This allows the detection of agglutinizing antibodies in the donor serum .
This test is rarely necessary because transfusions generally use packed red blood cells with most of the plasma removed by centrifugation .
Red blood cells have many other antigens in addition to ABO and Rh .
While most people are unlikely to have antibodies against these antigens , women who have had multiple pregnancies or patients who have had multiple transfusions may have them because of repeated exposure .
For this reason , an antibody screen test is used to determine if such antibodies are present .
Patient serum is checked against commercially prepared , pooled , type O red blood cells that express these antigens .
If agglutination occurs , the antigen to which the patient is responding must be identified and determined not to be present in the donor unit .
summarizes the various kinds of agglutination assays discussed in this section .
However , EIAs differ from western blots in that the assays are conducted in microtiter plates or in vivo rather than on an absorbent membrane .
There are many different types of EIAs , but they all involve an antibody molecule whose constant region binds an enzyme , leaving the variable region free to bind its specific antigen .
The addition of a substrate for the enzyme allows the antigen to be visualized or quantified .
In EIAs , the substrate for the enzyme is most often a chromogen , a colorless molecule that is converted into a colored end product .
The most widely used enzymes are alkaline phosphatase and horseradish peroxidase for which appropriate substrates are readily available .
In some EIAs , the substrate is a fluorogen , a nonfluorescent molecule that the enzyme converts into a fluorescent form .
EIAs that utilize a fluorogen are called fluorescent enzyme immunoassays ( FEIAs ) .
Fluorescence can be detected by either a fluorescence microscope or a spectrophotometer .
One powerful use of EIA is immunostaining , in which antibody-enzyme conjugates enhance microscopy .
Immunohistochemistry ( IHC ) is used for examining whole tissues .
As seen in , a section of tissue can be stained to visualize the various cell types .
In this example , a mAb against CD8 was used to stain CD8 cells in a section of tonsil tissue .
It is now possible to count the number of CD8 cells , determine their relative numbers versus the other cell types present , and determine the location of these cells within this tissue .
Such data would be useful for studying diseases such as AIDS , in which the normal function of CD8 cells is crucial for slowing disease progression .
Immunocytochemistry ( ICC ) is another valuable form of immunostaining .
While similar to IHC , in ICC , extracellular matrix material is stripped away , and the cell membrane is etched with alcohol to make it permeable to antibodies .
This allows antibodies to pass through the cell membrane and bind to specific targets inside the cell .
Organelles , cytoskeletal components , and other intracellular structures can be visualized in this way .
While some ICC techniques use EIA , the enzyme can be replaced with a fluorescent molecule , making it a fluorescent immunoassay .
The enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays ( ELISAs ) are widely used EIAs .
In the direct ELISA , antigens are immobilized in the well of a microtiter plate .
An antibody that is specific for a particular antigen and is conjugated to an enzyme is added to each well .
If the antigen is present , then the antibody will bind .
After washing to remove any unbound antibodies , a colorless substrate ( chromogen ) is added .
The presence of the enzyme converts the substrate into a colored end product .
While this technique is faster because it only requires the use of one antibody , it has the disadvantage that the signal from a direct ELISA is lower ( lower sensitivity ) .
In a sandwich ELISA , the goal is to use antibodies to precisely quantify specific antigen present in a solution , such as antigen from a pathogen , a serum protein , or a hormone from the blood or urine to list just a few examples .
The first step of a sandwich ELISA is to add the primary antibody to all the wells of a microtiter plate .
The antibody sticks to the plastic by hydrophobic interactions .
After an appropriate incubation time , any unbound antibody is washed away .
Comparable washes are used between each of the subsequent steps to ensure that only specifically bound molecules remain attached to the plate .
A blocking protein is then added ( e.g. , albumin or the milk protein casein ) to bind the remaining nonspecific protein-binding sites in the well .
Some of the wells will receive known amounts of antigen to allow the construction of a standard curve , and unknown antigen solutions are added to the other wells .
The primary antibody captures the antigen and , following a wash , the secondary antibody is added , which is a polyclonal antibody that is conjugated to an enzyme .
After a final wash , a colorless substrate ( chromogen ) is added , and the enzyme converts it into a colored end product .
The color intensity of the sample caused by the end product is measured with a spectrophotometer .
The amount of color produced ( measured as absorbance ) is directly proportional to the amount of enzyme , which in turn is directly proportional to the captured antigen .
ELISAs are extremely sensitive , allowing antigen to be quantified in the nanogram ( 10 g ) per mL range .
In an indirect ELISA , we quantify antigen-specific antibody rather than antigen .
We can use indirect ELISA to detect antibodies against many types of pathogens , including Borrelia burgdorferi ( Lyme disease ) and HIV .
There are three important differences between indirect and direct ELISAs as shown in .
Rather than using antibody to capture antigen , the indirect ELISA starts with attaching known antigen ( e.g. , peptides from HIV ) to the bottom of the microtiter plate wells .
After blocking the unbound sites on the plate , patient serum is added ; if antibodies are present ( primary antibody ) , they will bind the antigen .
After washing away any unbound proteins , the secondary antibody with its conjugated enzyme is directed against the primary antibody ( e.g. , antihuman immunoglobulin ) .
The secondary antibody allows us to quantify how much antigen-specific antibody is present in the patient ’ s serum by the intensity of the color produced from the conjugated enzyme-chromogen reaction .
As with several other tests for antibodies discussed in this chapter , there is always concern about cross-reactivity with antibodies directed against some other antigen , which can lead to false-positive results .
Thus , we can not definitively diagnose an HIV infection ( or any other type of infection ) based on a single indirect ELISA assay .
For some situations , it may be necessary to detect or quantify antigens or antibodies that are present at very low concentration in solution .
Immunofiltration techniques have been developed to make this possible .
In immunofiltration , a large volume of fluid is passed through a porous membrane into an absorbent pad .
An antigen attached to the porous membrane will capture antibody as it passes ; alternatively , we can also attach an antibody to the membrane to capture antigen .
The method of immunofiltration has been adapted in the development of immunochromatographic assays , commonly known as lateral flow tests or strip tests .
These tests are quick and easy to perform , making them popular for point-of-care use ( i.e. , in the doctor ’ s office ) or in-home use .
One example is the TORCH test that allows doctors to screen pregnant women or newborns for infection by an array of viruses and other pathogens ( Toxoplasma , other viruses , rubella , cytomegalovirus , herpes simplex ) .
In-home pregnancy tests are another widely used example of a lateral flow test .
Immunofiltration tests are also popular in developing countries , because they are inexpensive and do not require constant refrigeration of the dried reagents .
However , the technology is also built into some sophisticated laboratory equipment .
In lateral flow tests , fluids such as urine are applied to an absorbent pad on the test strip .
The fluid flows by capillary action and moves through a stripe of beads with antibodies attached to their surfaces .
The fluid in the sample actually hydrates the reagents , which are present in a dried state in the stripe .
Antibody-coated beads made of latex or tiny gold particles will bind antigens in the test fluid .
The antibody-antigen complexes then flow over a second stripe that has immobilized antibody against the antigen ; this stripe will retain the beads that have bound antigen .
A third control stripe binds any beads .
A red color ( from gold particles ) or blue ( from latex beads ) developing at the test line indicates a positive test .
If the color only develops at the control line , the test is negative .
Like ELISA techniques , lateral flow tests take advantage of antibody sandwiches , providing sensitivity and specificity .
While not as quantitative as ELISA , these tests have the advantage of being fast , inexpensive , and not dependent on special equipment .
Thus , they can be performed anywhere by anyone .
There are some concerns about putting such powerful diagnostic tests into the hands of people who may not understand the tests ’ limitations , such as the possibility of false-positive results .
While home pregnancy tests have become widely accepted , at-home antibodydetection tests for diseases like HIV have raised some concerns in the medical community .
Some have questioned whether self-administration of such tests should be allowed in the absence of medical personnel who can explain the test results and order appropriate confirmatory tests .
However , with growing numbers of lateral flow tests becoming available , and the rapid development of lab-on-a-chip technology , home medical tests are likely to become even more commonplace in the future .
compares some of the key mechanisms and examples of some of the EIAs discussed in this section as well as immunoblots , which were discussed in .
We can also label cells , allowing us to precisely quantify particular subsets of cells or even purify these subsets for further research .
As with the enzyme assays , FA methods may be direct , in which a labeled mAb binds an antigen , or indirect , in which secondary polyclonal antibodies bind patient antibodies that react to a prepared antigen .
Applications of these two methods were demonstrated in .
FA methods are also used in automated cell counting and sorting systems to enumerate or segregate labeled subpopulations of cells in a sample .
Direct fluorescent antibody ( DFA ) tests use a fluorescently labeled mAb to bind and illuminate a target antigen .
DFA tests are particularly useful for the rapid diagnosis of bacterial diseases .
For example , fluorescence-labeled antibodies against Streptococcus pyogenes ( group A strep ) can be used to obtain a diagnosis of strep throat from a throat swab .
The diagnosis is ready in a matter of minutes , and the patient can be started on antibiotics before even leaving the clinic .
DFA techniques may also be used to diagnose pneumonia caused by Mycoplasma pneumoniae or Legionella pneumophila from sputum samples .
The fluorescent antibodies bind to the bacteria on a microscope slide , allowing ready detection of the bacteria using a fluorescence microscope .
Thus , the DFA technique is valuable for visualizing certain bacteria that are difficult to isolate or culture from patient samples .
Indirect fluorescent antibody ( IFA ) tests are used to look for antibodies in patient serum .
For example , an IFA test for the diagnosis of syphilis uses T. pallidum cells isolated from a lab animal ( the bacteria can not be grown on lab media ) and a smear prepared on a glass slide .
Patient serum is spread over the smear and anti-treponemal antibodies , if present , are allowed to bind .
The serum is washed off and a secondary antibody added .
The secondary antibody is an antihuman immunoglobulin conjugated to a fluorogen .
On examination , the T. pallidum bacteria will only be visible if they have been bound by the antibodies from the patient ’ s serum .
The IFA test for syphilis provides an important complement to the VDRL test discussed in .
The VDRL is more likely to generate false-positive reactions than the IFA test ; however , the VDRL is a better test for determining whether an infection is currently active .
IFA tests are also useful for the diagnosis of autoimmune diseases .
For example , systemic lupus erythematosus ( SLE ) ( see ) is characterized by elevated expression levels of antinuclear antibodies ( ANA ) .
These autoantibodies can be expressed against a variety of DNA-binding proteins and even against DNA itself .
Because autoimmunity is often difficult to diagnose , especially early in disease progression , testing for ANA can be a valuable clue in making a diagnosis and starting appropriate treatment .
The IFA for ANA begins by fixing cells grown in culture to a glass slide and making them permeable to antibody .
The slides are then incubated with serial dilutions of serum from the patient .
After incubation , the slide is washed to remove unbound proteins , and the fluorescent antibody ( antihuman IgG conjugated to a fluorogen ) added .
After an incubation and wash , the cells can be examined for fluorescence evident around the nucleus .
The titer of ANA in the serum is determined by the highest dilution showing fluorescence .
Because many healthy people express ANA , the American College of Rheumatology recommends that the titer must be at least 1:40 in the presence of symptoms involving two or more organ systems to be considered indicative of SLE .
Fluorescently labeled antibodies can be used to quantify cells of a specific type in a complex mixture using flow cytometry , an automated , cell-counting system that detects fluorescing cells as they pass through a narrow tube one cell at a time .
The analysis begins by incubating a mixed-cell population ( e.g. , white blood cells from a donor ) with a fluorescently labeled mAb specific for a subpopulation of cells ( e.g. , anti-CD4 ) .
Some experiments look at two cell markers simultaneously by adding a different fluorogen to the appropriate mAb .
The cells are then introduced to the flow cytometer through a narrow capillary that forces the cells to pass in single file .
A laser is used to activate the fluorogen .
The fluorescent light radiates out in all directions , so the fluorescence detector can be positioned at an angle from the incident laser light .
shows the obscuration bar in front of the forward-scatter detector that prevents laser light from hitting the detector .
As a cell passes through the laser bar , the forward-scatter detector detects light scattered around the obscuration bar .
The scattered light is transformed into a voltage pulse , and the cytometer counts a cell .
The fluorescence from a labeled cell is detected by the side-scatter detectors .
The light passes through various dichroic mirrors such that the light emitted from the fluorophore is received by the correct detector .
Data are collected from both the forwardand side-scatter detectors .
One way these data can be presented is in the form of a histogram .
The forward scatter is placed on the y -axis ( to represent the number of cells ) , and the side scatter is placed on the x -axis ( to represent the fluoresence of each cell ) .
The scaling for the x -axis is logarithmic , so fluorescence intensity increases by a factor of 10 with each unit increase along the axis .
depicts an example in which a culture of cells is combined with an antibody attached to a fluorophore to detect CD8 cells and then analyzed by flow cytometry .
The histogram has two peaks .
The peak on the left has lower fluorescence readings , representing the subset of the cell population ( approximately 30 cells ) that does not fluoresce ; hence , they are not bound by antibody and therefore do not express CD8 .
The peak on the right has higher fluorescence readings , representing the subset of the cell population ( approximately 100 cells ) that show fluorescence ; hence , they are bound by the antibody and therefore do express CD8 .
The flow cytometer and immunofluorescence can also be modified to sort cells from a single sample into purified subpopulations of cells for research purposes .
This modification of the flow cytometer is called a fluorescenceactivated cell sorter ( FACS ) .
In a FACS , fluorescence by a cell induces the device to put a charge on a droplet of the transporting fluid containing that cell .
The charge is specific to the wavelength of the fluorescent light , which allows for differential sorting by those different charges .
The sorting is accomplished by an electrostatic deflector that moves the charged droplet containing the cell into one collecting vessel or another .
The process results in highly purified subpopulations of cells .
One limitation of a FACS is that it only works on isolated cells .
Thus , the method would work in sorting white blood cells , since they exist as isolated cells .
But for cells in a tissue , flow cytometry can only be applied if we can excise the tissue and separate it into single cells ( using proteases to cleave cell-cell adhesion molecules ) without disrupting cell integrity .
This method may be used on tumors , but more often , immunohistochemistry and immunocytochemistry are used to study cells in tissues .
compares the mechanisms of the fluorescent antibody techniques discussed in this section .
The human body is covered in skin , and like most coverings , skin is designed to protect what is underneath .
One of its primary purposes is to prevent microbes in the surrounding environment from invading underlying tissues and organs .
But in spite of its role as a protective covering , skin is not itself immune from infection .
Certain pathogens and toxins can cause severe infections or reactions when they come in contact with the skin .
Other pathogens are opportunistic , breaching the skin ’ s natural defenses through cuts , wounds , or a disruption of normal microbiota resulting in an infection in the surrounding skin and tissue .
Still other pathogens enter the body via different routes—through the respiratory or digestive systems , for example—but cause reactions that manifest as skin rashes or lesions .
Nearly all humans experience skin infections to some degree .
Many of these conditions are , as the name suggests , “ skin deep , ” with symptoms that are local and non-life-threatening .
At some point , almost everyone must endure conditions like acne , athlete ’ s foot , and minor infections of cuts and abrasions , all of which result from infections of the skin .
But not all skin infections are quite so innocuous .
Some can become invasive , leading to systemic infection or spreading over large areas of skin , potentially becoming life-threatening .
In addition to serving a wide range of other functions , the skin serves as an important barrier to microbial invasion .
Not only is it a physical barrier to penetration of deeper tissues by potential pathogens , but it also provides an inhospitable environment for the growth of many pathogens .
In this section , we will provide a brief overview of the anatomy and normal microbiota of the skin and eyes , along with general symptoms associated with skin and eye infections .
Human skin is made up of several layers and sublayers .
The two main layers are the epidermis and the dermis .
These layers cover a third layer of tissue called the hypodermis , which consists of fibrous and adipose connective tissue .
The epidermis is the outermost layer of the skin , and it is relatively thin .
The exterior surface of the epidermis , called the stratum corneum , primarily consists of dead skin cells .
This layer of dead cells limits direct contact between the outside world and live cells .
The stratum corneum is rich in keratin , a tough , fibrous protein that is also found in hair and nails .
Keratin helps make the outer surface of the skin relatively tough and waterproof .
It also helps to keep the surface of the skin dry , which reduces microbial growth .
Beneath the epidermis lies a thicker skin layer called the dermis .
The dermis contains connective tissue and embedded structures such as blood vessels , nerves , and muscles .
Structures called hair follicles ( from which hair grows ) are located within the dermis , even though much of their structure consists of epidermal tissue .
The dermis also contains the two major types of glands found in human skin : sweat glands ( tubular glands that produce sweat ) and sebaceous glands ( which are associated with hair follicles and produce sebum , a lipid-rich substance containing proteins and minerals ) .
Perspiration ( sweat ) provides some moisture to the epidermis , which can increase the potential for microbial growth .
For this reason , more microbes are found on the regions of the skin that produce the most sweat , such as the skin of the underarms and groin .
However , in addition to water , sweat also contains substances that inhibit microbial growth , such as salts , lysozyme , and antimicrobial peptides .
Sebum also serves to protect the skin and reduce water loss .
Although some of the lipids and fatty acids in sebum inhibit microbial growth , sebum contains compounds that provide nutrition for certain microbes .
The skin is home to a wide variety of normal microbiota , consisting of commensal organisms that derive nutrition from skin cells and secretions such as sweat and sebum .
The normal microbiota of skin tends to inhibit transientmicrobe colonization by producing antimicrobial substances and outcompeting other microbes that land on the surface of the skin .
This helps to protect the skin from pathogenic infection .
The skin ’ s properties differ from one region of the body to another , as does the composition of the skin ’ s microbiota .
The availability of nutrients and moisture partly dictates which microorganisms will thrive in a particular region of the skin .
Relatively moist skin , such as that of the nares ( nostrils ) and underarms , has a much different microbiota than the dryer skin on the arms , legs , hands , and top of the feet .
Some areas of the skin have higher densities of sebaceous glands .
These sebum-rich areas , which include the back , the folds at the side of the nose , and the back of the neck , harbor distinct microbial communities that are less diverse than those found on other parts of the body .
Different types of bacteria dominate the dry , moist , and sebum-rich regions of the skin .
The most abundant microbes typically found in the dry and sebaceous regions are Betaproteobacteria and Propionibacteria , respectively .
In the moist regions , Corynebacterium and Staphylococcus are most commonly found .
Viruses and fungi are also found on the skin , with Malassezia being the most common type of fungus found as part of the normal microbiota .
The role and populations of viruses in the microbiota , known as viromes , are still not well understood , and there are limitations to the techniques used to identify them .
However , Circoviridae , Papillomaviridae , and Polyomaviridae appear to be the most common residents in the healthy skin virome .
While the microbiota of the skin can play a protective role , it can also cause harm in certain cases .
Often , an opportunistic pathogen residing in the skin microbiota of one individual may be transmitted to another individual more susceptible to an infection .
This is one reason why clean surgical sites are so important .
Injury or damage to the skin can allow microbes to enter deeper tissues , where nutrients are more abundant and the environment is more conducive to bacterial growth .
Wound infections are common after a puncture or laceration that damages the physical barrier of the skin .
Microbes may infect structures in the dermis , such as hair follicles and glands , causing a localized infection , or they may reach the bloodstream , which can lead to a systemic infection .
In some cases , infectious microbes can cause a variety of rashes or lesions that differ in their physical characteristics .
These rashes can be the result of inflammation reactions or direct responses to toxins produced by the microbes .
lists some of the medical terminology used to describe skin lesions and rashes based on their characteristics ; and illustrate some of the various types of skin lesions .
It is important to note that many different diseases can lead to skin conditions of very similar appearance ; thus the terms used in the table are generally not exclusive to a particular type of infection or disease .
Although the eye and skin have distinct anatomy , they are both in direct contact with the external environment .
An important component of the eye is the nasolacrimal drainage system , which serves as a conduit for the fluid of the eye , called tears .
Tears flow from the external eye to the nasal cavity by the lacrimal apparatus , which is composed of the structures involved in tear production .
The lacrimal gland , above the eye , secretes tears to keep the eye moist .
There are two small openings , one on the inside edge of the upper eyelid and one on the inside edge of the lower eyelid , near the nose .
Each of these openings is called a lacrimal punctum .
Together , these lacrimal puncta collect tears from the eye that are then conveyed through lacrimal ducts to a reservoir for tears called the lacrimal sac , also known as the dacrocyst or tear sac .
From the sac , tear fluid flows via a nasolacrimal duct to the inner nose .
Each nasolacrimal duct is located underneath the skin and passes through the bones of the face into the nose .
Chemicals in tears , such as defensins , lactoferrin , and lysozyme , help to prevent colonization by pathogens .
In addition , mucins facilitate removal of microbes from the surface of the eye .
The surfaces of the eyeball and inner eyelid are mucous membranes called conjunctiva .
The normal conjunctival microbiota has not been well characterized , but does exist .
One small study ( part of the Ocular Microbiome project ) found twelve genera that were consistently present in the conjunctiva .
These microbes are thought to help defend the membranes against pathogens .
However , it is still unclear which microbes may be transient and which may form a stable microbiota .
Use of contact lenses can cause changes in the normal microbiota of the conjunctiva by introducing another surface into the natural anatomy of the eye .
Research is currently underway to better understand how contact lenses may impact the normal microbiota and contribute to eye disease .
The watery material inside of the eyeball is called the vitreous humor .
Unlike the conjunctiva , it is protected from contact with the environment and is almost always sterile , with no normal microbiota .
The conjunctiva is a frequent site of infection of the eye ; like other mucous membranes , it is also a common portal of entry for pathogens .
Inflammation of the conjunctiva is called conjunctivitis , although it is commonly known as pinkeye because of the pink appearance in the eye .
Infections of deeper structures , beneath the cornea , are less common .
Conjunctivitis occurs in multiple forms .
It may be acute or chronic .
Acute purulent conjunctivitis is associated with pus formation , while acute hemorrhagic conjunctivitis is associated with bleeding in the conjunctiva .
Infections leading to conjunctivitis , blepharitis , keratoconjunctivitis , or dacryocystitis may be caused by bacteria or viruses , but allergens , pollutants , or chemicals can also irritate the eye and cause inflammation of various structures .
Viral infection is a more likely cause of conjunctivitis in cases with symptoms such as fever and watery discharge that occurs with upper respiratory infection and itchy eyes .
summarizes some common forms of conjunctivitis and blepharitis .
Identify the most common bacterial pathogens that cause infections of the skin and eyes Compare the major characteristics of specific bacterial diseases affecting the skin and eyes Despite the skin ’ s protective functions , infections are common .
Gram-positive Staphylococcus spp .
and Streptococcus spp .
are responsible for many of the most common skin infections .
However , many skin conditions are not strictly associated with a single pathogen .
Opportunistic pathogens of many types may infect skin wounds , and individual cases with identical symptoms may result from different pathogens or combinations of pathogens .
In this section , we will examine some of the most important bacterial infections of the skin and eyes and discuss how biofilms can contribute to and exacerbate such infections .
Key features of bacterial skin and eye infections are also summarized in the Disease Profile boxes throughout this section .
Staphylococcus species are commonly found on the skin , with S. epidermidis and S. hominis being prevalent in the normal microbiota .
S. aureus is also commonly found in the nasal passages and on healthy skin , but pathogenic strains are often the cause of a broad range of infections of the skin and other body systems .
S. aureus is quite contagious .
It is spread easily through skin-to-skin contact , and because many people are chronic nasal carriers ( asymptomatic individuals who carry S. aureus in their nares ) , the bacteria can easily be transferred from the nose to the hands and then to fomites or other individuals .
Because it is so contagious , S. aureus is prevalent in most community settings .
This prevalence is particularly problematic in hospitals , where antibioticresistant strains of the bacteria may be present , and where immunocompromised patients may be more susceptible to infection .
Resistant strains include methicillin-resistant S. aureus ( MRSA ) , which can be acquired through healthcare settings ( hospital-acquired MRSA , or HA-MRSA ) or in the community ( community-acquired MRSA , or CAMRSA ) .
Hospital patients often arrive at health-care facilities already colonized with antibiotic-resistant strains of S. aureus that can be transferred to health-care providers and other patients .
Some hospitals have attempted to detect these individuals in order to institute prophylactic measures , but they have had mixed success ( see ) .
infection develops , choice of medication is important .
As discussed above , many When a staphylococcal staphylococci ( such as MRSA ) are resistant to some or many antibiotics .
Thus , antibiotic sensitivity is measured to identify the most suitable antibiotic .
However , even before receiving the results of sensitivity analysis , suspected S. aureus infections are often initially treated with drugs known to be effective against MRSA , such as trimethoprimsulfamethoxazole ( TMP/SMZ ) , clindamycin , a tetracycline ( doxycycline or minocycline ) , or linezolid .
The pathogenicity of staphylococcal infections is often enhanced by characteristic chemicals secreted by some strains .
Staphylococcal virulence factors include hemolysins called staphylolysins , which are cytotoxic for many types of cells , including skin cells and white blood cells .
Virulent strains of S. aureus are also coagulase-positive , meaning they produce coagulase , a plasma-clotting protein that is involved in abscess formation .
They may also produce leukocidins , which kill white blood cells and can contribute to the production of pus and Protein A , which inhibits phagocytosis by binding to the constant region of antibodies .
Some virulent strains of S. aureus also produce other toxins , such as toxic shock syndrome toxin-1 ( see ) .
To confirm the causative agent of a suspected staphylococcal skin infection , samples from the wound are cultured .
Under the microscope , gram-positive Staphylococcus species have cellular arrangements that form grapelike clusters ; when grown on blood agar , colonies have a unique pigmentation ranging from opaque white to cream .
A catalase test is used to distinguish Staphylococcus from Streptococcus , which is also a genus of gram-positive cocci and a common cause of skin infections .
Staphylococcus species are catalase-positive while Streptococcus species are catalase-negative .
Other tests are performed on samples from the wound in order to distinguish coagulase-positive species of Staphylococcus ( CoPS ) such as S. aureus from common coagulase-negative species ( CoNS ) such as S. epidermidis .
Although CoNS are less likely than CoPS to cause human disease , they can cause infections when they enter the body , as can sometimes occur via catheters , indwelling medical devices , and wounds .
Passive agglutination testing can be used to distinguish CoPS from CoNS .
If the sample is coagulase-positive , the sample is generally presumed to contain S. aureus .
Additional genetic testing would be necessary to identify the particular strain of S. aureus .
Another way to distinguish CoPS from CoNS is by culturing the sample on mannitol salt agar ( MSA ) .
Staphylococcus species readily grow on this medium because they are tolerant of the high concentration of sodium chloride ( 7.5 % NaCl ) .
However , CoPS such as S. aureus ferment mannitol ( which will be evident on a MSA plate ) , whereas CoNS such as S. epidermidis do not ferment mannitol but can be distinguished by the fermentation of other sugars such as lactose , malonate , and raffinose .
S. aureus is often associated with pyoderma , skin infections that are purulent .
Pus formation occurs because many strains of S. aureus produce leukocidins , which kill white blood cells .
These purulent skin infections may initially manifest as folliculitis , but can lead to furuncles or deeper abscesses called carbuncles .
Folliculitis generally presents as bumps and pimples that may be itchy , red , and/or pus-filled .
In some cases , folliculitis is self-limiting , but if it continues for more than a few days , worsens , or returns repeatedly , it may require medical treatment .
Sweat , skin injuries , ingrown hairs , tight clothing , irritation from shaving , and skin conditions can all contribute to folliculitis .
Avoidance of tight clothing and skin irritation can help to prevent infection , but topical antibiotics ( and sometimes other treatments ) may also help .
Folliculitis can be identified by skin inspection ; treatment is generally started without first culturing and identifying the causative agent .
In contrast , furuncles ( boils ) are deeper infections .
They are most common in those individuals ( especially young adults and teenagers ) who play contact sports , share athletic equipment , have poor nutrition , live in close quarters , or have weakened immune systems .
Good hygiene and skin care can often help to prevent furuncles from becoming more infective , and they generally resolve on their own .
However , if furuncles spread , increase in number or size , or lead to systemic symptoms such as fever and chills , then medical care is needed .
They may sometimes need to be drained ( at which time the pathogens can be cultured ) and treated with antibiotics .
When multiple boils develop into a deeper lesion , it is called a carbuncle .
Because carbuncles are deeper , they are more commonly associated with systemic symptoms and a general feeling of illness .
Larger , recurrent , or worsening carbuncles require medical treatment , as do those associated with signs of illness such as fever .
Carbuncles generally need to be drained and treated with antibiotics .
While carbuncles are relatively easy to identify visually , culturing and laboratory analysis of the wound may be recommended for some infections because antibiotic resistance is relatively common .
Proper hygiene is important to prevent these types of skin infections or to prevent the progression of existing infections .
Staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome ( SSSS ) is another superficial infection caused by S. aureus that is most commonly seen in young children , especially infants .
Bacterial exotoxins first produce erythema ( redness of the skin ) and then severe peeling of the skin , as might occur after scalding .
SSSS is diagnosed by examining characteristics of the skin ( which may rub off easily ) , using blood tests to check for elevated white blood cell counts , culturing , and other methods .
Intravenous antibiotics and fluid therapy are used as treatment .
The skin infection impetigo causes the formation of vesicles , pustules , and possibly bullae , often around the nose and mouth .
Bullae are large , fluid-filled blisters that measure at least 5 mm in diameter .
Impetigo can be diagnosed as either nonbullous or bullous .
In nonbullous impetigo , vesicles and pustules rupture and become encrusted sores .
Typically the crust is yellowish , often with exudate draining from the base of the lesion .
In bullous impetigo , the bullae fill and rupture , resulting in larger , draining , encrusted lesions .
Especially common in children , impetigo is particularly concerning because it is highly contagious .
Impetigo can be caused by S. aureus alone , by Streptococcus pyogenes alone , or by coinfection of S. aureus and S. pyogenes .
Impetigo is often diagnosed through observation of its characteristic appearance , although culture and susceptibility testing may also be used .
Topical or oral antibiotic treatment is typically effective in treating most cases of impetigo .
However , cases caused by S. pyogenes can lead to serious sequelae ( pathological conditions resulting from infection , disease , injury , therapy , or other trauma ) such as acute glomerulonephritis ( AGN ) , which is severe inflammation in the kidneys .
Though not as virulent as S. aureus , the staphylococcus S. epidermidis can cause serious opportunistic infections .
Such infections usually occur only in hospital settings .
S. epidermidis is usually a harmless resident of the normal skin microbiota .
However , health-care workers can inadvertently transfer S. epidermidis to medical devices that are inserted into the body , such as catheters , prostheses , and indwelling medical devices .
Once it has bypassed the skin barrier , S. epidermidis can cause infections inside the body that can be difficult to treat .
Like S. aureus , S. epidermidis is resistant to many antibiotics , and localized infections can become systemic if not treated quickly .
To reduce the risk of nosocomial ( hospital-acquired ) S. epidermidis , health-care workers must follow strict procedures for handling and sterilizing medical devices before and during surgical procedures .
Streptococcus are gram-positive cocci with a microscopic morphology that resembles chains of bacteria .
Colonies are typically small ( 1–2 mm in diameter ) , translucent , entire edge , with a slightly raised elevation that can be either nonhemolytic , alpha-hemolytic , or beta-hemolytic when grown on blood agar .
Additionally , they are facultative anaerobes that are catalase-negative .
The genus Streptococcus includes important pathogens that are categorized in serological Lancefield groups based on the distinguishing characteristics of their surface carbohydrates .
The most clinically important streptococcal species in humans is S. pyogenes , also known as group A streptococcus ( GAS ) .
S. pyogenes produces a variety of extracellular enzymes , including streptolysins O and S , hyaluronidase , and streptokinase .
These enzymes can aid in transmission and contribute to the inflammatory response .
S. pyogenes also produces a capsule and M protein , a streptococcal cell wall protein .
These virulence factors help the bacteria to avoid phagocytosis while provoking a substantial immune response that contributes to symptoms associated with streptococcal infections .
S. pyogenes causes a wide variety of diseases not only in the skin , but in other organ systems as well .
Examples of diseases elsewhere in the body include pharyngitis and scarlet fever , which will be covered in later chapters .
Common streptococcal conditions of the skin include cellulitis , erysipelas , and erythema nodosum .
An infection that develops in the dermis or hypodermis can cause cellulitis , which presents as a reddened area of the skin that is warm to the touch and painful .
The causative agent is often S. pyogenes , which may breach the epidermis through a cut or abrasion , although cellulitis may also be caused by staphylococci .
S. pyogenes can also cause erysipelas , a condition that presents as a large , intensely inflamed patch of skin involving the dermis ( often on the legs or face ) .
These infections can be suppurative , which results in a bullous form of erysipelas .
Streptococcal and other pathogens may also cause a condition called erythema nodosum , characterized by inflammation in the subcutaneous fat cells of the hypodermis .
It sometimes results from a streptococcal infection , though other pathogens can also cause the condition .
It is not suppurative , but leads to red nodules on the skin , most frequently on the shins .
In general , streptococcal infections are best treated through identification of the specific pathogen followed by treatment based upon that particular pathogen ’ s susceptibility to different antibiotics .
Many immunological tests , including agglutination reactions and ELISAs , can be used to detect streptococci .
Penicillin is commonly prescribed for treatment of cellulitis and erysipelas because resistance is not widespread in streptococci at this time .
In most patients , erythema nodosum is self-limiting and is not treated with antimicrobial drugs .
Recommended treatments may include nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs ( NSAIDs ) , cool wet compresses , elevation , and bed rest .
Streptococcal infections that start in the skin can sometimes spread elsewhere , resulting in a rare but potentially life-threatening condition called necrotizing fasciitis , sometimes referred to as flesh-eating bacterial syndrome .
S. pyogenes is one of several species that can cause this rare but potentially-fatal condition ; others include Klebsiella , Clostridium , Escherichia coli , S. aureus , and Aeromonas hydrophila .
Necrotizing fasciitis occurs when the fascia , a thin layer of connective tissue between the skin and muscle , becomes infected .
Severe invasive necrotizing fasciitis due to Streptococcus pyogenes occurs when virulence factors that are responsible for adhesion and invasion overcome host defenses .
S. pyogenes invasins allow bacterial cells to adhere to tissues and establish infection .
Bacterial proteases unique to S. pyogenes aggressively infiltrate and destroy host tissues , inactivate complement , and prevent neutrophil migration to the site of infection .
The infection and resulting tissue death can spread very rapidly , as large areas of skin become detached and die .
Treatment generally requires debridement ( surgical removal of dead or infected tissue ) or amputation of infected limbs to stop the spread of the infection ; surgical treatment is supplemented with intravenous antibiotics and other therapies .
Necrotizing fasciitis does not always originate from a skin infection ; in some cases there is no known portal of entry .
Some studies have suggested that experiencing a blunt force trauma can increase the risk of developing streptococcal necrotizing fasciitis .
Another important skin pathogen is Pseudomonas aeruginosa , a gram-negative , oxidase-positive , aerobic bacillus that is commonly found in water and soil as well as on human skin .
P. aeruginosa is a common cause of opportunistic infections of wounds and burns .
It can also cause hot tub rash , a condition characterized by folliculitis that frequently afflicts users of pools and hot tubs ( recall the Clinical Focus case in ) .
P. aeruginosa is also the cause of otitis externa ( swimmer ’ s ear ) , an infection of the ear canal that causes itching , redness , and discomfort , and can progress to fever , pain , and swelling .
Wounds infected with P. aeruginosa have a distinctive odor resembling grape soda or fresh corn tortillas .
This odor is caused by the 2-aminoacetophenone that is used by P. aeruginosa in quorum sensing and contributes to its pathogenicity .
Wounds infected with certain strains of P. aeruginosa also produce a blue-green pus due to the pigments pyocyanin and pyoverdin , which also contribute to its virulence .
Pyocyanin and pyoverdin are siderophores that help P. aeruginosa survive in low-iron environments by enhancing iron uptake .
P. aeruginosa also produces several other virulence factors , including phospholipase C ( a hemolysin capable of breaking down red blood cells ) , exoenzyme S ( involved in adherence to epithelial cells ) , and exotoxin A ( capable of causing tissue necrosis ) .
Other virulence factors include a slime that allows the bacterium to avoid being phagocytized , fimbriae for adherence , and proteases that cause tissue damage .
P. aeruginosa can be detected through the use of cetrimide agar , which is selective for Pseudomonas species .
tend to be resistant to most antibiotics .
They often produce β-lactamases , may have mutations affecting porins ( small cell wall channels ) that affect antibiotic uptake , and may pump some antibiotics out of the cell , contributing to this resistance .
Polymyxin B and gentamicin are effective , as are some fluoroquinolones .
Otitis externa is typically treated with ear drops containing acetic acid , antibacterials , and/or steroids to reduce inflammation ; ear drops may also include antifungals because fungi can sometimes cause or contribute to otitis externa .
Wound infections caused by Pseudomonas spp .
may be treated with topical antibiofilm agents that disrupt the formation of biofilms .
One of the most ubiquitous skin conditions is acne .
Acne afflicts nearly 80 % of teenagers and young adults , but it can be found in individuals of all ages .
Higher incidence among adolescents is due to hormonal changes that can result in overproduction of sebum .
Acne occurs when hair follicles become clogged by shed skin cells and sebum , causing non-inflammatory lesions called comedones .
Comedones ( singular “ comedo ” ) can take the form of whitehead and blackhead pimples .
Whiteheads are covered by skin , whereas blackhead pimples are not ; the black color occurs when lipids in the clogged follicle become exposed to the air and oxidize .
Often comedones lead to infection by Propionibacterium acnes , a gram-positive , non-spore-forming , aerotolerant anaerobic bacillus found on skin that consumes components of sebum .
P. acnes secretes enzymes that damage the hair follicle , causing inflammatory lesions that may include papules , pustules , nodules , or pseudocysts , depending on their size and severity .
Treatment of acne depends on the severity of the case .
There are multiple ways to grade acne severity , but three levels are usually considered based on the number of comedones , the number of inflammatory lesions , and the types of lesions .
Mild acne is treated with topical agents that may include salicylic acid ( which helps to remove old skin cells ) or retinoids ( which have multiple mechanisms , including the reduction of inflammation ) .
Moderate acne may be treated with antibiotics ( erythromycin , clindamycin ) , acne creams ( e.g. , benzoyl peroxide ) , and hormones .
Severe acne may require treatment using strong medications such as isotretinoin ( a retinoid that reduces oil buildup , among other effects , but that also has serious side effects such as photosensitivity ) .
Other treatments , such as phototherapy and laser therapy to kill bacteria and possibly reduce oil production , are also sometimes used .
The zoonotic disease anthrax is caused by Bacillus anthracis , a gram-positive , endospore-forming , facultative anaerobe .
Anthrax mainly affects animals such as sheep , goats , cattle , and deer , but can be found in humans as well .
Sometimes called wool sorter ’ s disease , it is often transmitted to humans through contact with infected animals or animal products , such as wool or hides .
However , exposure to B. anthracis can occur by other means , as the endospores are widespread in soils and can survive for long periods of time , sometimes for hundreds of years .
The vast majority of anthrax cases ( 95–99 % ) occur when anthrax endospores enter the body through abrasions of the skin .
This form of the disease is called cutaneous anthrax .
It is characterized by the formation of a nodule on the skin ; the cells within the nodule die , forming a black eschar , a mass of dead skin tissue .
The localized infection can eventually lead to bacteremia and septicemia .
If untreated , cutaneous anthrax can cause death in 20 % of patients .
Once in the skin tissues , B. anthracis endospores germinate and produce a capsule , which prevents the bacteria from being phagocytized , and two binary exotoxins that cause edema and tissue damage .
The first of the two exotoxins consists of a combination of protective antigen ( PA ) and an enzymatic lethal factor ( LF ) , forming lethal toxin ( LeTX ) .
The second consists of protective antigen ( PA ) and an edema factor ( EF ) , forming edema toxin ( EdTX ) .
Less commonly , anthrax infections can be initiated through other portals of entry such as the digestive tract ( gastrointestinal anthrax ) or respiratory tract ( pulmonary anthrax or inhalation anthrax ) .
Typically , cases of noncutaneous anthrax are more difficult to treat than the cutaneous form .
The mortality rate for gastrointestinal anthrax can be up to 40 % , even with treatment .
Inhalation anthrax , which occurs when anthrax spores are inhaled , initially causes influenza-like symptoms , but mortality rates are approximately 45 % in treated individuals and 85 % in those not treated .
A relatively new form of the disease , injection anthrax , has been reported in Europe in intravenous drug users ; it occurs when drugs are contaminated with B. anthracis .
Patients with injection anthrax show signs and symptoms of severe soft tissue infection that differ clinically from cutaneous anthrax .
This often delays diagnosis and treatment , and leads to a high mortality rate .
B. anthracis colonies on blood agar have a rough texture and serrated edges that eventually form an undulating band .
Broad spectrum antibiotics such as penicillin , erythromycin , and tetracycline are often effective treatments .
Unfortunately , B. anthracis has been used as a biological weapon and remains on the United Nations ’ list of potential agents of bioterrorism .
Over a period of several months in 2001 , a number of letters were mailed to members of the news media and the United States Congress .
As a result , 11 individuals developed cutaneous anthrax and another 11 developed inhalation anthrax .
Those infected included recipients of the letters , postal workers , and two other individuals .
Five of those infected with pulmonary anthrax died .
The anthrax spores had been carefully prepared to aerosolize , showing that the perpetrator had a high level of expertise in microbiology .
A vaccine is available to protect individuals from anthrax .
However , unlike most routine vaccines , the current anthrax vaccine is unique in both its formulation and the protocols dictating who receives it .
The vaccine is administered through five intramuscular injections over a period of 18 months , followed by annual boosters .
The vaccine protects against cutaneous and inhalation anthrax using cell-free filtrates of microaerophilic cultures of an avirulent , nonencapsulated strain of B. anthracis .
The FDA has not approved the vaccine for routine use after exposure to anthrax , but if there were ever an anthrax emergency in the United States , patients could be given anthrax vaccine after exposure to help prevent disease .
Like the skin , the surface of the eye comes in contact with the outside world and is somewhat prone to infection by bacteria in the environment .
Bacterial conjunctivitis ( pinkeye ) is a condition characterized by inflammation of the conjunctiva , often accompanied by a discharge of sticky fluid ( described as acute purulent conjunctivitis ) .
Conjunctivitis can affect one eye or both , and it usually does not affect vision permanently .
Bacterial conjunctivitis is most commonly caused by Haemophilus influenzae , but can also be caused by other species such as Moraxella catarrhalis , S. pneumoniae , and S. aureus .
The causative agent may be identified using bacterial cultures , Gram stain , and diagnostic biochemical , antigenic , or nucleic acid profile tests of the isolated pathogen .
Bacterial conjunctivitis is very contagious , being transmitted via secretions from infected individuals , but it is also self-limiting .
Bacterial conjunctivitis usually resolves in a few days , but topical antibiotics are sometimes prescribed .
Because this condition is so contagious , medical attention is recommended whenever it is suspected .
Individuals who use contact lenses should discontinue their use when conjunctivitis is suspected .
Certain symptoms , such as blurred vision , eye pain , and light sensitivity , can be associated with serious conditions and require medical attention .
Newborns whose mothers have certain sexually transmitted infections are at risk of contracting ophthalmia neonatorum or inclusion conjunctivitis , which are two forms of neonatal conjunctivitis contracted through exposure to pathogens during passage through the birth canal .
Gonococcal ophthalmia neonatorum is caused by Neisseria gonorrhoeae , the bacterium that causes the STD gonorrhea .
Inclusion ( chlamydial ) conjunctivitis is caused by Chlamydia trachomatis , the anaerobic , obligate , intracellular parasite that causes the STD chlamydia .
To prevent gonoccocal ophthalmia neonatorum , silver nitrate ointments were once routinely applied to all infants ’ eyes shortly after birth ; however , it is now more common to apply antibacterial creams or drops , such as erythromycin .
Most hospitals are required by law to provide this preventative treatment to all infants , because conjunctivitis caused by N. gonorrhoeae , C. trachomatis , or other bacteria acquired during a vaginal delivery can have serious complications .
If untreated , the infection can spread to the cornea , resulting in ulceration or perforation that can cause vision loss or even permanent blindness .
As such , neonatal conjunctivitis is treated aggressively with oral or intravenous antibiotics to stop the spread of the infection .
Causative agents of inclusion conjunctivitis may be identified using bacterial cultures , Gram stain , and diagnostic biochemical , antigenic , or nucleic acid profile tests .
Trachoma , or granular conjunctivitis , is a common cause of preventable blindness that is rare in the United States but widespread in developing countries , especially in Africa and Asia .
The condition is caused by the same species that causes neonatal inclusion conjunctivitis in infants , Chlamydia trachomatis .
C. trachomatis can be transmitted easily through fomites such as contaminated towels , bed linens , and clothing and also by direct contact with infected individuals .
C. trachomatis can also be spread by flies that transfer infected mucous containing C. trachomatis from one human to another .
Infection by C. trachomatis causes chronic conjunctivitis , which leads to the formation of necrotic follicles and scarring in the upper eyelid .
The scars turn the eyelashes inward ( a condition known as trichiasis ) and mechanical abrasion of the cornea leads to blindness .
Antibiotics such as azithromycin are effective in treating trachoma , and outcomes are good when the disease is treated promptly .
In areas where this disease is common , large public health efforts are focused on reducing transmission by teaching people how to avoid the risks of the infection .
Keratitis can have many causes , but bacterial keratitis is most frequently caused by Staphylococcus epidermidis and/ or Pseudomonas aeruginosa .
Contact lens users are particularly at risk for such an infection because S. epidermidis and P. aeruginosa both adhere well to the surface of the lenses .
Risk of infection can be greatly reduced by proper care of contact lenses and avoiding wearing lenses overnight .
Because the infection can quickly lead to blindness , prompt and aggressive treatment with antibiotics is important .
The causative agent may be identified using bacterial cultures , Gram stain , and diagnostic biochemical , antigenic , or nucleic acid profile tests of the isolated pathogen .
When treating bacterial infections of the skin and eyes , it is important to consider that few such infections can be attributed to a single pathogen .
While biofilms may develop in other parts of the body , they are especially relevant to skin infections ( such as those caused by S. aureus or P. aeruginosa ) because of their prevalence in chronic skin wounds .
Biofilms develop when bacteria ( and sometimes fungi ) attach to a surface and produce extracellular polymeric substances ( EPS ) in which cells of multiple organisms may be embedded .
When a biofilm develops on a wound , it may interfere with the natural healing process as well as diagnosis and treatment .
Because biofilms vary in composition and are difficult to replicate in the lab , they are still not thoroughly understood .
The extracellular matrix of a biofilm consists of polymers such as polysaccharides , extracellular DNA , proteins , and lipids , but the exact makeup varies .
The organisms living within the extracellular matrix may include familiar pathogens as well as other bacteria that do not grow well in cultures ( such as numerous obligate anaerobes ) .
This presents challenges when culturing samples from infections that involve a biofilm .
Because only some species grow in vitro , the culture may contain only a subset of the bacterial species involved in the infection .
Biofilms confer many advantages to the resident bacteria .
For example , biofilms can facilitate attachment to surfaces on or in the host organism ( such as wounds ) , inhibit phagocytosis , prevent the invasion of neutrophils , and sequester host antibodies .
Additionally , biofilms can provide a level of antibiotic resistance not found in the isolated cells and colonies that are typical of laboratory cultures .
The extracellular matrix provides a physical barrier to antibiotics , shielding the target cells from exposure .
Moreover , cells within a biofilm may differentiate to create subpopulations of dormant cells called persister cells .
Nutrient limitations deep within a biofilm add another level of resistance , as stress responses can slow metabolism and increase drug resistance .
Identify the most common viruses associated with infections of the skin and eyes Compare the major characteristics of specific viral diseases affecting the skin and eyes Until recently , it was thought that the normal microbiota of the body consisted primarily of bacteria and some fungi .
However , in addition to bacteria , the skin is colonized by viruses , and recent studies suggest that Papillomaviridae , Polyomaviridae and Circoviridae also contribute to the normal skin microbiota .
However , some viruses associated with skin are pathogenic , and these viruses can cause diseases with a wide variety of presentations .
Numerous types of viral infections cause rashes or lesions on the skin ; however , in many cases these skin conditions result from infections that originate in other body systems .
In this chapter , we will limit the discussion to viral skin infections that use the skin as a portal of entry .
Later chapters will discuss viral infections such as chickenpox , measles , and rubella—diseases that cause skin rashes but invade the body through portals of entry other than the skin .
Papillomas ( warts ) are the expression of common skin infections by human papillomavirus ( HPV ) and are transmitted by direct contact .
There are many types of HPV , and they lead to a variety of different presentations , such as common warts , plantar warts , flat warts , and filiform warts .
HPV can also cause sexually-transmitted genital warts , which will be discussed in .
Vaccination is available for some strains of HPV .
Common warts tend to develop on fingers , the backs of hands , and around nails in areas with broken skin .
In contrast , plantar warts ( also called foot warts ) develop on the sole of the foot and can grow inwards , causing pain and pressure during walking .
Flat warts can develop anywhere on the body , are often numerous , and are relatively smooth and small compared with other wart types .
Filiform warts are long , threadlike warts that grow quickly .
In some cases , the immune system may be strong enough to prevent warts from forming or to eradicate established warts .
However , treatment of established warts is typically required .
There are many available treatments for warts , and their effectiveness varies .
Common warts can be frozen off with liquid nitrogen .
Topical applications of salicylic acid may also be effective .
Other options are electrosurgery ( burning ) , curettage ( cutting ) , excision , painting with cantharidin ( which causes the wart to die so it can more easily be removed ) , laser treatments , treatment with bleomycin , chemical peels , and immunotherapy .
Another common skin virus is herpes simplex virus ( HSV ) .
HSV has historically been divided into two types , HSV-1 and HSV-2 .
HSV-1 is typically transmitted by direct oral contact between individuals , and is usually associated with oral herpes .
HSV-2 is usually transmitted sexually and is typically associated with genital herpes .
However , both HSV-1 and HSV-2 are capable of infecting any mucous membrane , and the incidence of genital HSV-1 and oral HSV-2 infections has been increasing in recent years .
In this chapter , we will limit our discussion to infections caused by HSV-1 ; HSV-2 and genital herpes will be discussed in .
Infection by HSV-1 commonly manifests as cold sores or fever blisters , usually on or around the lips .
HSV-1 is highly contagious , with some studies suggesting that up to 65 % of the US population is infected ; however , many infected individuals are asymptomatic .
Moreover , the virus can be latent for long periods , residing in the trigeminal nerve ganglia between recurring bouts of symptoms .
Recurrence can be triggered by stress or environmental conditions ( systemic or affecting the skin ) .
When lesions are present , they may blister , break open , and crust .
The virus can be spread through direct contact , even when a patient is asymptomatic .
While the lips , mouth , and face are the most common sites for HSV-1 infections , lesions can spread to other areas of the body .
Wrestlers and other athletes involved in contact sports may develop lesions on the neck , shoulders , and trunk .
This condition is often called herpes gladiatorum .
Herpes lesions that develop on the fingers are often called herpetic whitlow .
HSV-1 infections are commonly diagnosed from their appearance , although laboratory testing can confirm the diagnosis .
There is no cure , but antiviral medications such as acyclovir , penciclovir , famciclovir , and valacyclovir are used to reduce symptoms and risk of transmission .
Topical medications , such as creams with n -docosanol and penciclovir , can also be used to reduce symptoms such as itching , burning , and tingling .
The viral diseases roseola and fifth disease are somewhat similar in terms of their presentation , but they are caused by different viruses .
Roseola , sometimes called roseola infantum or exanthem subitum ( “ sudden rash ” ) , is a mild viral infection usually caused by human herpesvirus-6 ( HHV-6 ) and occasionally by HHV-7 .
It is spread via direct contact with the saliva or respiratory secretions of an infected individual , often through droplet aerosols .
Roseola is very common in children , with symptoms including a runny nose , a sore throat , and a cough , along with ( or followed by ) a high fever ( 39.4 ºC ) .
About three to five days after the fever subsides , a rash may begin to appear on the chest and abdomen .
The rash , which does not cause discomfort , initially forms characteristic macules that are flat or papules that are firm and slightly raised ; some macules or papules may be surrounded by a white ring .
The rash may eventually spread to the neck and arms , and sometimes continues to spread to the face and legs .
The diagnosis is generally made based upon observation of the symptoms .
However , it is possible to perform serological tests to confirm the diagnosis .
While treatment may be recommended to control the fever , the disease usually resolves without treatment within a week after the fever develops .
For individuals at particular risk , such as those who are immunocompromised , the antiviral medication ganciclovir may be used .
Fifth disease ( also known as erythema infectiosum ) is another common , highly contagious illness that causes a distinct rash that is critical to diagnosis .
Fifth disease is caused by parvovirus B19 , and is transmitted by contact with respiratory secretions from an infected individual .
Infection is more common in children than adults .
While approximately 20 % of individuals will be asymptomatic during infection , others will exhibit cold-like symptoms ( headache , fever , and upset stomach ) during the early stages when the illness is most infectious .
Several days later , a distinct red facial rash appears , often called “ slapped cheek ” rash .
Within a few days , a second rash may appear on the arms , legs , chest , back , or buttocks .
The rash may come and go for several weeks , but usually disappears within seven to twenty-one days , gradually becoming lacy in appearance as it recedes .
In children , the disease usually resolves on its own without medical treatment beyond symptom relief as needed .
Adults may experience different and possibly more serious symptoms .
Many adults with fifth disease do not develop any rash , but may experience joint pain and swelling that lasts several weeks or months .
Immunocompromised individuals can develop severe anemia and may need blood transfusions or immune globulin injections .
While the rash is the most important component of diagnosis ( especially in children ) , the symptoms of fifth disease are not always consistent .
Serological testing can be conducted for confirmation .
Like bacterial conjunctivitis viral infections of the eye can cause inflammation of the conjunctiva and discharge from the eye .
However , viral conjunctivitis tends to produce a discharge that is more watery than the thick discharge associated with bacterial conjunctivitis .
The infection is contagious and can easily spread from one eye to the other or to other individuals through contact with eye discharge .
Viral conjunctivitis is commonly associated with colds caused by adenoviruses ; however , other viruses can also cause conjunctivitis .
If the causative agent is uncertain , eye discharge can be tested to aid in diagnosis .
Antibiotic treatment of viral conjunctivitis is ineffective , and symptoms usually resolve without treatment within a week or two .
Herpes infections caused by HSV-1 can sometimes spread to the eye from other areas of the body , which may result in keratoconjunctivitis .
This condition , generally called herpes keratitis or herpetic keratitis , affects the conjunctiva and cornea , causing irritation , excess tears , and sensitivity to light .
Deep lesions in the cornea may eventually form , leading to blindness .
Because keratitis can have numerous causes , laboratory testing is necessary to confirm the diagnosis when HSV-1 is suspected ; once confirmed , antiviral medications may be prescribed .
Identify the most common fungal pathogens associated with cutaneous and subcutaneous mycoses Compare the major characteristics of specific fungal diseases affecting the skin Many fungal infections of the skin involve fungi that are found in the normal skin microbiota .
Some of these fungi can cause infection when they gain entry through a wound ; others mainly cause opportunistic infections in immunocompromised patients .
Other fungal pathogens primarily cause infection in unusually moist environments that promote fungal growth ; for example , sweaty shoes , communal showers , and locker rooms provide excellent breeding grounds that promote the growth and transmission of fungal pathogens .
Fungal infections , also called mycoses , can be divided into classes based on their invasiveness .
Mycoses that cause superficial infections of the epidermis , hair , and nails , are called cutaneous mycoses .
Mycoses that penetrate the epidermis and the dermis to infect deeper tissues are called subcutaneous mycoses .
Mycoses that spread throughout the body are called systemic mycoses .
A group of cutaneous mycoses called tineas are caused by dermatophytes , fungal molds that require keratin , a protein found in skin , hair , and nails , for growth .
There are three genera of dermatophytes , all of which can cause cutaneous mycoses : Trichophyton , Epidermophyton , and Microsporum .
Tineas on most areas of the body are generally called ringworm , but tineas in specific locations may have distinctive names and symptoms ( see and ) .
Keep in mind that these names—even though they are Latinized—refer to locations on the body , not causative organisms .
Tineas can be caused by different dermatophytes in most areas of the body .
Dermatophytes are commonly found in the environment and in soils and are frequently transferred to the skin via contact with other humans and animals .
Fungal spores can also spread on hair .
Many dermatophytes grow well in moist , dark environments .
For example , tinea pedis ( athlete ’ s foot ) commonly spreads in public showers , and the causative fungi grow well in the dark , moist confines of sweaty shoes and socks .
Likewise , tinea cruris ( jock itch ) often spreads in communal living environments and thrives in warm , moist undergarments .
Tineas on the body ( tinea corporis ) often produce lesions that grow radially and heal towards the center .
This causes the formation of a red ring , leading to the misleading name of ringworm recall the Clinical Focus case in .
Several approaches may be used to diagnose tineas .
A Wood ’ s lamp ( also called a black lamp ) with a wavelength of 365 nm is often used .
When directed on a tinea , the ultraviolet light emitted from the Wood ’ s lamp causes the fungal elements ( spores and hyphae ) to fluoresce .
Direct microscopic evaluation of specimens from skin scrapings , hair , or nails can also be used to detect fungi .
Generally , these specimens are prepared in a wet mount using a potassium hydroxide solution ( 10 % –20 % aqueous KOH ) , which dissolves the keratin in hair , nails , and skin cells to allow for visualization of the hyphae and fungal spores .
The specimens may be grown on Sabouraud dextrose CC ( chloramphenicol/cyclohexamide ) , a selective agar that supports dermatophyte growth while inhibiting the growth of bacteria and saprophytic fungi .
Macroscopic colony morphology is often used to initially identify the genus of the dermatophyte ; identification can be further confirmed by visualizing the microscopic morphology using either a slide culture or a sticky tape prep stained with lactophenol cotton blue .
Various antifungal treatments can be effective against tineas .
Allylamine ointments that include terbinafine are commonly used ; miconazole and clotrimazole are also available for topical treatment , and griseofulvin is used orally .
Another cause of cutaneous mycoses is Aspergillus , a genus consisting of molds of many different species , some of which cause a condition called aspergillosis .
Primary cutaneous aspergillosis , in which the infection begins in the skin , is rare but does occur .
More common is secondary cutaneous aspergillosis , in which the infection begins in the respiratory system and disseminates systemically .
Both primary and secondary cutaneous aspergillosis result in distinctive eschars that form at the site or sites of infection .
Pulmonary aspergillosis will be discussed more thoroughly in ) .
Primary cutaneous aspergillosis usually occurs at the site of an injury and is most often caused by Aspergillus fumigatus or Aspergillus flavus .
It is usually reported in patients who have had an injury while working in an agricultural or outdoor environment .
However , opportunistic infections can also occur in health-care settings , often at the site of intravenous catheters , venipuncture wounds , or in association with burns , surgical wounds , or occlusive dressing .
After candidiasis , aspergillosis is the second most common hospital-acquired fungal infection and often occurs in immunocompromised patients , who are more vulnerable to opportunistic infections .
Cutaneous aspergillosis is diagnosed using patient history , culturing , histopathology using a skin biopsy .
Treatment involves the use of antifungal medications such as voriconazole ( preferred for invasive aspergillosis ) , itraconazole , and amphotericin B if itraconazole is not effective .
For immunosuppressed individuals or burn patients , medication may be used and surgical or immunotherapy treatments may be needed .
Candida albicans and other yeasts in the genus Candida can cause skin infections referred to as cutaneous candidiasis .
are sometimes responsible for intertrigo , a general term for a rash that occurs in a skin fold , or other localized rashes on the skin .
Candida can also infect the nails , causing them to become yellow and harden .
Candidiasis of the skin and nails is diagnosed through clinical observation and through culture , Gram stain , and KOH wet mounts .
Susceptibility testing for anti-fungal agents can also be done .
Cutaneous candidiasis can be treated with topical or systemic azole antifungal medications .
Because candidiasis can become invasive , patients suffering from HIV/AIDS , cancer , or other conditions that compromise the immune system may benefit from preventive treatment .
Azoles , such as clotrimazole , econazole , fluconazole , ketoconazole , and miconazole ; nystatin ; terbinafine ; and naftifine may be used for treatment .
Long-term treatment with medications such as itraconazole or ketoconazole may be used for chronic infections .
Repeat infections often occur , but this risk can be reduced by carefully following treatment recommendations , avoiding excessive moisture , maintaining good health , practicing good hygiene , and having appropriate clothing ( including footwear ) .
Candida also causes infections in other parts of the body besides the skin .
These include vaginal yeast infections ( see ) and oral thrush ( see ) .
Whereas cutaneous mycoses are superficial , subcutaneous mycoses can spread from the skin to deeper tissues .
In temperate regions , the most common subcutaneous mycosis is a condition called sporotrichosis , caused by the fungus Sporothrix schenkii and commonly known as rose gardener ’ s disease or rose thorn disease ( recall ) .
Sporotrichosis is often contracted after working with soil , plants , or timber , as the fungus can gain entry through a small wound such as a thorn-prick or splinter .
Sporotrichosis can generally be avoided by wearing gloves and protective clothing while gardening and promptly cleaning and disinfecting any wounds sustained during outdoor activities .
Sporothrix infections initially present as small ulcers in the skin , but the fungus can spread to the lymphatic system and sometimes beyond .
When the infection spreads , nodules appear , become necrotic , and may ulcerate .
As more lymph nodes become affected , abscesses and ulceration may develop over a larger area ( often on one arm or hand ) .
In severe cases , the infection may spread more widely throughout the body , although this is relatively uncommon .
Sporothrix infection can be diagnosed based upon histologic examination of the affected tissue .
Its macroscopic morphology can be observed by culturing the mold on potato dextrose agar , and its microscopic morphology can be observed by staining a slide culture with lactophenol cotton blue .
Treatment with itraconazole is generally recommended .
Identify two parasites that commonly cause infections of the skin and eyes Identify the major characteristics of specific parasitic diseases affecting the skin and eyes Many parasitic protozoans and helminths use the skin or eyes as a portal of entry .
Some may physically burrow into the skin or the mucosa of the eye ; others breach the skin barrier by means of an insect bite .
Still others take advantage of a wound to bypass the skin barrier and enter the body , much like other opportunistic pathogens .
Although many parasites enter the body through the skin , in this chapter we will limit our discussion to those for which the skin or eyes are the primary site of infection .
Parasites that enter through the skin but travel to a different site of infection will be covered in other chapters .
In addition , we will limit our discussion to microscopic parasitic infections of the skin and eyes .
Macroscopic parasites such as lice , scabies , mites , and ticks are beyond the scope of this text .
Acanthamoeba is a genus of free-living protozoan amoebae that are common in soils and unchlorinated bodies of fresh water .
( This is one reason why some swimming pools are treated with chlorine . )
The genus contains a few parasitic species , some of which can cause infections of the eyes , skin , and nervous system .
Such infections can sometimes travel and affect other body systems .
Skin infections may manifest as abscesses , ulcers , and nodules .
When acanthamoebae infect the eye , causing inflammation of the cornea , the condition is called Acanthamoeba keratitis .
illustrates the Acanthamoeba life cycle and various modes of infection .
While Acanthamoeba keratitis is initially mild , it can lead to severe corneal damage , vision impairment , or even blindness if left untreated .
Similar to eye infections involving P. aeruginosa , Acanthamoeba poses a much greater risk to wearers of contact lenses because the amoeba can thrive in the space between contact lenses and the cornea .
Prevention through proper contact lens care is important .
Lenses should always be properly disinfected prior to use , and should never be worn while swimming or using a hot tub .
Acanthamoeba can also enter the body through other pathways , including skin wounds and the respiratory tract .
It usually does not cause disease except in immunocompromised individuals ; however , in rare cases , the infection can spread to the nervous system , resulting in a usually fatal condition called granulomatous amoebic encephalitis ( GAE ) ( see ) .
Disseminated infections , lesions , and Acanthamoeba keratitis can be diagnosed by observing symptoms and examining patient samples under the microscope to view the parasite .
Skin biopsies may be used .
Acanthamoeba keratitis is difficult to treat , and prompt treatment is necessary to prevent the condition from progressing .
The condition generally requires three to four weeks of intensive treatment to resolve .
Common treatments include topical antiseptics ( e.g. , polyhexamethylene biguanide , chlorhexidine , or both ) , sometimes with painkillers or corticosteroids ( although the latter are controversial because they suppress the immune system , which can worsen the infection ) .
Azoles are sometimes prescribed as well .
Advanced cases of keratitis may require a corneal transplant to prevent blindness .
The helminth Loa loa , also known as the African eye worm , is a nematode that can cause loiasis , a disease endemic to West and Central Africa .
The disease does not occur outside that region except when carried by travelers .
There is evidence that individual genetic differences affect susceptibility to developing loiasis after infection by the Loa loa worm .
Even in areas in which Loa loa worms are common , the disease is generally found in less than 30 % of the population .
It has been suggested that travelers who spend time in the region may be somewhat more susceptible to developing symptoms than the native population , and the presentation of infection may differ .
The parasite is spread by deerflies ( genus Chrysops ) , which can ingest the larvae from an infected human via a blood meal .
When the deerfly bites other humans , it deposits the larvae into their bloodstreams .
After about five months in the human body , some larvae develop into adult worms , which can grow to several centimeters in length and live for years in the subcutaneous tissue of the host .
The name “ eye worm ” alludes to the visible migration of worms across the conjunctiva of the eye .
Adult worms live in the subcutaneous tissues and can travel at about 1 cm per hour .
They can often be observed when migrating through the eye , and sometimes under the skin ; in fact , this is generally how the disease is diagnosed .
It is also possible to test for antibodies , but the presence of antibodies does not necessarily indicate a current infection ; it only means that the individual was exposed at some time .
Some patients are asymptomatic , but in others the migrating worms can cause fever and areas of allergic inflammation known as Calabar swellings .
Worms migrating through the conjunctiva can cause temporary eye pain and itching , but generally there is no lasting damage to the eye .
Some patients experience a range of other symptoms , such as widespread itching , hives , and joint and muscle pain .
Worms can be surgically removed from the eye or the skin , but this treatment only relieves discomfort ; it does not cure the infection , which involves many worms .
The preferred treatment is diethylcarbamazine , but this medication produces severe side effects in some individuals , such as brain inflammation and possible death in patients with heavy infections .
Albendazole is also sometimes used if diethylcarbamazine is not appropriate or not successful .
If left untreated for many years , loiasis can damage the kidneys , heart , and lungs , though these symptoms are rare .
The respiratory tract is one of the main portals of entry into the human body for microbial pathogens .
On average , a human takes about 20,000 breaths each day .
This roughly corresponds to 10,000 liters , or 10 cubic meters , of air .
Suspended within this volume of air are millions of microbes of terrestrial , animal , and human origin—including many potential pathogens .
A few of these pathogens will cause relatively mild infections like sore throats and colds .
Others , however , are less benign .
According to the World Health Organization , respiratory tract infections such as tuberculosis , influenza , and pneumonia were responsible for more than 4 million deaths worldwide in 2012 .
At one time , it was thought that antimicrobial drugs and preventive vaccines might hold respiratory infections in check in the developed world , but recent developments suggest otherwise .
The rise of multiple-antibiotic resistance in organisms like Mycobacterium tuberculosis has rendered many of our modern drugs ineffective .
In addition , there has been a recent resurgence in diseases like whooping cough and measles , once-common childhood illnesses made rare by effective vaccines .
Despite advances in medicine and public health programs , it is likely that respiratory pathogens will remain formidable adversaries for the foreseeable future .
However , inhalation and exhalation ( particularly when forceful ) can also serve as a vehicle of transmission for pathogens between individuals .
The respiratory system can be conceptually divided into upper and lower regions at the point of the epiglottis , the structure that seals off the lower respiratory system from the pharynx during swallowing .
The upper respiratory system is in direct contact with the external environment .
The nares ( or nostrils ) are the external openings of the nose that lead back into the nasal cavity , a large air-filled space behind the nares .
These anatomical sites constitute the primary opening and first section of the respiratory tract , respectively .
The nasal cavity is lined with hairs that trap large particles , like dust and pollen , and prevent their access to deeper tissues .
The nasal cavity is also lined with a mucous membrane and Bowman ’ s glands that produce mucus to help trap particles and microorganisms for removal .
The nasal cavity is connected to several other air-filled spaces .
The sinuses , a set of four , paired small cavities in the skull , communicate with the nasal cavity through a series of small openings .
The nasopharynx is part of the upper throat extending from the posterior nasal cavity .
The nasopharynx carries air inhaled through the nose .
The middle ear is connected to the nasopharynx through the eustachian tube .
The middle ear is separated from the outer ear by the tympanic membrane , or ear drum .
And finally , the lacrimal glands drain to the nasal cavity through the nasolacrimal ducts ( tear ducts ) .
The open connections between these sites allow microorganisms to move from the nasal cavity to the sinuses , middle ears ( and back ) , and down into the lower respiratory tract from the nasopharynx .
The oral cavity is a secondary opening for the respiratory tract .
The oral and nasal cavities connect through the fauces to the pharynx , or throat .
The pharynx can be divided into three regions : the nasopharynx , the oropharynx , and the laryngopharynx .
Air inhaled through the mouth does not pass through the nasopharynx ; it proceeds first through the oropharynx and then through the laryngopharynx .
The palatine tonsils , which consist of lymphoid tissue , are located within the oropharynx .
The laryngopharynx , the last portion of the pharynx , connects to the larynx , which contains the vocal fold .
The lower respiratory system begins below the epiglottis in the larynx or voice box .
The trachea , or windpipe , is a cartilaginous tube extending from the larynx that provides an unobstructed path for air to reach the lungs .
The trachea bifurcates into the left and right bronchi as it reaches the lungs .
These paths branch repeatedly to form smaller and more extensive networks of tubes , the bronchiole s. The terminal bronchioles formed in this treelike network end in cul-de-sacs called the alveoli .
These structures are surrounded by capillary networks and are the site of gas exchange in the respiratory system .
Human lungs contain on the order of 400,000,000 alveoli .
The outer surface of the lungs is protected with a double-layered pleural membrane .
This structure protects the lungs and provides lubrication to permit the lungs to move easily during respiration .
The inner lining of the respiratory system consists of mucous membranes and is protected by multiple immune defenses .
The goblet cells within the respiratory epithelium secrete a layer of sticky mucus .
The viscosity and acidity of this secretion inhibits microbial attachment to the underlying cells .
In addition , the respiratory tract contains ciliated epithelial cells .
The beating cilia dislodge and propel the mucus , and any trapped microbes , upward to the epiglottis , where they will be swallowed .
Elimination of microbes in this manner is referred to as the mucociliary escalator effect and is an important mechanism that prevents inhaled microorganisms from migrating further into the lower respiratory tract .
The upper respiratory system is under constant surveillance by mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue ( MALT ) , including the adenoids and tonsils .
Other mucosal defenses include secreted antibodies ( IgA ) , lysozyme , surfactant , and antimicrobial peptides called defensins .
Meanwhile , the lower respiratory tract is protected by alveolar macrophages .
These phagocytes efficiently kill any microbes that manage to evade the other defenses .
The combined action of these factors renders the lower respiratory tract nearly devoid of colonized microbes .
The upper respiratory tract contains an abundant and diverse microbiota .
The nasal passages and sinuses are primarily colonized by members of the Firmicutes , Actinobacteria , and Proteobacteria .
The most common bacteria identified include Staphylococcus epidermidis , viridans group streptococci ( VGS ) , Corynebacterium spp .
( diphtheroids ) , Propionibacterium spp. , and Haemophilus spp .
The oropharynx includes many of the same isolates as the nose and sinuses , with the addition of variable numbers of bacteria like species of Prevotella , Fusobacterium , Moraxella , and Eikenella , as well as some Candida fungal isolates .
In addition , many healthy humans asymptomatically carry potential pathogens in the upper respiratory tract .
As much as 20 % of the population carry Staphylococcus aureus in their nostrils .
The pharynx , too , can be colonized with pathogenic strains of Streptococcus , Haemophilus , and Neisseria .
The lower respiratory tract , by contrast , is scantily populated with microbes .
Of the organisms identified in the lower respiratory tract , species of Pseudomonas , Streptococcus , Prevotella , Fusobacterium , and Veillonella are the most common .
It is not clear at this time if these small populations of bacteria constitute a normal microbiota or if they are transients .
Many members of the respiratory system ’ s normal microbiota are opportunistic pathogens .
To proliferate and cause host damage , they first must overcome the immune defenses of respiratory tissues .
Many mucosal pathogens produce virulence factors such as adhesins that mediate attachment to host epithelial cells , or polysaccharide capsules that allow microbes to evade phagocytosis .
The endotoxins of gram-negative bacteria can stimulate a strong inflammatory response that damages respiratory cells .
Other pathogens produce exotoxins , and still others have the ability to survive within the host cells .
Once an infection of the respiratory tract is established , it tends to impair the mucociliary escalator , limiting the body ’ s ability to expel the invading microbes , thus making it easier for pathogens to multiply and spread .
Vaccines have been developed for many of the most serious bacterial and viral pathogens .
Several of the most important respiratory pathogens and their vaccines , if available , are summarized in .
Components of these vaccines will be explained later in the chapter .
Microbial diseases of the respiratory system typically result in an acute inflammatory response .
These infections can be grouped by the location affected and have names ending in “ itis ” , which literally means inflammation of .
For instance , rhinitis is an inflammation of the nasal cavities , often characteristic of the common cold .
Rhinitis may also be associated with hay fever allergies or other irritants .
Inflammation of the sinuses is called sinusitis inflammation of the ear is called otitis .
Otitis media is an inflammation of the middle ear .
A variety of microbes can cause pharyngitis , commonly known as a sore throat .
An inflammation of the larynx is called laryngitis .
The resulting inflammation may interfere with vocal cord function , causing voice loss .
When tonsils are inflamed , it is called tonsillitis .
Chronic cases of tonsillitis may be treated surgically with tonsillectomy .
More rarely , the epiglottis can be infected , a condition called epiglottitis .
In the lower respiratory system , the inflammation of the bronchial tubes results in bronchitis .
Most serious of all is pneumonia , in which the alveoli in the lungs are infected and become inflamed .
Pus and edema accumulate and fill the alveoli with fluids ( called consolidations ) .
This reduces the lungs ’ ability to exchange gases and often results in a productive cough expelling phlegm and mucus .
Cases of pneumonia can range from mild to life-threatening , and remain an important cause of mortality in the very young and very old .
Identify the most common bacteria that can cause infections of the upper and lower respiratory tract Compare the major characteristics of specific bacterial diseases of the respiratory tract The respiratory tract can be infected by a variety of bacteria , both gram positive and gram negative .
Although the diseases that they cause may range from mild to severe , in most cases , the microbes remain localized within the respiratory system .
Fortunately , most of these infections also respond well to antibiotic therapy .
A common upper respiratory infection , streptococcal pharyngitis ( strep throat ) is caused by Streptococcus pyogenes .
This gram-positive bacterium appears as chains of cocci , as seen in .
Rebecca Lancefield serologically classified streptococci in the 1930s using carbohydrate antigens from the bacterial cell walls .
S. pyogenes is the sole member of the Lancefield group A streptococci and is often referred to as GAS , or group A strep .
Similar to streptococcal infections of the skin , the mucosal membranes of the pharynx are damaged by the release of a variety of exoenzymes and exotoxins by this extracellular pathogen .
Many strains of S. pyogenes can degrade connective tissues by using hyaluronidase , collagenase and streptokinase .
Streptokinase activates plasmin , which leads to degradation of fibrin and , in turn , dissolution of blood clots , which assists in the spread of the pathogen .
Released toxins include streptolysins that can destroy red and white blood cells .
The submandibular lymph nodes beneath the angle of the jaw are also often swollen during strep throat .
Some strains of group A streptococci produce erythrogenic toxin .
This exotoxin is encoded by a temperate bacteriophage ( bacterial virus ) and is an example of phage conversion ( see ) .
The toxin attacks the plasma membranes of capillary endothelial cells and leads to scarlet fever ( or scarlatina ) , a disseminated fine red rash on the skin , and strawberry tongue , a red rash on the tongue .
Severe cases may even lead to streptococcal toxic shock syndrome ( STSS ) , which results from massive superantigen production that leads to septic shock and death .
S. pyogenes can be easily spread by direct contact or droplet transmission through coughing and sneezing .
The disease can be diagnosed quickly using a rapid enzyme immunoassay for the group A antigen .
However , due to a significant rate of false-negative results ( up to 30 % ) , culture identification is still the gold standard to confirm pharyngitis due to S. pyogenes .
S. pyogenes can be identified as a catalase-negative , beta hemolytic bacterium that is susceptible to 0.04 units of bacitracin .
Antibiotic resistance is limited for this bacterium , so most β-lactams remain effective ; oral amoxicillin and intramuscular penicillin G are those most commonly prescribed .
One reason strep throat infections are aggressively treated with antibiotics is because they can lead to serious sequelae , later clinical consequences of a primary infection .
It is estimated that 1 % –3 % of untreated S. pyogenes infections can be followed by nonsuppurative ( without the production of pus ) sequelae that develop 1–3 weeks after the acute infection has resolved .
Two such sequelae are acute rheumatic fever and acute glomerulonephritis .
Acute rheumatic fever can follow pharyngitis caused by specific rheumatogenic strains of S. pyogenes ( strains 1 , 3 , 5 , 6 , and 18 ) .
Although the exact mechanism responsible for this sequela remains unclear , molecular mimicry between the M protein of rheumatogenic strains of S. pyogenes and heart tissue is thought to initiate the autoimmune attack .
The most serious and lethal clinical manifestation of rheumatic fever is damage to and inflammation of the heart ( carditis ) .
Acute glomerulonephritis also results from an immune response to streptococcal antigens following pharyngitis and cutaneous infections .
Acute glomerulonephritis develops within 6–10 days after pharyngitis , but can take up to 21 days after a cutaneous infection .
Similar to acute rheumatic fever , there are strong associations between specific nephritogenic strains of S. pyogenes and acute glomerulonephritis , and evidence suggests a role for antigen mimicry and autoimmunity .
However , the primary mechanism of acute glomerulonephritis appears to be the formation of immune complexes between S. pyogenes antigens and antibodies , and their deposition between endothelial cells of the glomeruli of kidney .
Inflammatory response against the immune complexes leads to damage and inflammation of the glomeruli ( glomerulonephritis ) .
An infection of the middle ear is called acute otitis media ( AOM ) , but often it is simply referred to as an earache .
The condition is most common between ages 3 months and 3 years .
In the United States , AOM is the second-leading cause of visits to pediatricians by children younger than age 5 years , and it is the leading indication for antibiotic prescription .
AOM is characterized by the formation and accumulation of pus in the middle ear .
Unable to drain , the pus builds up , resulting in moderate to severe bulging of the tympanic membrane and otalgia ( ear pain ) .
Inflammation resulting from the infection leads to swelling of the eustachian tubes , and may also lead to fever , nausea , vomiting , and diarrhea , particularly in infants .
Infants and toddlers who can not yet speak may exhibit nonverbal signs suggesting AOM , such as holding , tugging , or rubbing of the ear , as well as uncharacteristic crying or distress in response to the pain .
AOM can be caused by a variety of bacteria .
Among neonates , S. pneumoniae is the most common cause of AOM , but Escherichia coli , Enterococcus spp. , and group B Streptococcus species can also be involved .
In older infants and children younger than 14 years old , the most common bacterial causes are S. pneumoniae , Haemophilus influenzae , or Moraxella catarrhalis .
Among S. pneumoniae infections , encapsulated strains are frequent causes of AOM .
By contrast , the strains of H. influenzae and M. cattarhalis that are responsible for AOM do not possess a capsule .
Rather than direct tissue damage by these pathogens , bacterial components such as lipopolysaccharide ( LPS ) in gramnegative pathogens induce an inflammatory response that causes swelling , pus , and tissue damage within the middle ear .
Any blockage of the eustachian tubes , with or without infection , can cause fluid to become trapped and accumulate in the middle ear .
This is referred to as otitis media with effusion ( OME ) .
The accumulated fluid offers an excellent reservoir for microbial growth and , consequently , secondary bacterial infections often ensue .
This can lead to recurring and chronic earaches , which are especially common in young children .
The higher incidence in children can be attributed to many factors .
Children have more upper respiratory infections , in general , and their eustachian tubes are also shorter and drain at a shallower angle .
Young children also tend to spend more time lying down than adults , which facilitates drainage from the nasopharynx through the eustachian tube and into the middle ear .
Bottle feeding while lying down enhances this risk because the sucking action on the bottle causes negative pressure to build up within the eustachian tube , promoting the movement of fluid and bacteria from the nasopharynx .
Diagnosis is typically made based on clinical signs and symptoms , without laboratory testing to determine the specific causative agent .
Antibiotics are frequently prescribed for the treatment of AOM .
High-dose amoxicillin is the first-line drug , but with increasing resistance concerns , macrolides and cephalosporins may also be used .
The pneumococcal conjugate vaccine ( PCV13 ) contains serotypes that are important causes of AOM , and vaccination has been shown to decrease the incidence of AOM .
Vaccination against influenza has also been shown to decrease the risk for AOM , likely because viral infections like influenza predispose patients to secondary infections with S. pneumoniae .
Although there is a conjugate vaccine available for the invasive serotype B of H. influenzae , this vaccine does not impact the incidence of H. influenzae AOM .
Because unencapsulated strains of H. influenzae and M. catarrhalis are involved in AOM , vaccines against bacterial cellular factors other than capsules will need to be developed .
The microbial community of the nasopharynx is extremely diverse and harbors many opportunistic pathogens , so it is perhaps not surprising that infections leading to rhinitis and sinusitis have many possible causes .
These conditions often occur as secondary infections after a viral infection , which effectively compromises the immune defenses and allows the opportunistic bacteria to establish themselves .
Bacterial sinusitis involves infection and inflammation within the paranasal sinuses .
Because bacterial sinusitis rarely occurs without rhinitis , the preferred term is rhinosinusitis .
The most common causes of bacterial rhinosinusitis are similar to those for AOM , including S. pneumoniae , H. influenzae , and M. catarrhalis .
The causative agent of diphtheria , Corynebacterium diphtheriae , is a club-shaped , gram-positive rod that belongs to the phylum Actinobacteria .
Diphtheroids are common members of the normal nasopharyngeal microbiota .
However , some strains of C. diphtheriae become pathogenic because of the presence of a temperate bacteriophage-encoded protein—the diphtheria toxin .
Diphtheria is typically a respiratory infection of the oropharynx but can also cause impetigo-like lesions on the skin .
Although the disease can affect people of all ages , it tends to be most severe in those younger than 5 years or older than 40 years .
Like strep throat , diphtheria is commonly transmitted in the droplets and aerosols produced by coughing .
After colonizing the throat , the bacterium remains in the oral cavity and begins producing the diphtheria toxin .
This protein is an A-B toxin that blocks host-cell protein synthesis by inactivating elongation factor ( EF ) -2 ( see ) .
The toxin ’ s action leads to the death of the host cells and an inflammatory response .
An accumulation of grayish exudate consisting of dead host cells , pus , red blood cells , fibrin , and infectious bacteria results in the formation of a pseudomembrane .
The pseudomembrane can cover mucous membranes of the nasal cavity , tonsils , pharynx , and larynx .
This is a classic sign of diphtheria .
As the disease progresses , the pseudomembrane can enlarge to obstruct the fauces of the pharynx or trachea and can lead to suffocation and death .
Sometimes , intubation , the placement of a breathing tube in the trachea , is required in advanced infections .
If the diphtheria toxin spreads throughout the body , it can damage other tissues as well .
This can include myocarditis ( heart damage ) and nerve damage that may impair breathing .
The presumptive diagnosis of diphtheria is primarily based on the clinical symptoms ( i.e. , the pseudomembrane ) and vaccination history , and is typically confirmed by identifying bacterial cultures obtained from throat swabs .
The diphtheria toxin itself can be directly detected in vitro using polymerase chain reaction ( PCR ) -based , direct detection systems for the diphtheria tox gene , and immunological techniques like radial immunodiffusion or Elek ’ s immunodiffusion test .
Broad-spectrum antibiotics like penicillin and erythromycin tend to effectively control C. diphtheriae infections .
Regrettably , they have no effect against preformed toxins .
If toxin production has already occurred in the patient , antitoxins ( preformed antibodies against the toxin ) are administered .
Although this is effective in neutralizing the toxin , the antitoxins may lead to serum sickness because they are produced in horses ( see ) .
Widespread vaccination efforts have reduced the occurrence of diphtheria worldwide .
There are currently four combination toxoid vaccines available that provide protection against diphtheria and other diseases : DTaP , Tdap , DT , and Td .
In all cases , the letters “ d , ” “ t , ” and “ p ” stand for diphtheria , tetanus , and pertussis , respectively ; the “ a ” stands for acellular .
If capitalized , the letters indicate a full-strength dose ; lowercase letters indicate reduced dosages .
According to current recommendations , children should receive five doses of the DTaP vaccine in their youth and a Td booster every 10 years .
Children with adverse reactions to the pertussis vaccine may be given the DT vaccine in place of the DTaP .
Pneumonia is a general term for infections of the lungs that lead to inflammation and accumulation of fluids and white blood cells in the alveoli .
Pneumonia can be caused by bacteria , viruses , fungi , and other organisms , although the vast majority of pneumonias are bacterial in origin .
Bacterial pneumonia is a prevalent , potentially serious infection ; it caused more 50,000 deaths in the United States in 2014 .
As the alveoli fill with fluids and white blood cells ( consolidation ) , air exchange becomes impaired and patients experience respiratory distress .
In addition , pneumonia can lead to pleurisy , an infection of the pleural membrane surrounding the lungs , which can make breathing very painful .
Although many different bacteria can cause pneumonia under the right circumstances , three bacterial species cause most clinical cases : Streptococcus pneumoniae , H .
influenzae , and Mycoplasma pneumoniae .
In addition to these , we will also examine some of the less common causes of pneumonia .
The most common cause of community-acquired bacterial pneumonia is Streptococcus pneumoniae .
This grampositive , alpha hemolytic streptococcus is commonly found as part of the normal microbiota of the human respiratory tract .
The cells tend to be somewhat lancet-shaped and typically appear as pairs .
The pneumococci initially colonize the bronchioles of the lungs .
Eventually , the infection spreads to the alveoli , where the microbe ’ s polysaccharide capsule interferes with phagocytic clearance .
Other virulence factors include autolysins like Lyt A , which degrade the microbial cell wall , resulting in cell lysis and the release of cytoplasmic virulence factors .
One of these factors , pneumolysin O , is important in disease progression ; this pore-forming protein damages host cells , promotes bacterial adherence , and enhances pro-inflammatory cytokine production .
The resulting inflammatory response causes the alveoli to fill with exudate rich in neutrophils and red blood cells .
As a consequence , infected individuals develop a productive cough with bloody sputum .
Pneumococci can be presumptively identified by their distinctive gram-positive , lancet-shaped cell morphology and diplococcal arrangement .
In blood agar cultures , the organism demonstrates alpha hemolytic colonies that are autolytic after 24 to 48 hours .
In addition , S. pneumoniae is extremely sensitive to optochin and colonies are rapidly destroyed by the addition of 10 % solution of sodium deoxycholate .
All clinical pneumococcal isolates are serotyped using the quellung reaction with typing antisera produced by the CDC .
Positive quellung reactions are considered definitive identification of pneumococci .
Antibiotics remain the mainstay treatment for pneumococci .
β-Lactams like penicillin are the first-line drugs , but resistance to β-lactams is a growing problem .
When β-lactam resistance is a concern , macrolides and fluoroquinolones may be prescribed .
However , S. pneumoniae resistance to macrolides and fluoroquinolones is increasing as well , limiting the therapeutic options for some infections .
There are currently two pneumococcal vaccines available : pneumococcal conjugate vaccine ( PCV13 ) and pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine ( PPSV23 ) .
These are generally given to the most vulnerable populations of individuals : children younger than 2 years and adults older than 65 years .
Encapsulated strains of Haemophilus influenzae are known for causing meningitis , but nonencapsulated strains are important causes of pneumonia .
This small , gram-negative coccobacillus is found in the pharynx of the majority of healthy children ; however , Haemophilus pneumonia is primarily seen in the elderly .
Like other pathogens that cause pneumonia , H. influenzae is spread by droplets and aerosols produced by coughing .
A fastidious organism , H. influenzae will only grow on media with available factor X ( hemin ) and factor V ( NAD ) , like chocolate agar .
Serotyping must be performed to confirm identity of H. influenzae isolates .
Infections of the alveoli by H. influenzae result in inflammation and accumulation of fluids .
Increasing resistance to β-lactams , macrolides , and tetracyclines presents challenges for the treatment of Haemophilus pneumonia .
Resistance to the fluoroquinolones is rare among isolates of H. influenzae but has been observed .
As discussed for AOM , a vaccine directed against nonencapsulated H. influenzae , if developed , would provide protection against pneumonia caused by this pathogen .
Primary atypical pneumonia is caused by Mycoplasma pneumoniae .
This bacterium is not part of the respiratory tract ’ s normal microbiota and can cause epidemic disease outbreaks .
Also known as walking pneumonia , mycoplasma pneumonia infections are common in crowded environments like college campuses and military bases .
It is spread by aerosols formed when coughing or sneezing .
The disease is often mild , with a low fever and persistent cough .
These bacteria , which do not have cell walls , use a specialized attachment organelle to bind to ciliated cells .
In the process , epithelial cells are damaged and the proper function of the cilia is hindered .
Mycoplasma grow very slowly when cultured .
Therefore , penicillin and thallium acetate are added to agar to prevent the overgrowth by faster-growing potential contaminants .
Since M. pneumoniae does not have a cell wall , it is resistant to these substances .
Without a cell wall , the microbial cells appear pleomorphic .
M. pneumoniae infections tend to be self-limiting but may also respond well to macrolide antibiotic therapy .
β-lactams , which target cell wall synthesis , are not indicated for treatment of infections with this pathogen .
Chlamydial pneumonia can be caused by three different species of bacteria : Chlamydophila pneumoniae ( formerly known as Chlamydia pneumoniae ) , Chlamydophila psittaci ( formerly known as Chlamydia psittaci ) , and Chlamydia trachomatis .
All three are obligate intracellular pathogens and cause mild to severe pneumonia and bronchitis .
Of the three , Chlamydophila pneumoniae is the most common and is transmitted via respiratory droplets or aerosols .
C. psittaci causes psittacosis , a zoonotic disease that primarily affects domesticated birds such as parakeets , turkeys , and ducks , but can be transmitted from birds to humans .
Psittacosis is a relatively rare infection and is typically found in people who work with birds .
Chlamydia trachomatis , the causative agent of the sexually transmitted disease chlamydia , can cause pneumonia in infants when the infection is passed from mother to baby during birth .
Diagnosis of chlamydia by culturing tends to be difficult and slow .
Because they are intracellular pathogens , they require multiple passages through tissue culture .
Recently , a variety of PCRand serologically based tests have been developed to enable easier identification of these pathogens .
Tetracycline and macrolide antibiotics are typically prescribed for treatment .
A variety of opportunistic bacteria that do not typically cause respiratory disease in healthy individuals are common causes of health care-associated pneumonia .
These include Klebsiella pneumoniae , Staphylococcus aureus , and proteobacteria such as species of Escherichia , Proteus , and Serratia .
Patients at risk include the elderly , those who have other preexisting lung conditions , and those who are immunocompromised .
In addition , patients receiving supportive therapies such as intubation , antibiotics , and immunomodulatory drugs may also be at risk because these interventions disrupt the mucociliary escalator and other pulmonary defenses .
Invasive medical devices such as catheters , medical implants , and ventilators can also introduce opportunistic pneumonia-causing pathogens into the body .
Pneumonia caused by K. pneumoniae is characterized by lung necrosis and “ currant jelly sputum , ” so named because it consists of clumps of blood , mucus , and debris from the thick polysaccharide capsule produced by the bacterium .
K. pneumoniae is often multidrug resistant .
Aminoglycoside and cephalosporin are often prescribed but are not always effective .
Klebsiella pneumonia is frequently fatal even when treated .
Pseudomonas aeruginosa is another opportunistic pathogen that can cause serious cases of bacterial pneumonia in patients with cystic fibrosis ( CF ) and hospitalized patients assisted with artificial ventilators .
This bacterium is extremely antibiotic resistant and can produce a variety of exotoxins .
Ventilator-associated pneumonia with P. aeruginosa is caused by contaminated equipment that causes the pathogen to be aspirated into the lungs .
In patients with CF , a genetic defect in the cystic fibrosis transmembrane receptor ( CFTR ) leads to the accumulation of excess dried mucus in the lungs .
This decreases the effectiveness of the defensins and inhibits the mucociliary escalator .
P. aeruginosa is known to infect more than half of all patients with CF .
It adapts to the conditions in the patient ’ s lungs and begins to produce alginate , a viscous exopolysaccharide that inhibits the mucociliary escalator .
Lung damage from the chronic inflammatory response that ensues is the leading cause of mortality in patients with CF .
Tuberculosis ( TB ) is one of the deadliest infectious diseases in human history .
M. tuberculosis is an acid-fast , high G + C , gram-positive , nonspore-forming rod .
Its cell wall is rich in waxy mycolic acids , which make the cells impervious to polar molecules .
It also causes these organisms to grow slowly .
M. tuberculosis causes a chronic granulomatous disease that can infect any area of the body , although it is typically associated with the lungs .
M. tuberculosis is spread by inhalation of respiratory droplets or aerosols from an infected person .
The infectious dose of M. tuberculosis is only 10 cells .
After inhalation , the bacteria enter the alveoli .
The cells are phagocytized by macrophages but can survive and multiply within these phagocytes because of the protection by the waxy mycolic acid in their cell walls .
If not eliminated by macrophages , the infection can progress , causing an inflammatory response and an accumulation of neutrophils and macrophages in the area .
Several weeks or months may pass before an immunological response is mounted by T cells and B cells .
Eventually , the lesions in the alveoli become walled off , forming small round lesions called tubercles .
Bacteria continue to be released into the center of the tubercles and the chronic immune response results in tissue damage and induction of apoptosis ( programmed host-cell death ) in a process called liquefaction .
This creates a caseous center , or air pocket , where the aerobic M. tuberculosis can grow and multiply .
Tubercles may eventually rupture and bacterial cells can invade pulmonary capillaries ; from there , bacteria can spread through the bloodstream to other organs , a condition known as miliary tuberculosis .
The rupture of tubercles also facilitates transmission of the bacteria to other individuals via droplet aerosols that exit the body in coughs .
Because these droplets can be very small and stay aloft for a long time , special precautions are necessary when caring for patients with TB , such as the use of face masks and negative-pressure ventilation and filtering systems .
Eventually , most lesions heal to form calcified Ghon complexes .
These structures are visible on chest radiographs and are a useful diagnostic feature .
But even after the disease has apparently ended , viable bacteria remain sequestered in these locations .
Release of these organisms at a later time can produce reactivation tuberculosis ( or secondary TB ) .
This is mainly observed in people with alcoholism , the elderly , or in otherwise immunocompromised individuals .
Because TB is a chronic disease , chemotherapeutic treatments often continue for months or years .
Multidrug resistant ( MDR-TB ) and extensively drug-resistant ( XDR-TB ) strains of M. tuberculosis are a growing clinical concern .
These strains can arise due to misuse or mismanagement of antibiotic therapies .
Therefore , it is imperative that proper multidrug protocols are used to treat these infections .
Common antibiotics included in these mixtures are isoniazid , rifampin , ethambutol , and pyrazinamide .
A TB vaccine is available that is based on the so-called bacillus Calmette-Guérin ( BCG ) strain of M. bovis commonly found in cattle .
In the United States , the BCG vaccine is only given to health-care workers and members of the military who are at risk of exposure to active cases of TB .
It is used more broadly worldwide .
Many individuals born in other countries have been vaccinated with BCG strain .
BCG is used in many countries with a high prevalence of TB , to prevent childhood tuberculous meningitis and miliary disease .
The Mantoux tuberculin skin test is regularly used in the United States to screen for potential TB exposure ( see ) .
However , prior vaccinations with the BCG vaccine can cause false-positive results .
Chest radiographs to detect Ghon complex formation are required , therefore , to confirm exposure .
The causative agent of pertussis , commonly called whooping cough , is Bordetella pertussis , a gram-negative coccobacillus .
The disease is characterized by mucus accumulation in the lungs that leads to a long period of severe coughing .
Sometimes , following a bout of coughing , a sound resembling a “ whoop ” is produced as air is inhaled through the inflamed and restricted airway—hence the name whooping cough .
Although adults can be infected , the symptoms of this disease are most pronounced in infants and children .
Pertussis is highly communicable through droplet transmission , so the uncontrollable coughing produced is an efficient means of transmitting the disease in a susceptible population .
Following inhalation , B. pertussis specifically attaches to epithelial cells using an adhesin , filamentous hemagglutinin .
The bacteria then grow at the site of infection and cause disease symptoms through the production of exotoxins .
One of the main virulence factors of this organism is an A-B exotoxin called the pertussis toxin ( PT ) .
When PT enters the host cells , it increases the cyclic adenosine monophosphate ( cAMP ) levels and disrupts cellular signaling .
PT is known to enhance inflammatory responses involving histamine and serotonin .
In addition to PT , B. pertussis produces a tracheal cytotoxin that damages ciliated epithelial cells and results in accumulation of mucus in the lungs .
The mucus can support the colonization and growth of other microbes and , as a consequence , secondary infections are common .
Together , the effects of these factors produce the cough that characterizes this infection .
A pertussis infection can be divided into three distinct stages .
The initial infection , termed the catarrhal stage , is relatively mild and unremarkable .
The signs and symptoms may include nasal congestion , a runny nose , sneezing , and a low-grade fever .
This , however , is the stage in which B. pertussis is most infectious .
In the paroxysmal stage , mucus accumulation leads to uncontrollable coughing spasms that can last for several minutes and frequently induce vomiting .
The paroxysmal stage can last for several weeks .
A long convalescence stage follows the paroxysmal stage , during which time patients experience a chronic cough that can last for up to several months .
In fact , the disease is sometimes called the 100-day cough .
In infants , coughing can be forceful enough to cause fractures to the ribs , and prolonged infections can lead to death .
The CDC reported 20 pertussis-related deaths in 2012 , but that number had declined to five by 2015 .
During the first 2 weeks of infection , laboratory diagnosis is best performed by culturing the organism directly from a nasopharyngeal ( NP ) specimen collected from the posterior nasopharynx .
The NP specimen is streaked onto BordetGengou medium .
The specimens must be transported to the laboratory as quickly as possible , even if transport media are used .
Transport times of longer than 24 hours reduce the viability of B. pertussis significantly .
Within the first month of infection , B. pertussis can be diagnosed using PCR techniques .
During the later stages of infection , pertussis-specific antibodies can be immunologically detected using an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay ( ELISA ) .
Pertussis is generally a self-limiting disease .
Antibiotic therapy with erythromycin or tetracycline is only effective at the very earliest stages of disease .
Antibiotics given later in the infection , and prophylactically to uninfected individuals , reduce the rate of transmission .
Active vaccination is a better approach to control this disease .
The DPT vaccine was once in common use in the United States .
In that vaccine , the P component consisted of killed whole-cell B. pertussis preparations .
Because of some adverse effects , that preparation has now been superseded by the DTaP and Tdap vaccines .
In both of these new vaccines , the “ aP ” component is a pertussis toxoid .
Widespread vaccination has greatly reduced the number of reported cases and prevented large epidemics of pertussis .
Recently , however , pertussis has begun to reemerge as a childhood disease in some states because of declining vaccination rates and an increasing population of susceptible children .
An atypical pneumonia called Legionnaires disease ( also known as legionellosis ) is caused by an aerobic gramnegative bacillus , Legionella pneumophila .
This bacterium infects free-living amoebae that inhabit moist environments , and infections typically occur from human-made reservoirs such as air-conditioning cooling towers , humidifiers , misting systems , and fountains .
Aerosols from these reservoirs can lead to infections of susceptible individuals , especially those suffering from chronic heart or lung disease or other conditions that weaken the immune system .
When L. pneumophila bacteria enter the alveoli , they are phagocytized by resident macrophages .
However , L. pneumophila uses a secretion system to insert proteins in the endosomal membrane of the macrophage ; these proteins prevent lysosomal fusion , allowing L. pneumophila to continue to proliferate within the phagosome .
The resulting respiratory disease can range from mild to severe pneumonia , depending on the status of the host ’ s immune defenses .
Although this disease primarily affects the lungs , it can also cause fever , nausea , vomiting , confusion , and other neurological effects .
Diagnosis of Legionnaires disease is somewhat complicated .
L. pneumophila is a fastidious bacterium and is difficult to culture .
In addition , since the bacterial cells are not efficiently stained with the Gram stain , other staining techniques , such as the Warthin-Starry silver-precipitate procedure , must be used to visualize this pathogen .
A rapid diagnostic test has been developed that detects the presence of Legionella antigen in a patient ’ s urine ; results take less than 1 hour , and the test has high selectivity and specificity ( greater than 90 % ) .
Unfortunately , the test only works for one serotype of L. pneumophila ( type 1 , the serotype responsible for most infections ) .
Consequently , isolation and identification of L. pneumophila from sputum remains the defining test for diagnosis .
Once diagnosed , Legionnaire disease can be effectively treated with fluoroquinolone and macrolide antibiotics .
However , the disease is sometimes fatal ; about 10 % of patients die of complications .
There is currently no vaccine available .
The zoonotic disease Q fever is caused by a rickettsia , Coxiella burnetii .
The primary reservoirs for this bacterium are domesticated livestock such as cattle , sheep , and goats .
The bacterium may be transmitted by ticks or through exposure to the urine , feces , milk , or amniotic fluid of an infected animal .
In humans , the primary route of infection is through inhalation of contaminated farmyard aerosols .
It is , therefore , largely an occupational disease of farmers .
Humans are acutely sensitive to C. burnetii —the infective dose is estimated to be just a few cells .
In addition , the organism is hardy and can survive in a dry environment for an extended time .
Symptoms associated with acute Q fever include high fever , headache , coughing , pneumonia , and general malaise .
In a small number of patients ( less than 5 % ) , the condition may become chronic , often leading to endocarditis , which may be fatal .
Diagnosing rickettsial infection by cultivation in the laboratory is both difficult and hazardous because of the easy aerosolization of the bacteria , so PCR and ELISA are commonly used .
Doxycycline is the first-line drug to treat acute Q fever .
In chronic Q fever , doxycycline is often paired with hydroxychloroquine .
Identify the most common viruses that can cause infections of the upper and lower respiratory tract Compare the major characteristics of specific viral diseases of the respiratory tract Viruses are the most frequent cause of respiratory tract infections .
Unlike the bacterial pathogens , we have few effective therapies to combat viral respiratory infections .
Fortunately , many of these diseases are mild and selflimiting .
A few respiratory infections manifest their primary symptoms at other locations in the body .
The common cold is a generic term for a variety of mild viral infections of the nasal cavity .
More than 200 different viruses are known to cause the common cold .
The most common groups of cold viruses include rhinoviruses , coronaviruses , and adenoviruses .
These infections are widely disseminated in the human population and are transmitted through direct contact and droplet transmission .
Coughing and sneezing efficiently produce infectious aerosols , and rhinoviruses are known to persist on environmental surfaces for up to a week .
Viral contact with the nasal mucosa or eyes can lead to infection .
Rhinoviruses tend to replicate best between 33 °C ( 91.4 °F ) and 35 °C ( 95 °F ) , somewhat below normal body temperature ( 37 °C [ 98.6 °F ] ) .
As a consequence , they tend to infect the cooler tissues of the nasal cavities .
Colds are marked by an irritation of the mucosa that leads to an inflammatory response .
This produces common signs and symptoms such as nasal excess nasal secretions ( runny nose ) , congestion , sore throat , coughing , and sneezing .
The absence of high fever is typically used to differentiate common colds from other viral infections , like influenza .
Some colds may progress to cause otitis media , pharyngitis , or laryngitis , and patients may also experience headaches and body aches .
The disease , however , is self-limiting and typically resolves within 1–2 weeks .
There are no effective antiviral treatments for the common cold and antibacterial drugs should not be prescribed unless secondary bacterial infections have been established .
Many of the viruses that cause colds are related , so immunity develops throughout life .
Given the number of viruses that cause colds , however , individuals are never likely to develop immunity to all causes of the common cold .
Commonly known as the flu , influenza is a common viral disease of the lower respiratory system caused by an orthomyxovirus .
Influenza is pervasive worldwide and causes 3,000–50,000 deaths each year in the United States .
The annual mortality rate can vary greatly depending on the virulence of the strain ( s ) responsible for seasonal epidemics .
Influenza infections are most typically characterized by fever , chills , and body aches .
This is followed by symptoms similar to the common cold that may last a week or more .
compares the signs and symptoms of influenza and the common cold .
In general , influenza is self-limiting .
However , serious cases can lead to pneumonia and other complications that can be fatal .
Such cases are more common in the very young and the elderly ; however , certain strains of influenza virus ( like the 1918–1919 variant discussed later in this chapter ) are more lethal to young adults than to the very young or old .
Strains that affect young adults are believed to involve a cytokine storm—a positive feedback loop that forms between cytokine production and leukocytes .
This cytokine storm produces an acute inflammatory response that leads to rapid fluid accumulation in the lungs , culminating in pulmonary failure .
In such cases , the ability to mount a vigorous immune response is actually detrimental to the patient .
The very young and very old are less susceptible to this effect because their immune systems are less robust .
A complication of influenza that occurs primarily in children and teenagers is Reye syndrome .
This sequela causes swelling in the liver and brain , and may progress to neurological damage , coma , or death .
Reye syndrome may follow other viral infections , like chickenpox , and has been associated with the use of aspirin .
For this reason , the CDC and other agencies recommend that aspirin and products containing aspirin never be used to treat viral illnesses in children younger than age 19 years .
The influenza virus is primarily transmitted by direct contact and inhalation of aerosols .
The RNA genome of this virus exists as seven or eight segments , each coated with ribonucleoprotein and encoding one or two specific viral proteins .
The influenza virus is surrounded by a lipid membrane envelope , and two of the main antigens of the influenza virus are the spike proteins hemagglutinin ( H ) and neuraminidase ( N ) , as shown in .
These spike proteins play important roles in the viral infectious cycle .
Following inhalation , the influenza virus uses the hemagglutinin protein to bind to sialic acid receptors on host respiratory epithelial cells .
This facilitates endocytosis of the viral particle .
Once inside the host cell , the negative strand viral RNA is replicated by the viral RNA polymerase to form mRNA , which is translated by the host to produce viral proteins .
Additional viral RNA molecules are transcribed to produce viral genomic RNA , which assemble with viral proteins to form mature virions .
Release of the virions from the host cell is facilitated by viral neuraminidase , which cleaves sialic-acid receptors to allow progeny viruses to make a clean exit when budding from an infected cell .
There are three genetically related influenza viruses , called A , B , and C. The influenza A viruses have different subtypes based on the structure of their hemagglutinin and neuraminidase proteins .
There are currently 18 known subtypes of hemagglutinin and 11 known subtypes of neuraminidase .
Influenza viruses are serologically characterized by the type of H and N proteins that they possess .
Of the nearly 200 different combinations of H and N , only a few , such as the H1N1 strain , are associated with human disease .
The influenza viruses A , B , and C make up three of the five major groups of orthomyxoviruses .
The differences between the three types of influenza are summarized in .
The most virulent group is the influenza A viruses , which cause seasonal pandemics of influenza each year .
Influenza A virus can infect a variety of animals , including pigs , horses , pigs , and even whales and dolphins .
Influenza B virus is less virulent and is sometimes associated with epidemic outbreaks .
Influenza C virus generally produces the mildest disease symptoms and is rarely connected with epidemics .
Neither influenza B virus nor influenza C virus has significant animal reservoirs .
Influenza virus infections elicit a strong immune response , particularly to the hemagglutinin protein , which would protect the individual if they encountered the same virus .
Unfortunately , the antigenic properties of the virus change relatively rapidly , so new strains are evolving that immune systems previously challenged by influenza virus can not recognize .
When an influenza virus gains a new hemagglutinin or neuraminidase type , it is able to evade the host ’ s immune response and be successfully transmitted , often leading to an epidemic .
There are two mechanisms by which these evolutionary changes may occur .
The mechanisms of antigen drift and antigenic shift for influenza virus have been described in .
Of these two genetic processes , it is viruses produced by antigenic shift that have the potential to be extremely virulent because individuals previously infected by other strains are unlikely to produce any protective immune response against these novel variants .
The most lethal influenza pandemic in recorded history occurred from 1918 through 1919 .
Near the end of World War I , an antigenic shift involving the recombination of avian and human viruses is thought to have produced a new H1N1 virus .
This strain rapidly spread worldwide and is commonly claimed to have killed as many as 40 million to 50 million people—more than double the number killed in the war .
Although referred to as the Spanish flu , this disease is thought to have originated in the United States .
Regardless of its source , the conditions of World War I greatly contributed to the spread of this disease .
Crowding , poor sanitation , and rapid mobilization of large numbers of personnel and animals facilitated the dissemination of the new virus once it appeared .
Several of the most important influenza pandemics of modern times have been associated with antigenic shifts .
A few of these are summarized in .
Laboratory diagnosis of influenza is typically performed using a variety of RIDTs .
These tests are inoculated by point-of-care personnel and give results within 15–20 minutes .
Unfortunately , these tests have variable sensitivity and commonly yield false-negative results .
Other tests include hemagglutination of erythrocytes ( due to hemagglutinin action ) or complement fixation .
Patient serum antibodies against influenza viruses can also be detected in blood samples .
Because influenza is self-limiting disease , diagnosis through these more time-consuming and expensive methods is not typically used .
Three drugs that inhibit influenza neuraminidase activity are available : inhaled zanamivir , oral oseltamivir , and intravenous peramivir .
If taken at the onset of symptoms , these drugs can shorten the course of the disease .
These drugs are thought to impair the ability of the virus to efficiently exit infected host cells .
A more effective means of controlling influenza outbreaks , though , is vaccination .
Every year , new influenza vaccines are developed to be effective against the strains expected to be predominant .
This is determined in February by a review of the dominant strains around the world from a network of reporting sites ; their reports are used to generate a recommendation for the vaccine combination for the following winter in the northern hemisphere .
In September , a similar recommendation is made for the winter in the southern hemisphere .
These recommendations are used by vaccine manufacturers to formulate each year ’ s vaccine .
In most cases , three or four viruses are selected—the two most prevalent influenza A strains and one or two influenza B strains .
The chosen strains are typically cultivated in eggs and used to produce either an inactivated or a live attenuated vaccine ( e.g. , FluMist ) .
For individuals 18 years or older with an allergy to egg products , a recombinant egg-free trivalent vaccine is available .
Most of the influenza vaccines over the past decade have had an effectiveness of about 50 % .
Viruses cause fewer cases of pneumonia than bacteria ; however , several viruses can lead to pneumonia in children and the elderly .
The most common sources of viral pneumonia are adenoviruses , influenza viruses , parainfluenza viruses , and respiratory syncytial viruses .
The signs and symptoms produced by these viruses can range from mild cold-like symptoms to severe cases of pneumonia , depending on the virulence of the virus strain and the strength of the host defenses of the infected individual .
Occasionally , infections can result in otitis media .
Respiratory syncytial virus ( RSV ) infections are fairly common in infants ; most people have been infected by the age of 2 years .
During infection , a viral surface protein causes host cells to fuse and form multinucleated giant cells called syncytia .
There are no specific antiviral therapies or vaccines available for viral pneumonia .
In adults , these infections are self-limiting , resemble the common cold , and tend to resolve uneventfully within 1 or 2 weeks .
Infections in infants , however , can be life-threatening .
RSV is highly contagious and can be spread through respiratory droplets from coughing and sneezing .
RSV can also survive for a long time on environmental surfaces and , thus , be transmitted indirectly via fomites .
Severe acute respiratory syndrome ( SARS ) and Middle East respiratory syndrome ( MERS ) are two acute respiratory infections caused by coronaviruses .
In both cases , these are thought to be zoonotic infections .
Bats and civet cats are thought to have been the reservoirs for SARS ; camels seem to be the reservoir for MERS .
SARS originated in southern China in the winter of 2002 and rapidly spread to 37 countries .
Within about 1 year , more than 8,000 people experienced influenza-like symptoms and nearly 800 people died .
The rapid spread and severity of these infections caused grave concern at the time .
However , the outbreak was controlled in 2003 and no further cases of SARS have been recorded since 2004 .
Signs and symptoms of SARS include high fever , headache , body aches , and cough , and most patients will develop pneumonia .
MERS was first reported in Saudi Arabia in 2013 .
Although some infected individuals will be asymptomatic or have mild cold-like symptoms , most will develop a high fever , aches , cough and a severe respiratory infection that can progress to pneumonia .
As of 2015 , over 1,300 people in 27 countries have been infected .
About 500 people have died .
There are no specific treatments for either MERS or SARS .
In addition , no vaccines are currently available .
Several recombinant vaccines , however , are being developed .
Measles , rubella ( German measles ) , and chickenpox are three important viral diseases often associated with skin rashes .
However , their symptoms are systemic , and because their portal of entry is the respiratory tract , they can be considered respiratory infections .
The measles virus ( MeV ) causes the highly contagious disease measles , also known as rubeola , which is a major cause of childhood mortality worldwide .
Although vaccination efforts have greatly reduced the incidence of measles in much of the world , epidemics are still common in unvaccinated populations in certain countries .
The measles virus is a single-stranded , negative-strand RNA virus and , like the influenza virus , it possesses an envelope with spikes of embedded hemagglutinin .
The infection is spread by direct contact with infectious secretions or inhalation of airborne droplets spread by breathing , coughing , or sneezing .
Measles is initially characterized by a high fever , conjunctivitis , and a sore throat .
The virus then moves systemically through the bloodstream and causes a characteristic rash .
The measles rash initially forms on the face and later spreads to the extremities .
The red , raised macular rash will eventually become confluent and can last for several days .
At the same time , extremely high fevers ( higher than 40.6 °C [ 105 °F ] ) can occur .
Another diagnostic sign of measles infections is Koplik ’ s spots , white spots that form on the inner lining of inflamed cheek tissues .
Although measles is usually self-limiting , it can lead to pneumonia , encephalitis , and death .
In addition , the inhibition of immune system cells by the measles virus predisposes patients to secondary infections .
In severe infections with highly virulent strains , measles fatality rates can be as high as 10 % to 15 % .
There were more than 145,000 measles deaths ( mostly young children ) worldwide in 2013 .
The preliminary diagnosis of measles is typically based on the appearance of the rash and Koplik ’ s spots .
Hemagglutination inhibition tests and serological tests may be used to confirm measles infections in low-prevalence settings .
There are no effective treatments for measles .
Vaccination is widespread in developed countries as part of the measles , mumps , and rubella ( MMR ) vaccine .
As a result , there are typically fewer than 200 cases of measles in the United States annually .
When it is seen , it is often associated with children who have not been vaccinated .
Rubella , or the German measles , is a relatively mild viral disease that produces a rash somewhat like that caused by the measles , even though the two diseases are unrelated .
The rubella virus is an enveloped RNA virus that can be found in the respiratory tract .
It is transmitted from person to person in aerosols produced by coughing or sneezing .
Nearly half of all infected people remain asymptomatic .
However , the virus is shed and spread by asymptomatic carriers .
Like rubeola , rubella begins with a facial rash that spreads to the extremities .
However , the rash is less intense , shorter lived ( 2–3 days ) , not associated with Koplik ’ s spots , and the resulting fever is lower ( 101 °F [ 38.3 °C ] ) .
Congenital rubella syndrome is the most severe clinical complication of the German measles .
This occurs if a woman is infected with rubella during pregnancy .
The rubella virus is teratogenic , meaning it can cause developmental defects if it crosses the placenta during pregnancy .
There is a very high incidence of stillbirth , spontaneous abortion , or congenital birth defects if the mother is infected before 11 weeks of pregnancy and 35 % if she is infected between weeks 13–16 ; after this time the incidence is low .
For this reason , prenatal screening for rubella is commonly practiced in the United States .
Postnatal infections are usually self-limiting and rarely cause severe complications .
Like measles , the preliminary diagnosis of rubella is based on the patient ’ s history , vaccination records , and the appearance of the rash .
The diagnosis can be confirmed by hemagglutinin inhibition assays and a variety of other immunological techniques .
There are no antiviral therapies for rubella , but an effective vaccine ( MMR ) is widely available .
Vaccination efforts have essentially eliminated rubella in the United States ; fewer than a dozen cases are reported in a typical year .
Chickenpox , also known as varicella , was once a common viral childhood disease .
The causative agent of chickenpox , the varicella-zoster virus , is a member of the herpesvirus family .
In children , the disease is mild and selflimiting , and is easily transmitted by direct contact or inhalation of material from the skin lesions .
In adults , however , chickenpox infections can be much more severe and can lead to pneumonia and birth defects in the case of infected pregnant women .
Reye syndrome , mentioned earlier in this chapter , is also a serious complication associated with chickenpox , generally in children .
Once infected , most individuals acquire a lifetime immunity to future chickenpox outbreaks .
For this reason , parents once held “ chickenpox parties ” for their children .
At these events , uninfected children were intentionally exposed to an infected individual so they would contract the disease earlier in life , when the incidence of complications is very low , rather than risk a more severe infection later .
After the initial viral exposure , chickenpox has an incubation period of about 2 weeks .
The initial infection of the respiratory tract leads to viremia and eventually produces fever and chills .
A pustular rash then develops on the face , progresses to the trunk , and then the extremities , although most form on the trunk .
Eventually , the lesions burst and form a crusty scab .
Individuals with chickenpox are infectious from about 2 days before the outbreak of the rash until all the lesions have scabbed over .
Like other herpesviruses , the varicella-zoster virus can become dormant in nerve cells .
While the pustular vesicles are developing , the virus moves along sensory nerves to the dorsal ganglia in the spinal cord .
Once there , the varicella-zoster virus can remain latent for decades .
These dormant viruses may be reactivated later in life by a variety of stimuli , including stress , aging , and immunosuppression .
Once reactivated , the virus moves along sensory nerves to the skin of the face or trunk .
This results in the production of the painful lesions in a condition known as shingles .
These symptoms generally last for 2–6 weeks , and may recur more than once .
Postherpetic neuralgia , pain signals sent from damaged nerves long after the other symptoms have subsided , is also possible .
In addition , the virus can spread to other organs in immunocompromised individuals .
A person with shingles lesions can transmit the virus to a nonimmune contact , and the newly infected individual would develop chickenpox as the primary infection .
Shingles can not be transmitted from one person to another .
The primary diagnosis of chickenpox in children is mainly based on the presentation of a pustular rash of the trunk .
Serological and PCR-based tests are available to confirm the initial diagnosis .
Treatment for chickenpox infections in children is usually not required .
In patients with shingles , acyclovir treatment can often reduce the severity and length of symptoms , and diminish the risk of postherpetic neuralgia .
An effective vaccine is now available for chickenpox .
A vaccine is also available for adults older than 60 years who were infected with chickenpox in their youth .
This vaccine reduces the likelihood of a shingles outbreak by boosting the immune defenses that are keeping the latent infection in check and preventing reactivation .
Identify the most common fungi that can cause infections of the respiratory tract Compare the major characteristics of specific fungal diseases of the respiratory tract Fungal pathogens are ubiquitous in the environment .
Serological studies have demonstrated that most people have been exposed to fungal respiratory pathogens during their lives .
Yet symptomatic infections by these microbes are rare in healthy individuals .
This demonstrates the efficacy of the defenses of our respiratory system .
In this section , we will examine some of the fungi that can cause respiratory infections .
Histoplasmosis is a fungal disease of the respiratory system and most commonly occurs in the Mississippi Valley of the United States and in parts of Central and South America , Africa , Asia , and Australia .
The causative agent , Histoplasma capsulatum , is a dimorphic fungus .
This microbe grows as a filamentous mold in the environment but occurs as a budding yeast during human infections .
The primary reservoir for this pathogen is soil , particularly in locations rich in bat or bird feces .
Histoplasmosis is acquired by inhaling microconidial spores in the air ; this disease is not transmitted from human to human .
The incidence of histoplasmosis exposure is high in endemic areas , with 60 % –90 % of the population having antiHistoplasma antibodies , depending on location ; however , relatively few individuals exposed to the fungus actually experience symptoms .
Those most likely to be affected are the very young , the elderly , and immunocompromised people .
In many ways , the course of this disease is similar to that of tuberculosis .
Following inhalation , the spores enter the lungs and are phagocytized by alveolar macrophages .
The fungal cells then survive and multiply within these phagocytes ( see ) .
Focal infections cause the formation of granulomatous lesions , which can lead to calcifications that resemble the Ghon complexes of tuberculosis , even in asymptomatic cases .
Also like tuberculosis , histoplasmosis can become chronic and reactivation can occur , along with dissemination to other areas of the body ( e.g. , the liver or spleen ) .
Signs and symptoms of pulmonary histoplasmosis include fever , headache , and weakness with some chest discomfort .
The initial diagnosis is often based on chest radiographs and cultures grown on fungal selective media like Sabouraud 's dextrose agar .
Direct fluorescence antibody staining and Giemsa staining can also be used to detect this pathogen .
In addition , serological tests including a complement fixation assay and histoplasmin sensitivity can be used to confirm the diagnosis .
In most cases , these infections are self-limiting and antifungal therapy is not required .
However , in disseminated disease , the antifungal agents amphotericin B and ketoconazole are effective ; itraconazole may be effective in immunocompromised patients , in whom the disease can be more serious .
Infection by the dimorphic fungus Coccidioides immitis causes coccidioidomycosis .
Because the microbe is endemic to the San Joaquin Valley of California , the disease is sometimes referred to as Valley fever .
A related species that causes similar infections is found in semi-arid and arid regions of the southwestern United States , Mexico , and Central and South America .
Like histoplasmosis , coccidioidomycosis is acquired by inhaling fungal spores—in this case , arthrospores formed by hyphal fragmentation .
Once in the body , the fungus differentiates into spherules that are filled with endospores .
Most C. immitis infections are asymptomatic and self-limiting .
However , the infection can be very serious for immunocompromised patients .
The endospores may be transported in the blood , disseminating the infection and leading to the formation of granulomatous lesions on the face and nose .
In severe cases , other major organs can become infected , leading to serious complications such as fatal meningitis .
Coccidioidomycosis can be diagnosed by culturing clinical samples .
C. immitis readily grows on laboratory fungal media , such as Sabouraud 's dextrose agar , at 35 °C ( 95 °F ) .
Culturing the fungus , however , is rather dangerous .
C. immitis is one of the most infectious fungal pathogens known and is capable of causing laboratory-acquired infections .
Indeed , until 2012 , this organism was considered a “ select agent ” of bioterrorism and classified as a BSL-3 microbe .
Serological tests for antibody production are more often used for diagnosis .
Although mild cases generally do not require intervention , disseminated infections can be treated with intravenous antifungal drugs like amphotericin B. Blastomycosis is a rare disease caused by another dimorphic fungus , Blastomyces dermatitidis .
Like Histoplasma and Coccidioides , Blastomyces uses the soil as a reservoir , and fungal spores can be inhaled from disturbed soil .
The pulmonary form of blastomycosis generally causes mild flu-like symptoms and is self-limiting .
It can , however , become disseminated in immunocompromised people , leading to chronic cutaneous disease with subcutaneous lesions on the face and hands .
These skin lesions eventually become crusty and discolored and can result in deforming scars .
Systemic blastomycosis is rare , but if left untreated , it is always fatal .
Preliminary diagnosis of pulmonary blastomycosis can be made by observing the characteristic budding yeast forms in sputum samples .
Commercially available urine antigen tests are now also available .
Additional confirmatory tests include serological assays such as immunodiffusion tests or EIA .
Most cases of blastomycosis respond well to amphotericin B or ketoconazole treatments .
A variety of fungi in the order Mucorales cause mucormycosis , a rare fungal disease .
These include bread molds , like Rhizopus and Mucor ; the most commonly associated species is Rhizopus arrhizus ( oryzae ) ( see ) .
These fungi can colonize many different tissues in immunocompromised patients , but often infect the skin , sinuses , or the lungs .
Although most people are regularly exposed to the causative agents of mucormycosis , infections in healthy individuals are rare .
Exposure to spores from the environment typically occurs through inhalation , but the spores can also infect the skin through a wound or the gastrointestinal tract if ingested .
Respiratory mucormycosis primarily affects immunocompromised individuals , such as patients with cancer or those who have had a transplant .
After the spores are inhaled , the fungi grow by extending hyphae into the host ’ s tissues .
Infections can occur in both the upper and lower respiratory tracts .
Rhinocerebral mucormycosis is an infection of the sinuses and brain ; symptoms include headache , fever , facial swelling , congestion , and tissue necrosis causing black lesions in the oral cavity .
Pulmonary mucormycosis is an infection of the lungs ; symptoms include fever , cough , chest pain , and shortness of breath .
In severe cases , infections may become disseminated and involve the central nervous system , leading to coma and death .
Diagnosing mucormycosis can be challenging .
Currently , there are no serological or PCR-based tests available to identify these infections .
Tissue biopsy specimens must be examined for the presence of the fungal pathogens .
The causative agents , however , are often difficult to distinguish from other filamentous fungi .
Infections are typically treated by the intravenous administration of amphotericin B , and superficial infections are removed by surgical debridement .
Since the patients are often immunocompromised , viral and bacterial secondary infections commonly develop .
Mortality rates vary depending on the site of the infection , the causative fungus , and other factors , but a recent study found an overall mortality rate of 54 % .
Aspergillus is a common filamentous fungus found in soils and organic debris .
Nearly everyone has been exposed to this mold , yet very few people become sick .
In immunocompromised patients , however , Aspergillus may become established and cause aspergillosis .
Inhalation of spores can lead to asthma-like allergic reactions .
The symptoms commonly include shortness of breath , wheezing , coughing , runny nose , and headaches .
Fungal balls , or aspergilloma , can form when hyphal colonies collect in the lungs .
The fungal hyphae can invade the host tissues , leading to pulmonary hemorrhage and a bloody cough .
In severe cases , the disease may progress to a disseminated form that is often fatal .
Death most often results from pneumonia or brain hemorrhages .
Laboratory diagnosis typically requires chest radiographs and a microscopic examination of tissue and respiratory fluid samples .
Serological tests are available to identify Aspergillus antigens .
In addition , a skin test can be performed to determine if the patient has been exposed to the fungus .
This test is similar to the Mantoux tuberculin skin test used for tuberculosis .
Aspergillosis is treated with intravenous antifungal agents , including itraconazole and voriconazole .
Allergic symptoms can be managed with corticosteroids because these drugs suppress the immune system and reduce inflammation .
However , in disseminated infections , corticosteroids must be discontinued to allow a protective immune response to occur .
A type of pneumonia called Pneumocystis pneumonia ( PCP ) is caused by Pneumocystis jirovecii .
Once thought to be a protozoan , this organism was formerly named P. carinii but it has been reclassified as a fungus and renamed based on biochemical and genetic analyses .
Pneumocystis is a leading cause of pneumonia in patients with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome ( AIDS ) and can be seen in other compromised patients and premature infants .
Respiratory infection leads to fever , cough , and shortness of breath .
Diagnosis of these infections can be difficult .
The organism is typically identified by microscopic examination of tissue and fluid samples from the lungs .
A PCR-based test is available to detect P. jirovecii in asymptomatic patients with AIDS .
The best treatment for these infections is the combination drug trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole ( TMP/SMZ ) .
These sulfa drugs often have adverse effects , but the benefits outweigh these risks .
Left untreated , PCP infections are often fatal .
Infection by the encapsulated yeast Cryptococcus neoformans causes cryptococcosis .
This fungus is ubiquitous in the soil and can be isolated from bird feces .
Immunocompromised people are infected by inhaling basidiospores found in aerosols .
The thick polysaccharide capsule surrounding these microbes enables them to avoid clearance by the alveolar macrophage .
Initial symptoms of infection include fever , fatigue , and a dry cough .
In immunocompromised patients , pulmonary infections often disseminate to the brain .
The resulting meningitis produces headaches , sensitivity to light , and confusion .
Left untreated , such infections are often fatal .
Cryptococcus infections are often diagnosed based on microscopic examination of lung tissues or cerebrospinal fluids .
India ink preparations can be used to visualize the extensive capsules that surround the yeast cells .
Serological tests are also available to confirm the diagnosis .
Amphotericin B , in combination with flucytosine , is typically used for the initial treatment of pulmonary infections .
Amphotericin B is a broad-spectrum antifungal drug that targets fungal cell membranes .
It can also adversely impact host cells and produce side effects .
For this reason , clinicians must carefully balance the risks and benefits of treatments in these patients .
Because it is difficult to eradicate cryptococcal infections , patients usually need to take fluconazole for up to 6 months after treatment with amphotericin B and flucytosine to clear the fungus .
Cryptococcal infections are more common in immunocompromised people , such as those with AIDS .
These patients typically require life-long suppressive therapy to control this fungal infection .
The urogenital system is a combination of the urinary tract and reproductive system .
Because both systems are open to the external environment , they are prone to infections .
Some infections are introduced from outside , whereas others result from imbalances in the microbiota of the urogenital tract .
Urinary tract infections ( UTIs ) are one the most common bacterial infections worldwide , affecting over 100 million people each year .
During 2007 in the United States , doctor office visits for UTIs exceeded 10 million , and an additional 2–3 million emergency department visits were attributed to UTIs .
Sexually transmitted infections ( STIs ) also primarily affect the urogenital system and are an important cause of patient morbidity .
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ( CDC ) estimates that there are approximately 20 million new cases of reportable STIs annually in the United States , half of which occur in people aged 15–24 years old .
When STIs spread to the reproductive organs , they can be associated with severe morbidity and loss of fertility .
Because males and females have different urogenital anatomy , urogenital infections may affect males and females differently .
In this chapter , we will discuss the various microbes that cause urogenital disease and the factors that contribute to their pathogenicity .
The reproductive system is responsible for the production of gametes and participates in conception and , in females , development of offspring .
Due to their proximity and overlap , these systems are often studied together and referred to as the urogenital system ( or genitourinary system ) .
The basic structures of the urinary tract are common in males and females .
However , there are unique locations for these structures in females and males , and there is a significant amount of overlap between the urinary and genital structures in males .
illustrates the urinary anatomy common to females and males .
The kidneys carry out the urinary system ’ s primary functions of filtering the blood and maintaining water and electrolyte balance .
The kidneys are composed of millions of filtration units called nephrons .
Each nephron is in intimate contact with blood through a specialized capillary bed called the glomerulus ( plural glomeruli ) .
Fluids , electrolytes , and molecules from the blood pass from the glomerulus into the nephron , creating the filtrate that becomes urine .
Urine that collects in each kidney empties through a ureter and drains to the urinary bladder , which stores urine .
Urine is released from the bladder to the urethra , which transports it to be excreted from the body through the urinary meatus , the opening of the urethra .
The male reproductive system is located in close proximity to the urinary system , and the urethra is part of both systems .
The testes are responsible for the production of sperm .
The epididymis is a coiled tube that collects sperm from the testes and passes it on to the vas deferens .
The epididymis is also the site of sperm maturation after they leave the testes .
The seminal vesicles and prostate are accessory glands that produce fluid that supports sperm .
During ejaculation , the vas deferens releases this mixture of fluid and sperm , called semen , into the urethra , which extends to the end of the penis .
The female reproductive system is located near the urinary system .
The external genitalia ( vulva ) in females open to the vagina , a muscular passageway that connects to the cervix .
The cervix is the lower part of the uterus ( the organ where a fertilized egg will implant and develop ) .
The cervix is a common site of infection , especially for viruses that may lead to cervical cancer .
The uterus leads to the fallopian tubes and eventually to the ovaries .
Ovaries are the site of ova ( egg ) production , as well as the site of estrogen and progesterone production that are involved in maturation and maintenance of reproductive organs , preparation of the uterus for pregnancy , and regulation of the menstrual cycle .
The normal microbiota of different body sites provides an important nonspecific defense against infectious diseases ( see ) , and the urogenital tract is no exception .
In both men and women , however , the kidneys are sterile .
Although urine does contain some antibacterial components , bacteria will grow in urine left out at room temperature .
Therefore , it is primarily the flushing action that keeps the ureters and bladder free of microbes .
Below the bladder , the normal microbiota of the male urogenital system is found primarily within the distal urethra and includes bacterial species that are commonly associated with the skin microbiota .
In women , the normal microbiota is found within the distal one third of the urethra and the vagina .
The normal microbiota of the vagina becomes established shortly after birth and is a complex and dynamic population of bacteria that fluctuates in response to environmental changes .
Members of the vaginal microbiota play an important role in the nonspecific defense against vaginal infections and sexually transmitted infections by occupying cellular binding sites and competing for nutrients .
In addition , the production of lactic acid by members of the microbiota provides an acidic environment within the vagina that also serves as a defense against infections .
For the majority of women , the lactic-acid–producing bacteria in the vagina are dominated by a variety of species of Lactobacillus .
For women who lack sufficient lactobacilli in their vagina , lactic acid production comes primarily from other species of bacteria such as Leptotrichia spp. , Megasphaera spp. , and Atopobium vaginae .
use glycogen from vaginal epithelial cells for metabolism and production of lactic acid .
This process is tightly regulated by the hormone estrogen .
Increased levels of estrogen correlate with increased levels of vaginal glycogen , increased production of lactic acid , and a lower vaginal pH .
Therefore , decreases in estrogen during the menstrual cycle and with menopause are associated with decreased levels of vaginal glycogen and lactic acid , and a higher pH .
In addition to producing lactic acid , Lactobacillus spp .
also contribute to the defenses against infectious disease through their production of hydrogen peroxide and bacteriocins ( antibacterial peptides ) .
Infections of the urinary tract most commonly cause inflammation of the bladder ( cystitis ) or of the urethra ( urethritis ) .
Urethritis can be associated with cystitis , but can also be caused by sexually transmitted infections .
Symptoms of urethritis in men include burning sensation while urinating , discharge from the penis , and blood in the semen or the urine .
In women , urethritis is associated with painful and frequent urination , vaginal discharge , fever , chills , and abdominal pain .
The symptoms of cystitis are similar to those of urethritis .
When urethritis is caused by a sexually transmitted pathogen , additional symptoms involving the genitalia can occur .
These can include painful vesicles ( blisters ) , warts , and ulcers .
Ureteritis , a rare infection of the ureter , can also occur with cystitis .
These infections can be acute or chronic .
Pyelonephritis and glomerulonephritis are infections of the kidney that are potentially serious .
Pyelonephritis is an infection of one or both of the kidneys and may develop from a lower urinary tract infection ; the upper urinary tract , including the ureters , is often affected .
Signs and symptoms of pyelonephritis include fever , chills , nausea , vomiting , lower back pain , and frequent painful urination .
Pyelonephritis usually only becomes chronic in individuals who have malformations in or damage to the kidneys .
Glomerulonephritis is an inflammation of the glomeruli of the nephrons .
Symptoms include excessive protein and blood in urine , increased blood pressure , and fluid retention leading to edema of face , hands , and feet .
Glomerulonephritis may be an acute infection or it can become chronic .
Infections occurring within the reproductive structures of males include epididymitis , orchitis , and prostatitis .
Bacterial infections may cause inflammation of the epididymis , called epididymitis .
This inflammation causes pain in the scrotum , testicles , and groin ; swelling , redness , and warm skin in these areas may also be observed .
Inflammation of the testicle , called orchitis , is usually caused by a bacterial infection spreading from the epididymis , but it can also be a complication of mumps , a viral disease .
The symptoms are similar to those of epididymitis , and it is not uncommon for them both to occur together , in which case the condition is called epididymo-orchitis .
Inflammation of the prostate gland , called prostatitis , can result from a bacterial infection .
The signs and symptoms of prostatitis include fever , chills , and pain in the bladder , testicles , and penis .
Patients may also experience burning during urination , difficulty emptying the bladder , and painful ejaculation .
Because of its proximity to the exterior , the vagina is a common site for infections in women .
The general term for any inflammation of the vagina is vaginitis .
Vaginitis often develops as a result of an overgrowth of bacteria or fungi that normally reside in the vaginal microbiota , although it can also result from infections by transient pathogens .
Bacterial infections of the vagina are called bacterial vaginosis , whereas fungal infections ( typically involving Candida spp . )
are called yeast infections .
Dynamic changes affecting the normal microbiota , acid production , and pH variations can be involved in the initiation of the microbial overgrowth and the development of vaginitis .
Although some individuals may have no symptoms , vaginosis and vaginitis can be associated with discharge , odor , itching , and burning .
Pelvic inflammatory disease ( PID ) is an infection of the female reproductive organs including the uterus , cervix , fallopian tubes , and ovaries .
The two most common pathogens are the sexually transmitted bacterial pathogens Neisseria gonorrhoeae and Chlamydia trachomatis .
Inflammation of the fallopian tubes , called salpingitis , is the most serious form of PID .
Symptoms of PID can vary between women and include pain in the lower abdomen , vaginal discharge , fever , chills , nausea , diarrhea , vomiting , and painful urination .
Hormonal changes , particularly shifts in estrogen in women due to pregnancy or menopause , can increase susceptibility to urogenital infections .
As discussed earlier , estrogen plays an important role in regulating the availability of glycogen and subsequent production of lactic acid by Lactobacillus species .
Low levels of estrogen are associated with an increased vaginal pH and an increased risk of bacterial vaginosis and yeast infections .
Estrogen also plays a role in maintaining the elasticity , strength , and thickness of the vaginal wall , and keeps the vaginal wall lubricated , reducing dryness .
Low levels of estrogen are associated with thinning of the vaginal wall .
This thinning increases the risk of tears and abrasions , which compromise the protective barrier and increase susceptibility to pathogens .
Another common cause of urogenital infections in females is fecal contamination that occurs because of the close proximity of the anus and the urethra .
Escherichia coli , an important member of the digestive tract microbiota , is the most common cause of urinary tract infections ( urethritis and cystitis ) in women ; it generally causes infection when it is introduced to the urethra in fecal matter .
Good hygiene can reduce the risk of urinary tract infections by this route .
In men , urinary tract infections are more commonly associated with other conditions , such as an enlarged prostate , kidney stones , or placement of a urinary catheter .
All of these conditions impair the normal emptying of the bladder , which serves to flush out microbes capable of causing infection .
Infections that are transmitted between individuals through sexual contact are called sexually transmitted infections ( STIs ) or sexually transmitted diseases ( STDs ) .
( The CDC prefers the term STD , but WHO prefers STI , which encompasses infections that result in disease as well as those that are subclinical or asymptomatic . )
STIs often affect the external genitalia and skin , where microbes are easily transferred through physical contact .
Lymph nodes in the genital region may also become swollen as a result of infection .
However , many STIs have systemic effects as well , causing symptoms that range from mild ( e.g. , general malaise ) to severe ( e.g. , liver damage or serious immunosuppression ) .
Bacteria are the most common causes of UTIs , especially in the urethra and bladder .
Cystitis is most often caused by a bacterial infection of the bladder , but it can also occur as a reaction to certain treatments or irritants such as radiation treatment , hygiene sprays , or spermicides .
Common symptoms of cystitis include dysuria ( urination accompanied by burning , discomfort , or pain ) , pyuria ( pus in the urine ) , hematuria ( blood in the urine ) , and bladder pain .
In women , bladder infections are more common because the urethra is short and located in close proximity to the anus , which can result in infections of the urinary tract by fecal bacteria .
Bladder infections are also more common in the elderly because the bladder may not empty fully , causing urine to pool ; the elderly may also have weaker immune systems that make them more vulnerable to infection .
Conditions such as prostatitis in men or kidney stones in both men and women can impact proper drainage of urine and increase risk of bladder infections .
Catheterization can also increase the risk of bladder infection ( see ) .
Gram-negative bacteria such as Escherichia coli ( most commonly ) , Proteus vulgaris , Pseudomonas aeruginosa , and Klebsiella pneumoniae cause most bladder infections .
Gram-positive pathogens associated with cystitis include the coagulase-negative Staphylococcus saprophyticus , Enterococcus faecalis , and Streptococcus agalactiae .
Routine manual urinalysis using a urine dipstick or test strip can be used for rapid screening of infection .
These test strips are either held in a urine stream or dipped in a sample of urine to test for the presence of nitrites , leukocyte esterase , protein , or blood that can indicate an active bacterial infection .
The presence of nitrite may indicate the presence of E. coli or K. pneumonia ; these bacteria produce nitrate reductase , which converts nitrate to nitrite .
The leukocyte esterase ( LE ) test detects the presence of neutrophils as an indication of active infection .
Low specificity , sensitivity , or both , associated with these rapid screening tests require that care be taken in interpretation of results and in their use in diagnosis of urinary tract infections .
Therefore , positive LE or nitrite results are followed by a urine culture to confirm a bladder infection .
Urine culture is generally accomplished using blood agar and MacConkey agar , and it is important to culture a clean catch of urine to minimize contamination with normal microbiota of the penis and vagina .
A clean catch of urine is accomplished by first washing the labia and urethral opening of female patients or the penis of male patients .
The patient then releases a small amount of urine into the toilet bowl before stopping the flow of urine .
Finally , the patient resumes urination , this time filling the container used to collect the specimen .
Bacterial cystitis is commonly treated with fluoroquinolones , nitrofurantoin , cephalosporins , or a combination of trimethoprim and sulfamethoxazole .
Pain medications may provide relief for patients with dysuria .
Treatment is more difficult in elderly patients , who experience a higher rate of complications such as sepsis and kidney infections .
Pyelonephritis , an inflammation of the kidney , can be caused by bacteria that have spread from other parts of the urinary tract ( such as the bladder ) .
In addition , pyelonephritis can develop from bacteria that travel through the bloodstream to the kidney .
When the infection spreads from the lower urinary tract , the causative agents are typically fecal bacteria such as E. coli .
Common signs and symptoms include back pain ( due to the location of the kidneys ) , fever , and nausea or vomiting .
Gross hematuria ( visible blood in the urine ) occurs in 30–40 % of women but is rare in men .
The infection can become serious , potentially leading to bacteremia and systemic effects that can become life-threatening .
Scarring of the kidney can occur and persist after the infection has cleared , which may lead to dysfunction .
Diagnosis of pyelonephritis is made using microscopic examination of urine , culture of urine , testing for leukocyte esterase and nitrite levels , and examination of the urine for blood or protein .
It is also important to use blood cultures to evaluate the spread of the pathogen into the bloodstream .
Imaging of the kidneys may be performed in highrisk patients with diabetes or immunosuppression , the elderly , patients with previous renal damage , or to rule out an obstruction in the kidney .
Pyelonephritis can be treated with either oral or intravenous antibiotics , including penicillins , cephalosporins , vancomycin , fluoroquinolones , carbapenems , and aminoglycosides .
Glomerulonephritis occurs when the glomeruli of the nephrons are damaged from inflammation .
Whereas pyelonephritis is usually acute , glomerulonephritis may be acute or chronic .
The most well-characterized mechanism of glomerulonephritis is the post-streptococcal sequelae associated with Streptococcus pyogenes throat and skin infections .
Although S. pyogenes does not directly infect the glomeruli of the kidney , immune complexes that form in blood between S. pyogenes antigens and antibodies lodge in the capillary endothelial cell junctions of the glomeruli and trigger a damaging inflammatory response .
Glomerulonephritis can also occur in patients with bacterial endocarditis ( infection and inflammation of heart tissue ) ; however , it is currently unknown whether glomerulonephritis associated with endocarditis is also immune-mediated .
Leptospira are generally harmless spirochetes that are commonly found in the soil .
However , some pathogenic species can cause an infection called leptospirosis in the kidneys and other organs .
Leptospirosis can produce fever , headache , chills , vomiting , diarrhea , and rash with severe muscular pain .
If the disease continues to progress , infection of the kidney , meninges , or liver may occur and may lead to organ failure or meningitis .
When the kidney and liver become seriously infected , it is called Weil ’ s disease .
Pulmonary hemorrhagic syndrome can also develop in the lungs , and jaundice may occur .
are found widely in animals such as dogs , horses , cattle , pigs , and rodents , and are excreted in their urine .
Humans generally become infected by coming in contact with contaminated soil or water , often while swimming or during flooding ; infection can also occur through contact with body fluids containing the bacteria .
The bacteria may enter the body through mucous membranes , skin injuries , or by ingestion .
The mechanism of pathogenicity is not well understood .
Leptospirosis is extremely rare in the United States , although it is endemic in Hawaii ; 50 % of all cases in the United States come from Hawaii .
It is more common in tropical than in temperate climates , and individuals who work with animals or animal products are most at risk .
The bacteria can also be cultivated in specialized media , with growth observed in broth in a few days to four weeks ; however , diagnosis of leptospirosis is generally made using faster methods , such as detection of antibodies to Leptospira spp .
in patient samples using serologic testing .
Polymerase chain reaction ( PCR ) , enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay ( ELISA ) , slide agglutination , and indirect immunofluorescence tests may all be used for diagnosis .
Treatment for leptospirosis involves broad-spectrum antibiotics such as penicillin and doxycycline .
For more serious cases of leptospirosis , antibiotics may be given intravenously .
There are two main categories of bacterial urethritis : gonorrheal and nongonococcal .
Gonorrheal urethritis is caused by Neisseria gonorrhoeae and is associated with gonorrhea , a common STI .
This cause of urethritis will be discussed in .
The term nongonococcal urethritis ( NGU ) refers to inflammation of the urethra that is unrelated to N. gonorrhoeae .
In women , NGU is often asymptomatic .
In men , NGU is typically a mild disease , but can lead to purulent discharge and dysuria .
Because the symptoms are often mild or nonexistent , most infected individuals do not know that they are infected , yet they are carriers of the disease .
Asymptomatic patients also have no reason to seek treatment , and although not common , untreated NGU can spread to the reproductive organs , causing pelvic inflammatory disease and salpingitis in women and epididymitis and prostatitis in men .
Important bacterial pathogens that cause nongonococcal urethritis include Chlamydia trachomatis , Mycoplasma genitalium , Ureaplasma urealyticum , and Mycoplasma hominis .
C. trachomatis is a difficult-to-stain , gram-negative bacterium with an ovoid shape .
An intracellular pathogen , C .
trachomatis causes the most frequently reported STI in the United States , chlamydia .
Although most persons infected with C. trachomatis are asymptomatic , some patients can present with NGU .
C. trachomatis can also cause nonurogenital infections such as the ocular disease trachoma ( see ) .
The life cycle of C. trachomatis is illustrated in .
C. trachomatis has multiple possible virulence factors that are currently being studied to evaluate their roles in causing disease .
These include polymorphic outer-membrane autotransporter proteins , stress response proteins , and type III secretion effectors .
The type III secretion effectors have been identified in gram-negative pathogens , including C. trachomatis .
This virulence factor is an assembly of more than 20 proteins that form what is called an injectisome for the transfer of other effector proteins that target the infected host cells .
The outer-membrane autotransporter proteins are also an effective mechanism of delivering virulence factors involved in colonization , disease progression , and immune system evasion .
Other species associated with NGU include Mycoplasma genitalium , Ureaplasma urealyticum , and Mycoplasma hominis .
These bacteria are commonly found in the normal microbiota of healthy individuals , who may acquire them during birth or through sexual contact , but they can sometimes cause infections leading to urethritis ( in males and females ) or vaginitis and cervicitis ( in females ) .
M. genitalium is a more common cause of urethritis in most settings than N. gonorrhoeae , although it is less common than C. trachomatis .
It is responsible for approximately 30 % of recurrent or persistent infections , 20–25 % of nonchlamydial NGU cases , and 15 % –20 % of NGU cases .
M. genitalium attaches to epithelial cells and has substantial antigenic variation that helps it evade host immune responses .
It has lipid-associated membrane proteins that are involved in causing inflammation .
Several possible virulence factors have been implicated in the pathogenesis of U. urealyticum .
These include the ureaplasma proteins phospholipase A , phospholipase C , multiple banded antigen ( MBA ) , urease , and immunoglobulin α protease .
The phospholipases are virulence factors that damage the cytoplasmic membrane of target cells .
The immunoglobulin α protease is an important defense against antibodies .
It can generate hydrogen peroxide , which may adversely affect host cell membranes through the production of reactive oxygen species .
Treatments differ for gonorrheal and nongonococcal urethritis .
However , N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis are often simultaneously present , which is an important consideration for treatment .
NGU is most commonly treated using tetracyclines ( such as doxycycline ) and azithromycin ; erythromycin is an alternative option .
Tetracyclines and fluoroquinolones are most commonly used to treat U. urealyticum , but resistance to tetracyclines is becoming an increasing problem .
While tetracyclines have been the treatment of choice for M. hominis , increasing resistance means that other options must be used .
Clindamycin and fluoroquinolones are alternatives .
M. genitalium is generally susceptible to doxycycline , azithromycin , and moxifloxacin .
Like other mycoplasma , M. genitalium does not have a cell wall and therefore β-lactams ( including penicillins and cephalosporins ) are not effective treatments .
Identify the most common bacterial pathogens that can cause infections of the reproductive system Compare the major characteristics of specific bacterial diseases affecting the reproductive system In addition to infections of the urinary tract , bacteria commonly infect the reproductive tract .
As with the urinary tract , parts of the reproductive system closest to the external environment are the most likely sites of infection .
Often , the same microbes are capable of causing urinary tract and reproductive tract infections .
Inflammation of the vagina is called vaginitis , often caused by a bacterial infection .
It is also possible to have an imbalance in the normal vaginal microbiota without inflammation called bacterial vaginosis ( BV ) .
Vaginosis may be asymptomatic or may cause mild symptoms such as a thin , white-to-yellow , homogeneous vaginal discharge , burning , odor , and itching .
The major causative agent is Gardnerella vaginalis , a gram-variable to gram-negative pleomorphic bacterium .
Other causative agents include anaerobic species such as members of the genera Bacteroides and Fusobacterium .
Additionally , ureaplasma and mycoplasma may be involved .
The disease is usually self-limiting , although antibiotic treatment is recommended if symptoms develop .
G. vaginalis appears to be more virulent than other vaginal bacterial species potentially associated with BV .
Like Lactobacillus spp. , G. vaginalis is part of the normal vaginal microbiota , but when the population of Lactobacillus spp .
decreases and the vaginal pH increases , G. vaginalis flourishes , causing vaginosis by attaching to vaginal epithelial cells and forming a thick protective biofilm .
G. vaginalis also produces a cytotoxin called vaginolysin that lyses vaginal epithelial cells and red blood cells .
Since G. vaginalis can also be isolated from healthy women , the “ gold standard ” for the diagnosis of BV is direct examination of vaginal secretions and not the culture of G. vaginalis .
Diagnosis of bacterial vaginosis from vaginal secretions can be accurately made in three ways .
The first is to use a DNA probe .
The second method is to assay for sialidase activity ( sialidase is an enzyme produced by G. vaginalis and other bacteria associated with vaginosis , including Bacteroides spp. , Prevotella spp. , and Mobiluncus spp . ) .
The third method is to assess gram-stained vaginal smears for microscopic morphology and relative numbers and types of bacteria , squamous epithelial cells , and leukocytes .
By examining slides prepared from vaginal swabs , it is possible to distinguish lactobacilli ( long , grampositive rods ) from other gram-negative species responsible for BV .
A shift in predominance from gram-positive bacilli to gram-negative coccobacilli can indicate BV .
Additionally , the slide may contain so-called clue cells , which are epithelial cells that appear to have a granular or stippled appearance due to bacterial cells attached to their surface .
Treatment is often unnecessary because the infection often clears on its own .
However , in some cases , antibiotics such as topical or oral clindamycin or metronidazole may be prescribed .
Alternative treatments include oral tinidazole or clindamycin ovules ( vaginal suppositories ) .
Also known as the clap , gonorrhea is a common sexually transmitted disease of the reproductive system that is especially prevalent in individuals between the ages of 15 and 24 .
It is caused by Neisseria gonorrhoeae , often called gonococcus or GC , which have fimbriae that allow the cells to attach to epithelial cells .
It also has a type of lipopolysaccharide endotoxin called lipooligosaccharide as part of the outer membrane structure that enhances its pathogenicity .
In addition to causing urethritis , N. gonorrhoeae can infect other body tissues such as the skin , meninges , pharynx , and conjunctiva .
Many infected individuals ( both men and women ) are asymptomatic carriers of gonorrhea .
When symptoms do occur , they manifest differently in males and females .
Males may develop pain and burning during urination and discharge from the penis that may be yellow , green , or white .
Less commonly , the testicles may become swollen or tender .
Over time , these symptoms can increase and spread .
In some cases , chronic infection develops .
The disease can also develop in the rectum , causing symptoms such as discharge , soreness , bleeding , itching , and pain ( especially in association with bowel movements ) .
Women may develop pelvic pain , discharge from the vagina , intermenstrual bleeding ( i.e. , bleeding not associated with normal menstruation ) , and pain or irritation associated with urination .
As with men , the infection can become chronic .
In women , however , chronic infection can cause increases in menstrual flow .
Rectal infection can also occur , with the symptoms previously described for men .
Infections that spread to the endometrium and fallopian tubes can cause pelvic inflammatory disease ( PID ) , characterized by pain in the lower abdominal region , dysuria , vaginal discharge , and fever .
When a gonorrhea infection disseminates throughout the body , serious complications can develop .
The infection may spread through the blood ( bacteremia ) and affect organs throughout the body , including the heart ( gonorrheal endocarditis ) , joints ( gonorrheal arthritis ) , and meninges encasing the brain ( meningitis ) .
Urethritis caused by N. gonorrhoeae can be difficult to treat due to antibiotic resistance ( see ) .
Some strains have developed resistance to the fluoroquinolones , so cephalosporins are often a first choice for treatment .
Because co-infection with C. trachomatis is common , the CDC recommends treating with a combination regimen of ceftriaxone and azithromycin .
Treatment of sexual partners is also recommended to avoid reinfection and spread of infection to others .
Chlamydia trachomatis is the causative agent of the STI chlamydia .
While many Chlamydia infections are asymptomatic , chlamydia is a major cause of nongonococcal urethritis ( NGU ) and may also cause epididymitis and orchitis in men .
In women , chlamydia infections can cause urethritis , salpingitis , and PID .
In addition , chlamydial infections may be associated with an increased risk of cervical cancer .
Because chlamydia is widespread , often asymptomatic , and has the potential to cause substantial complications , routine screening is recommended for sexually active women who are under age 25 , at high risk ( i.e. , not in a monogamous relationship ) , or beginning prenatal care .
Certain serovars of C. trachomatis can cause an infection of the lymphatic system in the groin known as lymphogranuloma venereum .
This condition is commonly found in tropical regions and can also co-occur in conjunction with human immunodeficiency virus ( HIV ) infection .
After the microbes invade the lymphatic system , buboes ( large lymph nodes , see ) form and can burst , releasing pus through the skin .
The male genitals can become greatly enlarged and in women the rectum may become narrow .
Urogenital infections caused by C. trachomatis can be treated using azithromycin or doxycycline ( the recommended regimen from the CDC ) .
Erythromycin , levofloxacin , and ofloxacin are alternatives .
Syphilis is spread through direct physical ( generally sexual ) contact , and is caused by the gram-negative spirochete Treponema pallidum .
T. pallidum has a relatively simple genome and lacks lipopolysaccharide endotoxin characteristic of gram-negative bacteria .
However , it does contain lipoproteins that trigger an immune response in the host , causing tissue damage that may enhance the pathogen ’ s ability to disseminate while evading the host immune system .
After entering the body , T. pallidum moves rapidly into the bloodstream and other tissues .
If not treated effectively , syphilis progresses through three distinct stages : primary , secondary , and tertiary .
Primary syphilis appears as a single lesion on the cervix , penis , or anus within 10 to 90 days of transmission .
Such lesions contain many T. pallidum cells and are highly infectious .
The lesion , called a hard chancre , is initially hard and painless , but it soon develops into an ulcerated sore .
Localized lymph node swelling may occur as well .
In some cases , these symptoms may be relatively mild , and the lesion may heal on its own within two to six weeks .
Because the lesions are painless and often occur in hidden locations ( e.g. , the cervix or anus ) , infected individuals sometimes do not notice them .
The secondary stage generally develops once the primary chancre has healed or begun to heal .
Secondary syphilis is characterized by a rash that affects the skin and mucous membranes of the mouth , vagina , or anus .
The rash often begins on the palms or the soles of the feet and spreads to the trunk and the limbs .
The rash may take many forms , such as macular or papular .
On mucous membranes , it may manifest as mucus patches or white , wartlike lesions called condylomata lata .
The rash may be accompanied by malaise , fever , and swelling of lymph nodes .
Individuals are highly contagious in the secondary stage , which lasts two to six weeks and is recurrent in about 25 % of cases .
After the secondary phase , syphilis can enter a latent phase , in which there are no symptoms but microbial levels remain high .
Blood tests can still detect the disease during latency .
The latent phase can persist for years .
Tertiary syphilis , which may occur 10 to 20 years after infection , produces the most severe symptoms and can be fatal .
Granulomatous lesions called gummas may develop in a variety of locations , including mucous membranes , bones , and internal organs .
Gummas can be large and destructive , potentially causing massive tissue damage .
The most deadly lesions are those of the cardiovascular system ( cardiovascular syphilis ) and the central nervous system ( neurosyphilis ) .
Cardiovascular syphilis can result in a fatal aortic aneurysm ( rupture of the aorta ) or coronary stenosis ( a blockage of the coronary artery ) .
Damage to the central nervous system can cause dementia , personality changes , seizures , general paralysis , speech impairment , loss of vision and hearing , and loss of bowel and bladder control .
The recommended methods for diagnosing early syphilis are darkfield or brightfield ( silver stain ) microscopy of tissue or exudate from lesions to detect T. pallidum .
If these methods are not available , two types of serologic tests ( treponemal and nontreponemal ) can be used for a presumptive diagnosis once the spirochete has spread in the body .
Nontreponemal serologic tests include the Venereal Disease Research Laboratory ( VDRL ) and rapid plasma reagin ( RPR ) tests .
These are similar screening tests that detect nonspecific antibodies ( those for lipid antigens produced during infection ) rather than those produced against the spirochete .
Confirmatory testing , rather than screening , must be done using treponemal rather than nontreponemal tests because only the former tests for antibodies to spirochete antigens .
Both treponemal and nontreponemal tests should be used ( as opposed to just one ) since both tests have limitations than can result in false positives or false negatives .
Neurosyphilis can not be diagnosed using a single test .
With or without clinical signs , it is generally necessary to assess a variety of factors , including reactive serologic test results , cerebrospinal fluid cell count abnormalities , cerebrospinal fluid protein abnormalities , or reactive VDRL-CSF ( the VDRL test of cerebrospinal fluid ) .
The VDRLCSF is highly specific , but not sufficiently sensitive for conclusive diagnosis .
The recommended treatment for syphilis is parenteral penicillin G ( especially long-acting benzathine penicillin , although the exact choice depends on the stage of disease ) .
Other options include tetracycline and doxycycline .
Congenital syphilis is passed by mother to fetus when untreated primary or secondary syphilis is present .
In many cases , infection may lead to miscarriage or stillbirth .
Children born with congenital syphilis show symptoms of secondary syphilis and may develop mucus patches that deform the nose .
In infants , gummas can cause significant tissue damage to organs and teeth .
Many other complications may develop , such as osteochondritis , anemia , blindness , bone deformations , neurosyphilis , and cardiovascular lesions .
Because congenital syphilis poses such a risk to the fetus , expectant mothers are screened for syphilis infection during the first trimester of pregnancy as part of the TORCH panel of prenatal tests .
The sexually transmitted infection chancroid is caused by the gram-negative rod Haemophilus ducreyi .
It is characterized by soft chancres on the genitals or other areas associated with sexual contact , such as the mouth and anus .
Unlike the hard chancres associated with syphilis , soft chancres develop into painful , open sores that may bleed or produce fluid that is highly contagious .
In addition to causing chancres , the bacteria can invade the lymph nodes , potentially leading to pus discharge through the skin from lymph nodes in the groin .
Like other genital lesions , soft chancres are of particular concern because they compromise the protective barriers of the skin or mucous membranes , making individuals more susceptible to HIV and other sexually transmitted diseases .
Several virulence factors have been associated with H. ducreyi , including lipooligosaccharides , protective outer membrane proteins , antiphagocytic proteins , secretory proteins , and collagen-specific adhesin NcaA .
The collagenspecific adhesion NcaA plays an important role in initial cellular attachment and colonization .
Outer membrane proteins DsrA and DltA have been shown to provide protection from serum-mediated killing by antibodies and complement .
H. ducreyi is difficult to culture ; thus , diagnosis is generally based on clinical observation of genital ulcers and tests that rule out other diseases with similar ulcers , such as syphilis and genital herpes .
PCR tests for H. ducreyi have been developed in some laboratories , but as of 2015 none had been cleared by the US Food and Drug Administration ( FDA ) .
Recommended treatments for chancroid include antibiotics such as azithromycin , ciprofloxacin , erythromycin and ceftriaxone .
Resistance to ciprofloxacin and erythromycin has been reported .
Identify the most common viruses that cause infections of the reproductive system Compare the major characteristics of specific viral diseases affecting the reproductive system Several viruses can cause serious problems for the human reproductive system .
Most of these viral infections are incurable , increasing the risk of persistent sexual transmission .
In addition , such viral infections are very common in the United States .
For example , human papillomavirus ( HPV ) is the most common STI in the country , with an estimated prevalence of 79.1 million infections in 2008 ; herpes simplex virus 2 ( HSV-2 ) is the next most prevalent STI at 24.1 million infections .
In this section , we will examine these and other major viral infections of the reproductive system .
Genital herpes is a common condition caused by the herpes simplex virus , an enveloped , doublestranded DNA virus that is classified into two distinct types .
Herpes simplex virus has several virulence factors , including infected cell protein ( ICP ) 34.5 , which helps in replication and inhibits the maturation of dendritic cells as a mechanism of avoiding elimination by the immune system .
In addition , surface glycoproteins on the viral envelope promote the coating of herpes simplex virus with antibodies and complement factors , allowing the virus to appear as “ self ” and prevent immune system activation and elimination .
There are two herpes simplex virus types .
While herpes simplex virus type 1 ( HSV-1 ) is generally associated with oral lesions like cold sores or fever blisters ( see ) , herpes simplex virus type 2 ( HSV-2 ) is usually associated with genital herpes .
However , both viruses can infect either location as well as other parts of the body .
Oral-genital contact can spread either virus from the mouth to the genital region or vice versa .
Many infected individuals do not develop symptoms , and thus do not realize that they carry the virus .
However , in some infected individuals , fever , chills , malaise , swollen lymph nodes , and pain precede the development of fluidfilled vesicles that may be irritating and uncomfortable .
When these vesicles burst , they release infectious fluid and allow transmission of HSV .
In addition , open herpes lesions can increase the risk of spreading or acquiring HIV .
In men , the herpes lesions typically develop on the penis and may be accompanied by a watery discharge .
In women , the vesicles develop most commonly on the vulva , but may also develop on the vagina or cervix .
The symptoms are typically mild , although the lesions may be irritating or accompanied by urinary discomfort .
Use of condoms may not always be an effective means of preventing transmission of genital herpes since the lesions can occur on areas other than the genitals .
Herpes simplex viruses can cause recurrent infections because the virus can become latent and then be reactivated .
This occurs more commonly with HSV-2 than with HSV-1 .
The virus moves down peripheral nerves , typically sensory neurons , to ganglia in the spine ( either the trigeminal ganglion or the lumbar-sacral ganglia ) and becomes latent .
Reactivation can later occur , causing the formation of new vesicles .
HSV-2 most effectively reactivates from the lumbar-sacral ganglia .
Not everyone infected with HSV-2 experiences reactivations , which are typically associated with stressful conditions , and the frequency of reactivation varies throughout life and among individuals .
Between outbreaks or when there are no obvious vesicles , the virus can still be transmitted .
Virologic and serologic techniques are used for diagnosis .
The virus may be cultured from lesions .
The immunostaining methods that are used to detect virus from cultures generally require less expertise than methods based on cytopathic effect ( CPE ) , as well as being a less expensive option .
However , PCR or other DNA amplification methods may be preferred because they provide the most rapid results without waiting for culture amplification .
PCR is also best for detecting systemic infections .
Serologic techniques are also useful in some circumstances , such as when symptoms persist but PCR testing is negative .
While there is no cure or vaccine for HSV-2 infections , antiviral medications are available that manage the infection by keeping the virus in its dormant or latent phase , reducing signs and symptoms .
If the medication is discontinued , then the condition returns to its original severity .
The recommended medications , which may be taken at the start of an outbreak or daily as a method of prophylaxis , are acyclovir , famciclovir , and valacyclovir .
Herpes infections in newborns , referred to as neonatal herpes , are generally transmitted from the mother to the neonate during childbirth , when the child is exposed to pathogens in the birth canal .
Infections can occur regardless of whether lesions are present in the birth canal .
In most cases , the infection of the newborn is limited to skin , mucous membranes , and eyes , and outcomes are good .
However , sometimes the virus becomes disseminated and spreads to the central nervous system , resulting in motor function deficits or death .
In some cases , infections can occur before birth when the virus crosses the placenta .
This can cause serious complications in fetal development and may result in spontaneous abortion or severe disabilities if the fetus survives .
The condition is most serious when the mother is infected with HSV for the first time during pregnancy .
Thus , expectant mothers are screened for HSV infection during the first trimester of pregnancy as part of the TORCH panel of prenatal tests ( see ) .
Systemic acyclovir treatment is recommended to treat newborns with neonatal herpes .
Warts of all types are caused by a variety of strains of human papillomavirus ( HPV ) ( see ) .
Condylomata acuminata , more commonly called genital warts or venereal warts , are an extremely prevalent STI caused by certain strains of HPV .
Condylomata are irregular , soft , pink growths that are found on external genitalia or the anus .
HPV is a small , non-enveloped virus with a circular double-stranded DNA genome .
Researchers have identified over 200 different strains ( called types ) of HPV , with approximately 40 causing STIs .
While some types of HPV cause genital warts , HPV infection is often asymptomatic and self-limiting .
However , genital HPV infection often co-occurs with other STIs like syphilis or gonorrhea .
Additionally , some forms of HPV ( not the same ones associated with genital warts ) are associated with cervical cancers .
At least 14 oncogenic ( cancer-causing ) HPV types are known to have a causal association with cervical cancers .
Examples of oncogenic HPV are types 16 and 18 , which are associated with 70 % of cervical cancers .
Oncogenic HPV types can also cause oropharyngeal cancer , anal cancer , vaginal cancer , vulvar cancer , and penile cancer .
Most of these cancers are caused by HPV type 16 .
HPV virulence factors include proteins ( E6 and E7 ) that are capable of inactivating tumor suppressor proteins , leading to uncontrolled cell division and the development of cancer .
HPV can not be cultured , so molecular tests are the primary method used to detect HPV .
While routine HPV screening is not recommended for men , it is included in guidelines for women .
An initial screening for HPV at age 30 , conducted at the same time as a Pap test , is recommended .
If the tests are negative , then further HPV testing is recommended every five years .
More frequent testing may be needed in some cases .
The protocols used to collect , transport , and store samples vary based on both the type of HPV testing and the purpose of the testing .
This should be determined in individual cases in consultation with the laboratory that will perform the testing .
Because HPV testing is often conducted concurrently with Pap testing , the most common approach uses a single sample collection within one vial for both .
This approach uses liquid-based cytology ( LBC ) .
The samples are then used for Pap smear cytology as well as HPV testing and genotyping .
HPV can be recognized in Pap smears by the presence of cells called koilocytes ( called koilocytosis or koilocytotic atypia ) .
Koilocytes have a hyperchromatic atypical nucleus that stains darkly and a high ratio of nuclear material to cytoplasm .
There is a distinct clear appearance around the nucleus called a perinuclear halo .
Most HPV infections resolve spontaneously ; however , various therapies are used to treat and remove warts .
Topical medications such as imiquimod ( which stimulates the production of interferon ) , podofilox , or sinecatechins , may be effective .
Warts can also be removed using cryotherapy or surgery , but these approaches are less effective for genital warts than for other types of warts .
Electrocauterization and carbon dioxide laser therapy are also used for wart removal .
Regular Pap testing can detect abnormal cells that might progress to cervical cancer , followed by biopsy and appropriate treatment .
Vaccines for some of the high risk HPV types are now available .
Gardasil vaccine includes types 6 , 11 , 16 and 18 ( types 6 and 11 are associated with 90 % of genital wart infections and types 16 and 18 are associated with 70 % of cervical cancers ) .
Gardasil 9 vaccinates against the previous four types and an additional five high-risk types ( 31 , 33 , 45 , 52 , and 58 ) .
Cervarix vaccine includes just HPV types 16 and 18 .
Vaccination is the most effective way to prevent infection with oncogenic HPV , but it is important to note that not all oncogenic HPV types are covered by the available vaccines .
It is recommended for both boys and girls prior to sexual activity ( usually between the ages of nine and fifteen ) .
Summarize the important characteristics of vaginal candidiasis Only one major fungal pathogen affects the urogenital system .
Candida is a genus of fungi capable of existing in a yeast form or as a multicellular fungus .
are commonly found in the normal , healthy microbiota of the skin , gastrointestinal tract , respiratory system , and female urogenital tract .
However , they typically only cause disease in the female reproductive tract under conditions that compromise the host ’ s defenses .
While there are at least 20 Candida species of clinical importance , C. albicans is the species most commonly responsible for fungal vaginitis .
As discussed earlier , lactobacilli in the vagina inhibit the growth of other organisms , including bacteria and Candida , but disruptions can allow Candida to increase in numbers .
Typical disruptions include antibiotic therapy , illness ( especially diabetes ) , pregnancy , and the presence of transient microbes .
Immunosuppression can also play a role , and the severe immunosuppression associated with HIV infection often allows Candida to thrive .
This can cause genital or vaginal candidiasis , a condition characterized by vaginitis and commonly known as a yeast infection .
When a yeast infection develops , inflammation occurs along with symptoms of pruritus ( itching ) , a thick white or yellow discharge , and odor .
Other forms of candidiasis include cutaneous candidiasis ( see ) and oral thrush ( see ) .
Although Candida spp .
are found in the normal microbiota , Candida spp .
may also be transmitted between individuals .
Sexual contact is a common mode of transmission , although candidiasis is not considered an STI .
Diagnosis of vaginal candidiasis can be made using microscopic evaluation of vaginal secretions to determine whether there is an excess of Candida .
Culturing approaches are less useful because Candida is part of the normal microbiota and will regularly appear .
It is also easy to contaminate samples with Candida because it is so common , so care must be taken to handle clinical material appropriately .
Samples can be refrigerated if there is a delay in handling .
Candida is a dimorphic fungus , so it does not only exist in a yeast form ; cultivation can be used to identify chlamydospores and pseudohyphae , which develop from germ tubes .
The presence of the germ tube can be used in a diagnostic test in which cultured yeast cells are combined with rabbit serum and observed after a few hours for the presence of germ tubes .
Molecular tests are also available if needed .
The Affirm VPII Microbial Identification Test , for instance , tests simultaneously for the vaginal microbes C. albicans , G. vaginalis ( see ) , and Trichomonas vaginalis ( see ) .
Topical antifungal medications for vaginal candidiasis include butoconazole , miconazole , clotrimazole , tioconazole , and nystatin .
Oral treatment with fluconazole can be used .
There are often no clear precipitating factors for infection , so prevention is difficult .
Identify the most common protozoan pathogen that causes infections of the reproductive system Summarize the important characteristics of trichomoniasis Only one major protozoan species causes infections in the urogenital system .
Trichomoniasis , or “ trich , ” is the most common nonviral STI and is caused by a flagellated protozoan Trichomonas vaginalis .
T. vaginalis has an undulating membrane and , generally , an amoeboid shape when attached to cells in the vagina .
In culture , it has an oval shape .
T. vaginalis is commonly found in the normal microbiota of the vagina .
As with other vaginal pathogens , it can cause vaginitis when there is disruption to the normal microbiota .
It is found only as a trophozoite and does not form cysts .
T. vaginalis can adhere to cells using adhesins such as lipoglycans ; it also has other cell-surface virulence factors , including tetraspanins that are involved in cell adhesion , motility , and tissue invasion .
In addition , T. vaginalis is capable of phagocytosing other microbes of the normal microbiota , contributing to the development of an imbalance that is favorable to infection .
Both men and women can develop trichomoniasis .
Men are generally asymptomatic , and although women are more likely to develop symptoms , they are often asymptomatic as well .
When symptoms do occur , they are characteristic of urethritis .
Men experience itching , irritation , discharge from the penis , and burning after urination or ejaculation .
Women experience dysuria ; itching , burning , redness , and soreness of the genitalia ; and vaginal discharge .
The infection may also spread to the cervix .
Infection increases the risk of transmitting or acquiring HIV and is associated with pregnancy complications such as preterm birth .
Microscopic evaluation of wet mounts is an inexpensive and convenient method of diagnosis , but the sensitivity of this method is low .
Nucleic acid amplification testing ( NAAT ) is preferred due to its high sensitivity .
Using wet mounts and then NAAT for those who initially test negative is one option to improve sensitivity .
Samples may be obtained for NAAT using urine , vaginal , or endocervical specimens for women and with urine and urethral swabs for men .
It is also possible to use other methods such as the OSOM Trichomonas Rapid Test ( an immunochromatographic test that detects antigen ) and a DNA probe test for multiple species associated with vaginitis ( the Affirm VPII Microbial Identification Test discussed in section 23.5 ) .
T. vaginalis is sometimes detected on a Pap test , but this is not considered diagnostic due to high rates of false positives and negatives .
The recommended treatment for trichomoniasis is oral metronidazole or tinidazole .
Sexual partners should be treated as well .
Gastrointestinal ( GI ) diseases are so common that , unfortunately , most people have had first-hand experience with the unpleasant symptoms , such as diarrhea , vomiting , and abdominal discomfort .
The causes of gastrointestinal illness can vary widely , but such diseases can be grouped into two categories : those caused by infection ( the growth of a pathogen in the GI tract ) or intoxication ( the presence of a microbial toxin in the GI tract ) .
Foodborne pathogens like Escherichia coli O157 : H7 are among the most common sources of gastrointestinal disease .
Contaminated food and water have always posed a health risk for humans , but in today ’ s global economy , outbreaks can occur on a much larger scale .
E. coli O157 : H7 is a potentially deadly strain of E. coli with a history of contaminating meat and produce that are not properly processed .
The source of an E. coli O157 : H7 outbreak can be difficult to trace , especially if the contaminated food is processed in a foreign country .
Once the source is identified , authorities may issue recalls of the contaminated food products , but by then there are typically numerous cases of food poisoning , some of them fatal .
The parts of the mouth include the teeth , the gums , the tongue , the oral vestibule ( the space between the gums , lips , and teeth ) , and the oral cavity proper ( the space behind the teeth and gums ) .
Other parts of the GI tract are the pharynx , esophagus , stomach , small intestine , large intestine , rectum , and anus .
Accessory digestive organs include the salivary glands , liver , gallbladder , spleen , and pancreas .
The digestive system contains normal microbiota , including archaea , bacteria , fungi , protists , and even viruses .
Because this microbiota is important for normal functioning of the digestive system , alterations to the microbiota by antibiotics or diet can be harmful .
Additionally , the introduction of pathogens to the GI tract can cause infections and diseases .
In this section , we will review the microbiota found in a healthy digestive tract and the general signs and symptoms associated with oral and GI infections .
Food enters the digestive tract through the mouth , where mechanical digestion ( by chewing ) and chemical digestion ( by enzymes in saliva ) begin .
Within the mouth are the tongue , teeth , and salivary glands , including the parotid , sublingual , and submandibular glands .
The salivary glands produce saliva , which lubricates food and contains digestive enzymes .
The structure of a tooth begins with the visible outer surface , called the crown , which has to be extremely hard to withstand the force of biting and chewing .
The crown is covered with enamel , which is the hardest material in the body .
Underneath the crown , a layer of relatively hard dentin extends into the root of the tooth around the innermost pulp cavity , which includes the pulp chamber at the top of the tooth and pulp canal , or root canal , located in the root .
The pulp that fills the pulp cavity is rich in blood vessels , lymphatic vessels , connective tissue , and nerves .
The root of the tooth and some of the crown are covered with cementum , which works with the periodontal ligament to anchor the tooth in place in the jaw bone .
The soft tissues surrounding the teeth and bones are called gums , or gingiva .
The gingival space or gingival crevice is located between the gums and teeth .
Microbes such as bacteria and archaea are abundant in the mouth and coat all of the surfaces of the oral cavity .
However , different structures , such as the teeth or cheeks , host unique communities of both aerobic and anaerobic microbes .
Some factors appear to work against making the mouth hospitable to certain microbes .
For example , chewing allows microbes to mix better with saliva so they can be swallowed or spit out more easily .
Saliva also contains enzymes , including lysozyme , which can damage microbial cells .
Recall that lysozyme is part of the first line of defense in the innate immune system and cleaves the β- ( 1,4 ) glycosidic linkages between N-acetylglucosamine ( NAG ) and N-acetylmuramic acid ( NAM ) in bacterial peptidoglycan ( see ) .
Additionally , fluids containing immunoglobulins and phagocytic cells are produced in the gingival spaces .
Despite all of these chemical and mechanical activities , the mouth supports a large microbial community .
As food leaves the oral cavity , it travels through the pharynx , or the back of the throat , and moves into the esophagus , which carries the food from the pharynx to the stomach without adding any additional digestive enzymes .
The stomach produces mucus to protect its lining , as well as digestive enzymes and acid to break down food .
Partially digested food then leaves the stomach through the pyloric sphincter , reaching the first part of the small intestine called the duodenum .
Pancreatic juice , which includes enzymes and bicarbonate ions , is released into the small intestine to neutralize the acidic material from the stomach and to assist in digestion .
Bile , produced by the liver but stored in the gallbladder , is also released into the small intestine to emulsify fats so that they can travel in the watery environment of the small intestine .
Digestion continues in the small intestine , where the majority of nutrients contained in the food are absorbed .
Simple columnar epithelial cells called enterocytes line the lumen surface of the small intestinal folds called villi .
Each enterocyte has smaller microvilli ( cytoplasmic membrane extensions ) on the cellular apical surface that increase the surface area to allow more absorption of nutrients to occur .
Digested food leaves the small intestine and moves into the large intestine , or colon , where there is a more diverse microbiota .
Near this junction , there is a small pouch in the large intestine called the cecum , which attaches to the appendix .
Further digestion occurs throughout the colon and water is reabsorbed , then waste is excreted through the rectum , the last section of the colon , and out of the body through the anus .
The environment of most of the GI tract is harsh , which serves two purposes : digestion and immunity .
The stomach is an extremely acidic environment ( pH 1.5–3.5 ) due to the gastric juices that break down food and kill many ingested microbes ; this helps prevent infection from pathogens .
The environment in the small intestine is less harsh and is able to support microbial communities .
Microorganisms present in the small intestine can include lactobacilli , diptherioids and the fungus Candida .
On the other hand , the large intestine ( colon ) contains a diverse and abundant microbiota that is important for normal function .
These microbes include Bacteriodetes ( especially the genera Bacteroides and Prevotella ) and Firmicutes ( especially members of the genus Clostridium ) .
Methanogenic archaea and some fungi are also present , among many other species of bacteria .
These microbes all aid in digestion and contribute to the production of feces , the waste excreted from the digestive tract , and flatus , the gas produced from microbial fermentation of undigested food .
They can also produce valuable nutrients .
For example , lactic acid bacteria such as bifidobacteria can synthesize vitamins , such as vitamin B12 , folate , and riboflavin , that humans can not synthesize themselves .
E. coli found in the intestine can also break down food and help the body produce vitamin K , which is important for blood coagulation .
The GI tract has several other methods of reducing the risk of infection by pathogens .
The Peyer ’ s patches then secrete IgA and other pathogen-specific antibodies into the intestinal lumen to help keep intestinal microbes at safe levels .
Goblet cells , which are modified simple columnar epithelial cells , also line the GI tract .
Goblet cells secrete a gel-forming mucin , which is the major component of mucus .
The production of a protective layer of mucus helps reduce the risk of pathogens reaching deeper tissues .
The constant movement of materials through the gastrointestinal tract also helps to move transient pathogens out of the body .
In fact , feces are composed of approximately 25 % microbes , 25 % sloughed epithelial cells , 25 % mucus , and 25 % digested or undigested food .
Finally , the normal microbiota provides an additional barrier to infection via a variety of mechanisms .
For example , these organisms outcompete potential pathogens for space and nutrients within the intestine .
This is known as competitive exclusion .
Members of the microbiota may also secrete protein toxins known as bacteriocins that are able to bind to specific receptors on the surface of susceptible bacteria .
Despite numerous defense mechanisms that protect against infection , all parts of the digestive tract can become sites of infection or intoxication .
The term food poisoning is sometimes used as a catch-all for GI infections and intoxications , but not all forms of GI disease originate with foodborne pathogens or toxins .
In the mouth , fermentation by anaerobic microbes produces acids that damage the teeth and gums .
This can lead to tooth decay , cavities , and periodontal disease , a condition characterized by chronic inflammation and erosion of the gums .
Additionally , some pathogens can cause infections of the mucosa , glands , and other structures in the mouth , resulting in inflammation , sores , cankers , and other lesions .
An open sore in the mouth or GI tract is typically called an ulcer .
Infections and intoxications of the lower GI tract often produce symptoms such as nausea , vomiting , diarrhea , aches , and fever .
In some cases , vomiting and diarrhea may cause severe dehydration and other complications that can become serious or fatal .
Various clinical terms are used to describe gastrointestinal symptoms .
For example , gastritis is an inflammation of the stomach lining that results in swelling and enteritis refers to inflammation of the intestinal mucosa .
When the inflammation involves both the stomach lining and the intestinal lining , the condition is called gastroenteritis .
Inflammation of the liver is called hepatitis .
Inflammation of the colon , called colitis , commonly occurs in cases of food intoxication .
Because an inflamed colon does not reabsorb water as effectively as it normally does , stools become watery , causing diarrhea .
Damage to the epithelial cells of the colon can also cause bleeding and excess mucus to appear in watery stools , a condition called dysentery .
Explain the role of microbial activity in diseases of the mouth and oral cavity Compare the major characteristics of specific oral diseases and infections Despite the presence of saliva and the mechanical forces of chewing and eating , some microbes thrive in the mouth .
These microbes can cause damage to the teeth and can cause infections that have the potential to spread beyond the mouth and sometimes throughout the body .
Cavities of the teeth , known clinically as dental caries , are microbial lesions that cause damage to the teeth .
Over time , the lesion can grow through the outer enamel layer to infect the underlying dentin or even the innermost pulp .
If dental caries are not treated , the infection can become an abscess that spreads to the deeper tissues of the teeth , near the roots , or to the bloodstream .
Tooth decay results from the metabolic activity of microbes that live on the teeth .
A layer of proteins and carbohydrates forms when clean teeth come into contact with saliva .
Microbes are attracted to this food source and form a biofilm called plaque .
The most important cariogenic species in these biofilms is Streptococcus mutans .
When sucrose , a disaccharide sugar from food , is broken down by bacteria in the mouth , glucose and fructose are produced .
The glucose is used to make dextran , which is part of the extracellular matrix of the biofilm .
Fructose is fermented , producing organic acids such as lactic acid .
These acids dissolve the minerals of the tooth , including enamel , even though it is the hardest material in the body .
The acids work even more quickly on exposed dentin .
Over time , the plaque biofilm can become thick and eventually calcify .
When a heavy plaque deposit becomes hardened in this way , it is called tartar or dental calculus .
These substantial plaque biofilms can include a variety of bacterial species , including Streptococcus and Actinomyces species .
Some tooth decay is visible from the outside , but it is not always possible to see all decay or the extent of the decay .
X-ray imaging is used to produce radiographs that can be studied to look for deeper decay and damage to the root or bone .
If not detected , the decay can reach the pulp or even spread to the bloodstream .
Painful abscesses can develop .
To prevent tooth decay , prophylactic treatment and good hygiene are important .
Regular tooth brushing and flossing physically removes microbes and combats microbial growth and biofilm formation .
Toothpaste contains fluoride , which becomes incorporated into the hydroxyapatite of tooth enamel , protecting it against acidity caused by fermentation of mouth microbiota .
Fluoride is also bacteriostatic , thus slowing enamel degradation .
Antiseptic mouthwashes commonly contain plant-derived phenolics like thymol and eucalyptol and/or heavy metals like zinc chloride ( see ) .
Phenolics tend to be stable and persistent on surfaces , and they act through denaturing proteins and disrupting membranes .
Regular dental cleanings allow for the detection of decay at early stages and the removal of tartar .
They may also help to draw attention to other concerns , such as damage to the enamel from acidic drinks .
Reducing sugar consumption may help prevent damage that results from the microbial fermentation of sugars .
Additionally , sugarless candies or gum with sugar alcohols ( such as xylitol ) can reduce the production of acids because these are fermented to nonacidic compounds ( although excess consumption may lead to gastrointestinal distress ) .
Fluoride treatment or ingesting fluoridated water strengthens the minerals in teeth and reduces the incidence of dental caries .
If caries develop , prompt treatment prevents worsening .
Smaller areas of decay can be drilled to remove affected tissue and then filled .
If the pulp is affected , then a root canal may be needed to completely remove the infected tissues to avoid continued spread of the infection , which could lead to painful abscesses .
In addition to damage to the teeth themselves , the surrounding structures can be affected by microbes .
Periodontal disease is the result of infections that lead to inflammation and tissue damage in the structures surrounding the teeth .
The progression from mild to severe periodontal disease is generally reversible and preventable with good oral hygiene .
Inflammation of the gums that can lead to irritation and bleeding is called gingivitis .
When plaque accumulates on the teeth , bacteria colonize the gingival space .
As this space becomes increasingly blocked , the environment becomes anaerobic .
This allows a wide variety of microbes to colonize , including Porphyromonas , Streptococcus , and Actinomyces .
The bacterial products , which include lipopolysaccharide ( LPS ) , proteases , lipoteichoic acids , and others , cause inflammation and gum damage .
It is possible that methanogenic archaeans ( including Methanobrevibacter oralis and other Methanobrevibacter species ) also contribute to disease progression as some species have been identified in patients with periodontal disease , but this has proven difficult to study .
Gingivitis is diagnosed by visual inspection , including measuring pockets in the gums , and X-rays , and is usually treated using good dental hygiene and professional dental cleaning , with antibiotics reserved for severe cases .
Over time , chronic gingivitis can develop into the more serious condition of periodontitis .
When this happens , the gums recede and expose parts of the tooth below the crown .
This newly exposed area is relatively unprotected , so bacteria can grow on it and spread underneath the enamel of the crown and cause cavities .
Bacteria in the gingival space can also erode the cementum , which helps to hold the teeth in place .
If not treated , erosion of cementum can lead to the movement or loss of teeth .
The bones of the jaw can even erode if the infection spreads .
This condition can be associated with bleeding and halitosis ( bad breath ) .
Cleaning and appropriate dental hygiene may be sufficient to treat periodontitis .
However , in cases of severe periodontitis , an antibiotic may be given .
Antibiotics may be given in pill form or applied directly to the gum ( local treatment ) .
Antibiotics given can include tetracycline , doxycycline , macrolides or β-lactams .
Because periodontitis can be caused by a mix of microbes , a combination of antibiotics may be given .
When certain bacteria , such as Prevotella intermedia , Fusobacterium species , and Treponema vicentii , are involved and periodontal disease progresses , acute necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis or trench mouth , also called Vincent 's disease , can develop .
This is severe periodontitis characterized by erosion of the gums , ulcers , substantial pain with chewing , and halitosis that can be diagnosed by visual examination and X-rays .
In countries with good medical and dental care , it is most common in individuals with weakened immune systems , such as patients with AIDS .
In addition to cleaning and pain medication , patients may be prescribed antibiotics such as amoxicillin , amoxicillin clavulanate , clindamycin , or doxycycline .
As noted earlier , normal oral microbiota can cause dental and periodontal infections .
However , there are number of other infections that can manifest in the oral cavity when other microbes are present .
As described in , infections by herpes simplex virus type 1 ( HSV-1 ) frequently manifest as oral herpes , also called acute herpes labialis and characterized by cold sores on the lips , mouth , or gums .
HSV-1 can also cause acute herpetic gingivostomatitis , a condition that results in ulcers of the mucous membranes inside the mouth .
Herpetic gingivostomatitis is normally self-limiting except in immunocompromised patients .
Like oral herpes , the infection is generally diagnosed through clinical examination , but cultures or biopsies may be obtained if other signs or symptoms suggest the possibility of a different causative agent .
If treatment is needed , mouthwashes or antiviral medications such as acyclovir , famciclovir , or valacyclovir may be used .
The yeast Candida is part of the normal human microbiota , but overgrowths , especially of Candida albicans , can lead to infections in several parts of the body .
When Candida infection develops in the oral cavity , it is called oral thrush .
Oral thrush is most common in infants because they do not yet have well developed immune systems and have not acquired the robust normal microbiota that keeps Candida in check in adults .
Oral thrush is also common in immunodeficient patients and is a common infection in patients with AIDS .
Oral thrush is characterized by the appearance of white patches and pseudomembranes in the mouth and can be associated with bleeding .
The infection may be treated topically with nystatin or clotrimazole oral suspensions , although systemic treatment is sometimes needed .
In serious cases , systemic azoles such as fluconazole or itraconazole ( for strains resistant to fluconazole ) , may be used .
Amphotericin B can also be used if the infection is severe or if the Candida species is azole-resistant .
The viral disease mumps is an infection of the parotid glands , the largest of the three pairs of salivary glands .
The causative agent is mumps virus ( MuV ) , a paramyxovirus with an envelope that has hemagglutinin and neuraminidase spikes .
A fusion protein located on the surface of the envelope helps to fuse the viral envelope to the host cell plasma membrane .
Mumps virus is transmitted through respiratory droplets or through contact with contaminated saliva , making it quite contagious so that it can lead easily to epidemics .
It causes fever , muscle pain , headache , pain with chewing , loss of appetite , fatigue , and weakness .
There is swelling of the salivary glands and associated pain .
The virus can enter the bloodstream ( viremia ) , allowing it to spread to the organs and the central nervous system .
The infection ranges from subclinical cases to cases with serious complications , such as encephalitis , meningitis , and deafness .
Inflammation of the pancreas , testes , ovaries , and breasts may also occur and cause permanent damage to those organs ; despite these complications , a mumps infection rarely cause sterility .
Mumps can be recognized based on clinical signs and symptoms , and a diagnosis can be confirmed with laboratory testing .
The virus can be identified using culture or molecular techniques such as RT-PCR .
Serologic tests are also available , especially enzyme immunoassays that detect antibodies .
There is no specific treatment for mumps , so supportive therapies are used .
The most effective way to avoid infection is through vaccination .
Although mumps used to be a common childhood disease , it is now rare in the United States due to vaccination with the measles , mumps , and rubella ( MMR ) vaccine .
Identify the most common bacteria that can cause infections of the GI tract Compare the major characteristics of specific bacterial diseases affecting the GI tract A wide range of gastrointestinal diseases are caused by bacterial contamination of food .
Recall that foodborne disease can arise from either infection or intoxication .
In both cases , bacterial toxins are typically responsible for producing disease signs and symptoms .
The distinction lies in where the toxins are produced .
In an infection , the microbial agent is ingested , colonizes the gut , and then produces toxins that damage host cells .
In an intoxication , bacteria produce toxins in the food before it is ingested .
In either case , the toxins cause damage to the cells lining the gastrointestinal tract , typically the colon .
This leads to the common signs and symptoms of diarrhea or watery stool and abdominal cramps , or the more severe dysentery .
Symptoms of foodborne diseases also often include nausea and vomiting , which are mechanisms the body uses to expel the toxic materials .
Most bacterial gastrointestinal illness is short-lived and self-limiting ; however , loss of fluids due to severe diarrheal illness can lead to dehydration that can , in some cases , be fatal without proper treatment .
Oral rehydration therapy with electrolyte solutions is an essential aspect of treatment for most patients with GI disease , especially in children and infants .
Staphylococcal food poisoning is one form of food intoxication .
When Staphylococcus aureus grows in food , it may produce enterotoxins that , when ingested , can cause symptoms such as nausea , diarrhea , cramping , and vomiting within one to six hours .
In some severe cases , it may cause headache , dehydration , and changes in blood pressure and heart rate .
Signs and symptoms resolve within 24 to 48 hours .
S. aureus is often associated with a variety of raw or undercooked and cooked foods including meat ( e.g. , canned meat , ham , and sausages ) and dairy products ( e.g. , cheeses , milk , and butter ) .
It is also commonly found on hands and can be transmitted to prepared foods through poor hygiene , including poor handwashing and the use of contaminated food preparation surfaces , such as cutting boards .
The greatest risk is for food left at a temperature below 60 °C ( 140 °F ) , which allows the bacteria to grow .
Cooked foods should generally be reheated to at least 60 °C ( 140 °F ) for safety and most raw meats should be cooked to even higher internal temperatures .
There are at least 21 Staphylococcal enterotoxins and Staphylococcal enterotoxin-like toxins that can cause food intoxication .
The enterotoxins are proteins that are resistant to low pH , allowing them to pass through the stomach .
They are heat stable and are not destroyed by boiling at 100 °C .
Even though the bacterium itself may be killed , the enterotoxins alone can cause vomiting and diarrhea , although the mechanisms are not fully understood .
At least some of the symptoms may be caused by the enterotoxin functioning as a superantigen and provoking a strong immune response by activating T cell proliferation .
The rapid onset of signs and symptoms helps to diagnose this foodborne illness .
Because the bacterium does not need to be present for the toxin to cause symptoms , diagnosis is confirmed by identifying the toxin in a food sample or in biological specimens ( feces or vomitus ) from the patient .
Serological techniques , including ELISA , can also be used to identify the toxin in food samples .
The condition generally resolves relatively quickly , within 24 hours , without treatment .
In some cases , supportive treatment in a hospital may be needed .
When gastrointestinal illness is associated with the rod-shaped , gram-negative bacterium Shigella , it is called bacillary dysentery , or shigellosis .
Infections can be caused by S. dysenteriae , S. flexneri , S. boydii , and/or S. sonnei that colonize the GI tract .
Shigellosis can be spread from hand to mouth or through contaminated food and water .
Most commonly , it is transmitted through the fecal-oral route .
Shigella bacteria invade intestinal epithelial cells .
When taken into a phagosome , they can escape and then live within the cytoplasm of the cell or move to adjacent cells .
As the organisms multiply , the epithelium and structures with M cells of the Peyer ’ s patches in the intestine may become ulcerated and cause loss of fluid .
Stomach cramps , fever , and watery diarrhea that may also contain pus , mucus , and/or blood often develop .
More severe cases may result in ulceration of the mucosa , dehydration , and rectal bleeding .
Additionally , patients may later develop hemolytic uremic syndrome ( HUS ) , a serious condition in which damaged blood cells build up in the kidneys and may cause kidney failure , or reactive arthritis , a condition in which arthritis develops in multiple joints following infection .
Patients may also develop chronic post-infection irritable bowel syndrome ( IBS ) .
S. dysenteriae type 1 is able to produce Shiga toxin , which targets the endothelial cells of small blood vessels in the small and large intestine by binding to a glycosphingolipid .
Once inside the endothelial cells , the toxin targets the large ribosomal subunit , thus affecting protein synthesis of these cells .
Hemorrhaging and lesions in the colon can result .
The toxin can target the kidney ’ s glomerulus , the blood vessels where filtration of blood in the kidney begins , thus resulting in HUS .
Stool samples , which should be processed promptly , are analyzed using serological or molecular techniques .
One common method is to perform immunoassays for S. dysenteriae .
( Other methods that can be used to identify Shigella include API test strips , Enterotube systems , or PCR testing .
The presence of white blood cells and blood in fecal samples occurs in about 70 % of patients .
Severe cases may require antibiotics such as ciprofloxacin and azithromycin , but these must be carefully prescribed because resistance is increasingly common .
Salmonella gastroenteritis , also called salmonellosis , is caused by the rod-shaped , gram-negative bacterium Salmonella .
Two species , S. enterica and S. bongori , cause disease in humans , but S. enterica is the most common .
The most common serotypes of S. enterica are Enteritidis and Typhi .
We will discuss typhoid fever caused by serotypes Typhi and Paratyphi A separately .
Here , we will focus on salmonellosis caused by other serotypes .
Salmonella is a part of the normal intestinal microbiota of many individuals .
However , salmonellosis is caused by exogenous agents , and infection can occur depending on the serotype , size of the inoculum , and overall health of the host .
Infection is caused by ingestion of contaminated food , handling of eggshells , or exposure to certain animals .
Salmonella is part of poultry ’ s microbiota , so exposure to raw eggs and raw poultry can increase the risk of infection .
Handwashing and cooking foods thoroughly greatly reduce the risk of transmission .
Salmonella bacteria can survive freezing for extended periods but can not survive high temperatures .
Once the bacteria are ingested , they multiply within the intestines and penetrate the epithelial mucosal cells via M cells where they continue to grow .
They trigger inflammatory processes and the hypersecretion of fluids .
Once inside the body , they can persist inside the phagosomes of macrophages .
Salmonella can cross the epithelial cell membrane and enter the bloodstream and lymphatic system .
Some strains of Salmonella also produce an enterotoxin that can cause an intoxication .
Infected individuals develop fever , nausea , abdominal cramps , vomiting , headache , and diarrhea .
These signs and symptoms generally last a few days to a week .
According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ( CDC ) , there are 1,000,000 cases annually , with 380 deaths each year .
However , because the disease is usually self-limiting , many cases are not reported to doctors and the overall incidence may be underreported .
Diagnosis involves culture followed by serotyping and DNA fingerprinting if needed .
Positive results are reported to the CDC .
When an unusual serotype is detected , samples are sent to the CDC for further analysis .
Serotyping is important for determining treatment .
Oral rehydration therapy is commonly used .
Antibiotics are only recommended for serious cases .
When antibiotics are needed , as in immunocompromised patients , fluoroquinolones , third-generation cephalosporins , and ampicillin are recommended .
Antibiotic resistance is a serious concern .
Certain serotypes of S. enterica , primarily serotype Typhi ( S. typhi ) but also Paratyphi , cause a more severe type of salmonellosis called typhoid fever .
This serious illness , which has an untreated mortality rate of 10 % , causes high fever , body aches , headache , nausea , lethargy , and a possible rash .
Some individuals carry S. typhi without presenting signs or symptoms ( known as asymptomatic carriers ) and continually shed them through their feces .
These carriers often have the bacteria in the gallbladder or intestinal epithelium .
Individuals consuming food or water contaminated with these feces can become infected .
S. typhi penetrate the intestinal mucosa , grow within the macrophages , and are transported through the body , most notably to the liver and gallbladder .
Eventually , the macrophages lyse , releasing S. typhi into the bloodstream and lymphatic system .
Mortality can result from ulceration and perforation of the intestine .
A wide range of complications , such as pneumonia and jaundice , can occur with disseminated disease .
S. typhi have Salmonella pathogenicity islands ( SPIs ) that contain the genes for many of their virulence factors .
Two examples of important typhoid toxins are the Vi antigen , which encodes for capsule production , and chimeric A2B5 toxin , which causes many of the signs and symptoms of the acute phase of typhoid fever .
Clinical examination and culture are used to make the diagnosis .
The bacteria can be cultured from feces , urine , blood , or bone marrow .
Serology , including ELISA , is used to identify the most pathogenic strains , but confirmation with DNA testing or culture is needed .
A PCR test can also be used , but is not widely available .
The recommended antibiotic treatment involves fluoroquinolones , ceftriaxone , and azithromycin .
Individuals must be extremely careful to avoid infecting others during treatment .
Typhoid fever can be prevented through vaccination for individuals traveling to parts of the world where it is common .
The gram-negative rod Escherichia coli is a common member of the normal microbiota of the colon .
Although the vast majority of E. coli strains are helpful commensal bacteria , some can be pathogenic and may cause dangerous diarrheal disease .
The pathogenic strains have additional virulence factors such as type 1 fimbriae that promote colonization of the colon or may produce toxins ( see ) .
These virulence factors are acquired through horizontal gene transfer .
Extraintestinal disease can result if the bacteria spread from the gastrointestinal tract .
Although these bacteria can be spread from person to person , they are often acquired through contaminated food or water .
There are six recognized pathogenic groups of E. coli , but we will focus here on the four that are most commonly transmitted through food and water .
Enterotoxigenic E. coli ( ETEC ) , also known as traveler ’ s diarrhea , causes diarrheal illness and is common in less developed countries .
In Mexico , ETEC infection is called Montezuma ’ s Revenge .
Following ingestion of contaminated food or water , infected individuals develop a watery diarrhea , abdominal cramps , malaise ( a feeling of being unwell ) , and a low fever .
ETEC produces a heat-stable enterotoxin similar to cholera toxin , and adhesins called colonization factors that help the bacteria to attach to the intestinal wall .
Some strains of ETEC also produce heat-labile toxins .
The disease is usually relatively mild and self-limiting .
Diagnosis involves culturing and PCR .
If needed , antibiotic treatment with fluoroquinolones , doxycycline , rifaximin , and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole ( TMP/SMZ ) may shorten infection duration .
However , antibiotic resistance is a problem .
Enteroinvasive E. coli ( EIEC ) is very similar to shigellosis , including its pathogenesis of intracellular invasion into intestinal epithelial tissue .
This bacterium carries a large plasmid that is involved in epithelial cell penetration .
The illness is usually self-limiting , with symptoms including watery diarrhea , chills , cramps , malaise , fever , and dysentery .
Culturing and PCR testing can be used for diagnosis .
Antibiotic treatment is not recommended , so supportive therapy is used if needed .
Enteropathogenic E. coli ( EPEC ) can cause a potentially fatal diarrhea , especially in infants and those in less developed countries .
Fever , vomiting , and diarrhea can lead to severe dehydration .
These E. coli inject a protein ( Tir ) that attaches to the surface of the intestinal epithelial cells and triggers rearrangement of host cell actin from microvilli to pedestals .
Tir also happens to be the receptor for Intimin , a surface protein produced by EPEC , thereby allowing E. coli to “ sit ” on the pedestal .
The genes necessary for this pedestal formation are encoded on the locus for enterocyte effacement ( LEE ) pathogenicity island .
As with ETEC , diagnosis involves culturing and PCR .
Treatment is similar to that for ETEC .
The most dangerous strains are enterohemorrhagic E. coli ( EHEC ) , which are the strains capable of causing epidemics .
In particular , the strain O157 : H7 has been responsible for several recent outbreaks .
Recall that the O and H refer to surface antigens that contribute to pathogenicity and trigger a host immune response ( “ O ” refers to the O-side chain of the lipopolysaccharide and the “ H ” refers to the flagella ) .
Similar to EPEC , EHEC also forms pedestals .
EHEC also produces a Shiga-like toxin .
Because the genome of this bacterium has been sequenced , it is known that the Shiga toxin genes were most likely acquired through transduction ( horizontal gene transfer ) .
The Shiga toxin genes originated from Shigella dysenteriae .
Prophage from a bacteriophage that previously infected Shigella integrated into the chromosome of E. coli .
The Shiga-like toxin is often called verotoxin .
EHEC can cause disease ranging from relatively mild to life-threatening .
Symptoms include bloody diarrhea with severe cramping , but no fever .
Although it is often self-limiting , it can lead to hemorrhagic colitis and profuse bleeding .
One possible complication is HUS .
Diagnosis involves culture , often using MacConkey with sorbitol agar to differentiate between E. coli O157 : H7 , which does not ferment sorbitol , and other less virulent strains of E. coli that can ferment sorbitol .
Serological typing or PCR testing also can be used , as well as genetic testing for Shiga toxin .
To distinguish EPEC from EHEC , because they both form pedestals on intestinal epithelial cells , it is necessary to test for genes encoding for both the Shiga-like toxin and for the LEE .
Both EPEC and EHEC have LEE , but EPEC lacks the gene for Shiga toxin .
Antibiotic therapy is not recommended and may worsen HUS because of the toxins released when the bacteria are killed , so supportive therapies must be used .
summarizes the characteristics of the four most common pathogenic groups .
The gastrointestinal disease cholera is a serious infection often associated with poor sanitation , especially following natural disasters , because it is spread through contaminated water and food that has not been heated to temperatures high enough to kill the bacteria .
It is caused by Vibrio cholerae serotype O1 , a gram-negative , flagellated bacterium in the shape of a curved rod ( vibrio ) .
According to the CDC , cholera causes an estimated 3 to 5 million cases and 100,000 deaths each year .
Because V. cholerae is killed by stomach acid , relatively large doses are needed for a few microbial cells to survive to reach the intestines and cause infection .
The motile cells travel through the mucous layer of the intestines , where they attach to epithelial cells and release cholera enterotoxin .
The toxin is an A-B toxin with activity through adenylate cyclase ( see ) .
Within the intestinal cell , cyclic AMP ( cAMP ) levels increase , which activates a chloride channel and results in the release of ions into the intestinal lumen .
This increase in osmotic pressure in the lumen leads to water also entering the lumen .
As the water and electrolytes leave the body , it causes rapid dehydration and electrolyte imbalance .
Diarrhea is so profuse that it is often called “ rice water stool , ” and patients are placed on cots with a hole in them to monitor the fluid loss .
Cholera is diagnosed by taking a stool sample and culturing for Vibrio .
The bacteria are oxidase positive and show non-lactose fermentation on MacConkey agar .
Gram-negative lactose fermenters will produce red colonies while non-fermenters will produce white/colorless colonies .
Gram-positive bacteria will not grow on MacConkey .
Lactose fermentation is commonly used for pathogen identification because the normal microbiota generally ferments lactose while pathogens do not .
V. cholerae may also be cultured on thiosulfate citrate bile salts sucrose ( TCBS ) agar , a selective and differential media for Vibrio spp. , which produce a distinct yellow colony .
Cholera may be self-limiting and treatment involves rehydration and electrolyte replenishment .
Although antibiotics are not typically needed , they can be used for severe or disseminated disease .
Tetracyclines are recommended , but doxycycline , erythromycin , orfloxacin , ciprofloxacin , and TMP/SMZ may be used .
Recent evidence suggests that azithromycin is also a good first-line antibiotic .
Good sanitation—including appropriate sewage treatment , clean supplies for cooking , and purified drinking water—is important to prevent infection V. cholera is not the only Vibrio species that can cause disease .
V. parahemolyticus is associated with consumption of contaminated seafood and causes gastrointestinal illness with signs and symptoms such as watery diarrhea , nausea , fever , chills , and abdominal cramps .
The bacteria produce a heat-stable hemolysin , leading to dysentery and possible disseminated disease .
It also sometimes causes wound infections .
V. parahemolyticus is diagnosed using cultures from blood , stool , or a wound .
As with V. cholera , selective medium ( especially TCBS agar ) works well .
Tetracycline and ciprofloxacin can be used to treat severe cases , but antibiotics generally are not needed .
Vibrio vulnificus is found in warm seawater and , unlike V. cholerae , is not associated with poor sanitary conditions .
The bacteria can be found in raw seafood , and ingestion causes gastrointestinal illness .
It can also be acquired by individuals with open skin wounds who are exposed to water with high concentrations of the pathogen .
In some cases , the infection spreads to the bloodstream and causes septicemia .
Skin infection can lead to edema , ecchymosis ( discoloration of skin due to bleeding ) , and abscesses .
Patients with underlying disease have a high fatality rate of about 50 % .
It is of particular concern for individuals with chronic liver disease or who are otherwise immunodeficient because a healthy immune system can often prevent infection from developing .
V. vulnificus is diagnosed by culturing for the pathogen from stool samples , blood samples , or skin abscesses .
Adult patients are treated with doxycycline combined with a third generation cephalosporin or with fluoroquinolones , and children are treated with TMP/SMZ .
Two other vibrios , Aeromonas hydrophila and Plesiomonas shigelloides , are also associated with marine environments and raw seafood ; they can also cause gastroenteritis .
Like V. vulnificus , A. hydrophila is more often associated with infections in wounds , generally those acquired in water .
In some cases , it can also cause septicemia .
Other species of Aeromonas can cause illness .
P. shigelloides is sometimes associated with more serious systemic infections if ingested in contaminated food or water .
Culture can be used to diagnose A. hydrophila and P. shigelloides infections , for which antibiotic therapy is generally not needed .
When necessary , tetracycline and ciprofloxacin , among other antibiotics , may be used for treatment of A. hydrophila , and fluoroquinolones and trimethoprim are the effective treatments for P. shigelloides .
Campylobacter is a genus of gram-negative , spiral or curved bacteria .
They may have one or two flagella .
Campylobacter jejuni gastroenteritis , a form of campylobacteriosis , is a widespread illness that is caused by Campylobacter jejuni .
The primary route of transmission is through poultry that becomes contaminated during slaughter .
Handling of the raw chicken in turn contaminates cooking surfaces , utensils , and other foods .
Unpasteurized milk or contaminated water are also potential vehicles of transmission .
In most cases , the illness is self-limiting and includes fever , diarrhea , cramps , vomiting , and sometimes dysentery .
More serious signs and symptoms , such as bacteremia , meningitis , pancreatitis , cholecystitis , and hepatitis , sometimes occur .
It has also been associated with autoimmune conditions such as Guillain-Barré syndrome , a neurological disease that occurs after some infections and results in temporary paralysis .
HUS following infection can also occur .
The virulence in many strains is the result of hemolysin production and the presence of Campylobacter cytolethal distending toxin ( CDT ) , a powerful deoxyribonuclease ( DNase ) that irreversibly damages host cell DNA .
Diagnosis involves culture under special conditions , such as elevated temperature , low oxygen tension , and often medium supplemented with antimicrobial agents .
These bacteria should be cultured on selective medium ( such as Campy CV , charcoal selective medium , or cefaperazone charcoal deoxycholate agar ) and incubated under microaerophilic conditions for at least 72 hours at 42 °C .
Antibiotic treatment is not usually needed , but erythromycin or ciprofloxacin may be used .
The gram-negative bacterium Helicobacter pylori is able to tolerate the acidic environment of the human stomach and has been shown to be a major cause of peptic ulcers , which are ulcers of the stomach or duodenum .
The bacterium is also associated with increased risk of stomach cancer .
According to the CDC , approximately twothirds of the population is infected with H. pylori , but less than 20 % have a risk of developing ulcers or stomach cancer .
H. pylori is found in approximately 80 % of stomach ulcers and in over 90 % of duodenal ulcers .
H. pylori colonizes epithelial cells in the stomach using pili for adhesion .
These bacteria produce urease , which stimulates an immune response and creates ammonia that neutralizes stomach acids to provide a more hospitable microenvironment .
The infection damages the cells of the stomach lining , including those that normally produce the protective mucus that serves as a barrier between the tissue and stomach acid .
As a result , inflammation ( gastritis ) occurs and ulcers may slowly develop .
Ulcer formation can also be caused by toxin activity .
It has been reported that 50 % of clinical isolates of H. pylori have detectable levels of exotoxin activity in vitro .
This toxin , VacA , induces vacuole formation in host cells .
VacA has no primary sequence homology with other bacterial toxins , and in a mouse model , there is a correlation between the presence of the toxin gene , the activity of the toxin , and gastric epithelial tissue damage .
Signs and symptoms include nausea , lack of appetite , bloating , burping , and weight loss .
Bleeding ulcers may produce dark stools .
If no treatment is provided , the ulcers can become deeper , more tissues can be involved , and stomach perforation can occur .
Because perforation allows digestive enzymes and acid to leak into the body , it is a very serious condition .
To diagnose H. pylori infection , multiple methods are available .
In a breath test , the patient swallows radiolabeled urea .
If H. pylori is present , the bacteria will produce urease to break down the urea .
This reaction produces radiolabeled carbon dioxide that can be detected in the patient ’ s breath .
Blood testing can also be used to detect antibodies to H. pylori .
The bacteria themselves can be detected using either a stool test or a stomach wall biopsy .
Antibiotics can be used to treat the infection .
However , unique to H. pylori , the recommendation from the US Food and Drug Administration is to use a triple therapy .
Omeprazole , bismuth subsalicylate , and lansoprazole are not antibiotics but are instead used to decrease acid levels because H. pylori prefers acidic environments .
Although treatment is often valuable , there are also risks to H. pylori eradication .
Infection with H. pylori may actually protect against some cancers , such as esophageal adenocarcinoma and gastroesophageal reflux disease .
Clostridium perfringens gastroenteritis is a generally mild foodborne disease that is associated with undercooked meats and other foods .
C. perfringens is a gram-positive , rod-shaped , endospore-forming anaerobic bacterium that is tolerant of high and low temperatures .
At high temperatures , the bacteria can form endospores that will germinate rapidly in foods or within the intestine .
Food poisoning by type A strains is common .
This strain always produces an enterotoxin , sometimes also present in other strains , that causes the clinical symptoms of cramps and diarrhea .
A more severe form of the illness , called pig-bel or enteritis necroticans , causes hemorrhaging , pain , vomiting , and bloating .
Gangrene of the intestines may result .
This form has a high mortality rate but is rare in the United States .
Diagnosis involves detecting the C. perfringens toxin in stool samples using either molecular biology techniques ( PCR detection of the toxin gene ) or immunology techniques ( ELISA ) .
The bacteria itself may also be detected in foods or in fecal samples .
Treatment includes rehydration therapy , electrolyte replacement , and intravenous fluids .
Antibiotics are not recommended because they can damage the balance of the microbiota in the gut , and there are concerns about antibiotic resistance .
The illness can be prevented through proper handling and cooking of foods , including prompt refrigeration at sufficiently low temperatures and cooking food to a sufficiently high temperature .
Clostridium difficile is a gram-positive rod that can be a commensal bacterium as part of the normal microbiota of healthy individuals .
When the normal microbiota is disrupted by long-term antibiotic use , it can allow the overgrowth of this bacterium , resulting in antibiotic-associated diarrhea caused by C. difficile .
Antibiotic-associated diarrhea can also be considered a nosocomial disease .
Because this species can form endospores , it can survive for extended periods of time in the environment under harsh conditions and is a considerable concern in health-care settings .
This bacterium produces two toxins , Clostridium difficile toxin A ( TcdA ) and Clostridium difficile toxin B ( TcdB ) .
These toxins inactivate small GTP-binding proteins , resulting in actin condensation and cell rounding , followed by cell death .
then ulceration with exudate , and can progress to pseudomembranous colitis , which involves inflammation of the colon and the development of a pseudomembrane of fibrin containing dead epithelial cells and leukocytes .
Watery diarrhea , dehydration , fever , loss of appetite , and abdominal pain can result .
Perforation of the colon can occur , leading to septicemia , shock , and death .
C. difficile is also associated with necrotizing enterocolitis in premature babies and neutropenic enterocolitis associated with cancer therapies .
Infections begin with focal necrosis , Diagnosis is made by considering the patient history ( such as exposure to antibiotics ) , clinical presentation , imaging , endoscopy , lab tests , and other available data .
Detecting the toxin in stool samples is used to confirm diagnosis .
Although culture is preferred , it is rarely practical in clinical practice because the bacterium is an obligate anaerobe .
Nucleic acid amplification tests , including PCR , are considered preferable to ELISA testing for molecular analysis .
The first step of conventional treatment is to stop antibiotic use , and then to provide supportive therapy with electrolyte replacement and fluids .
Metronidazole is the preferred treatment if the C. difficile diagnosis has been confirmed .
Vancomycin can also be used , but it should be reserved for patients for whom metronidazole was ineffective or who meet other criteria ( e.g. , under 10 years of age , pregnant , or allergic to metronidazole ) .
A newer approach to treatment , known as a fecal transplant , focuses on restoring the microbiota of the gut in order to combat the infection .
In this procedure , a healthy individual donates a stool sample , which is mixed with saline and transplanted to the recipient via colonoscopy , endoscopy , sigmoidoscopy , or enema .
It has been reported that this procedure has greater than 90 % success in resolving C. difficile infections .
Bacillus cereus , commonly found in soil , is a gram-positive endospore-forming bacterium that can sometimes cause foodborne illness .
B. cereus endospores can survive cooking and produce enterotoxins in food after it has been heated ; illnesses often occur after eating rice and other prepared foods left at room temperature for too long .
The signs and symptoms appear within a few hours of ingestion and include nausea , pain , and abdominal cramps .
B. cereus produces two toxins : one causing diarrhea , and the other causing vomiting .
More severe signs and symptoms can sometimes develop .
Diagnosis can be accomplished by isolating bacteria from stool samples or vomitus and uneaten infected food .
Treatment involves rehydration and supportive therapy .
Antibiotics are not typically needed , as the illness is usually relatively mild and is due to toxin activity .
The genus Yersinia is best known for Yersinia pestis , a gram-negative rod that causes the plague .
However , Y. enterocolitica and Y. pseudotuberculosis can cause gastroenteritis .
The infection is generally transmitted through the fecal-oral route , with ingestion of food or water that has been contaminated by feces .
Intoxication can also result because of the activity of its endotoxin and exotoxins ( enterotoxin and cytotoxin necrotizing factor ) .
The illness is normally relatively mild and self-limiting .
However , severe diarrhea and dysentery can develop in infants .
In adults , the infection can spread and cause complications such as reactive arthritis , thyroid disorders , endocarditis , glomerulonephritis , eye inflammation , and/or erythema nodosum .
Bacteremia may develop in rare cases .
Diagnosis is generally made by detecting the bacteria in stool samples .
Samples may also be obtained from other tissues or body fluids .
Treatment is usually supportive , including rehydration , without antibiotics .
If bacteremia or other systemic disease is present , then antibiotics such as fluoroquinolones , aminoglycosides , doxycycline , and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole may be used .
Recovery can take up to two weeks .
Identify the most common viruses that can cause infections of the GI tract Compare the major characteristics of specific viral diseases affecting the GI tract and liver In the developing world , acute viral gastroenteritis is devastating and a leading cause of death for children .
Worldwide , diarrhea is the second leading cause of mortality for children under age five , and 70 % of childhood gastroenteritis is viral .
As discussed , there are a number of bacteria responsible for diarrhea , but viruses can also cause diarrhea .
E. coli and rotavirus are the most common causative agents in the developing world .
In this section , we will discuss rotaviruses and other , less common viruses that can also cause gastrointestinal illnesses .
Rotaviruses are double-stranded RNA viruses in the family Reoviridae .
They are responsible for common diarrheal illness , although prevention through vaccination is becoming more common .
The virus is primarily spread by the fecal-oral route .
These viruses are widespread in children , especially in day-care centers .
The CDC estimates that 95 % of children in the United States have had at least one rotavirus infection by the time they reach age five .
Due to the memory of the body ’ s immune system , adults who come into contact with rotavirus will not contract the infection or , if they do , are asymptomatic .
The elderly , however , are vulnerable to rotavirus infection due to weakening of the immune system with age , so infections can spread through nursing homes and similar facilities .
In these cases , the infection may be transmitted from a family member who may have subclinical or clinical disease .
The virus can also be transmitted from contaminated surfaces , on which it can survive for some time .
Infected individuals exhibit fever , vomiting , and diarrhea .
The virus can survive in the stomach following a meal , but is normally found in the small intestines , particularly the epithelial cells on the villi .
Infection can cause food intolerance , especially with respect to lactose .
The illness generally appears after an incubation period of about two days and lasts for approximately one week ( three to eight days ) .
Without supportive treatment , the illness can cause severe fluid loss , dehydration , and even death .
Even with milder illness , repeated infections can potentially lead to malnutrition , especially in developing countries , where rotavirus infection is common due to poor sanitation and lack of access to clean drinking water .
Patients ( especially children ) who are malnourished after an episode of diarrhea are more susceptible to future diarrheal illness , increasing their risk of death from rotavirus infection .
The most common clinical tool for diagnosis is enzyme immunoassay , which detects the virus from fecal samples .
Latex agglutination assays are also used .
Additionally , the virus can be detected using electron microscopy and RTPCR .
Treatment is supportive with oral rehydration therapy .
Preventive vaccination is also available .
In the United States , rotavirus vaccines are part of the standard vaccine schedule and administration follows the guidelines of the World Health Organization ( WHO ) .
The WHO recommends that all infants worldwide receive the rotavirus vaccine , the first dose between six and 15 weeks of age and the second before 32 weeks .
Noroviruses , commonly identified as Norwalk viruses , are caliciviruses .
Several strains can cause gastroenteritis .
There are millions of cases a year , predominately in infants , young children , and the elderly .
These viruses are easily transmitted and highly contagious .
They are known for causing widespread infections in groups of people in confined spaces , such as on cruise ships .
The viruses can be transmitted through direct contact , through touching contaminated surfaces , and through contaminated food .
Because the virus is not killed by disinfectants used at standard concentrations for killing bacteria , the risk of transmission remains high , even after cleaning .
The signs and symptoms of norovirus infection are similar to those for rotavirus , with watery diarrhea , mild cramps , and fever .
Additionally , these viruses sometimes cause projectile vomiting .
The illness is usually relatively mild , develops 12 to 48 hours after exposure , and clears within a couple of days without treatment .
However , dehydration may occur .
Norovirus can be detected using PCR or enzyme immunoassay ( EIA ) testing .
RT-qPCR is the preferred approach as EIA is insufficiently sensitive .
If EIA is used for rapid testing , diagnosis should be confirmed using PCR .
No medications are available , but the illness is usually self-limiting .
Rehydration therapy and electrolyte replacement may be used .
Good hygiene , hand washing , and careful food preparation reduce the risk of infection .
Astroviruses are single-stranded RNA viruses ( family Astroviridae ) that can cause severe gastroenteritis , especially in infants and children .
Signs and symptoms include diarrhea , nausea , vomiting , fever , abdominal pain , headache , and malaise .
The viruses are transmitted through the fecal-oral route ( contaminated food or water ) .
For diagnosis , stool samples are analyzed .
Testing may involve enzyme immunoassays and immune electron microscopy .
Treatment involves supportive rehydration and electrolyte replacement if needed .
Hepatitis is a general term meaning inflammation of the liver , which can have a variety of causes .
In some cases , the cause is viral infection .
There are five main hepatitis viruses that are clinically significant : hepatitisviruses A ( HAV ) , B ( HBV ) , C ( HCV ) , D , ( HDV ) and E ( HEV ) .
Note that other viruses , such as Epstein-Barr virus ( EBV ) , yellow fever , and cytomegalovirus ( CMV ) can also cause hepatitis and are discussed in .
Although the five hepatitis viruses differ , they can cause some similar signs and symptoms because they all have an affinity for hepatocytes ( liver cells ) .
HAV and HEV can be contracted through ingestion while HBV , HCV , and HDV are transmitted by parenteral contact .
It is possible for individuals to become long term or chronic carriers of hepatitis viruses .
The virus enters the blood ( viremia ) , spreading to the spleen , the kidneys , and the liver .
During viral replication , the virus infects hepatocytes .
The inflammation is caused by the hepatocytes replicating and releasing more hepatitis virus .
Signs and symptoms include malaise , anorexia , loss of appetite , dark urine , pain in the upper right quadrant of the abdomen , vomiting , nausea , diarrhea , joint pain , and gray stool .
Additionally , when the liver is diseased or injured , it is unable to break down hemoglobin effectively , and bilirubin can build up in the body , giving the skin and mucous membranes a yellowish color , a condition called jaundice .
In severe cases , death from liver necrosis may occur .
Despite having many similarities , each of the hepatitis viruses has its own unique characteristics .
HAV is generally transmitted through the fecal-oral route , close personal contact , or exposure to contaminated water or food .
Hepatitis A can develop after an incubation period of 15 to 50 days ( the mean is 30 ) .
It is normally mild or even asymptomatic and is usually self-limiting within weeks to months .
A more severe form , fulminant hepatitis , rarely occurs but has a high fatality rate of 70–80 % .
Vaccination is available and is recommended especially for children ( between ages one and two ) , those traveling to countries with higher risk , those with liver disease and certain other conditions , and drug users .
Although HBV is associated with similar signs and symptoms , transmission and outcomes differ .
This virus has a mean incubation period of 120 days and is generally associated with exposure to infectious blood or body fluids such as semen or saliva .
Exposure can occur through skin puncture , across the placenta , or through mucosal contact , but it is not spread through casual contact such as hugging , hand holding , sneezing , or coughing , or even through breastfeeding or kissing .
Risk of infection is greatest for those who use intravenous drugs or who have sexual contact with an infected individual .
Health-care workers are also at risk from needle sticks and other injuries when treating infected patients .
The infection can become chronic and may progress to cirrhosis or liver failure .
It is also associated with liver cancer .
Chronic infections are associated with the highest mortality rates and are more common in infants .
Approximately 90 % of infected infants become chronic carriers , compared with only 6–10 % of infected adults .
Health-care agencies are required to offer the HBV vaccine to all workers who have occupational exposure to blood and/or other infectious materials .
HCV is often undiagnosed and therefore may be more widespread than is documented .
It has a mean incubation period of 45 days and is transmitted through contact with infected blood .
Although some cases are asymptomatic and/or resolve spontaneously , 75 % –85 % of infected individuals become chronic carriers .
Nearly all cases result from parenteral transmission often associated with IV drug use or transfusions .
The risk is greatest for individuals with past or current history of intravenous drug use or who have had sexual contact with infected individuals .
It has also been spread through contaminated blood products and can even be transmitted through contaminated personal products such as toothbrushes and razors .
New medications have recently been developed that show great effectiveness in treating HCV and that are tailored to the specific genotype causing the infection .
HDV is uncommon in the United States and only occurs in individuals who are already infected with HBV , which it requires for replication .
Therefore , vaccination against HBV is also protective against HDV infection .
HDV is transmitted through contact with infected blood .
HEV infections are also rare in the United States but many individuals have a positive antibody titer for HEV .
The virus is most commonly spread by the fecal-oral route through food and/or water contamination , or personto-person contact , depending on the genotype of the virus , which varies by location .
There are four genotypes that differ somewhat in their mode of transmission , distribution , and other factors ( for example , two are zoonotic and two are not , and only one causes chronic infection ) .
Genotypes three and four are only transmitted through food , while genotypes one and two are also transmitted through water and fecal-oral routes .
Genotype one is the only type transmitted person-to-person and is the most common cause of HEV outbreaks .
Consumption of undercooked meat , especially deer or pork , and shellfish can lead to infection .
Genotypes three and four are zoonoses , so they can be transmitted from infected animals that are consumed .
Pregnant women are at particular risk .
This disease is usually self-limiting within two weeks and does not appear to cause chronic infection .
General laboratory testing for hepatitis begins with blood testing to examine liver function .
Some of these are included in a complete metabolic panel ( CMP ) , which may first suggest a possible liver problem and indicate the need for more comprehensive testing .
A hepatitis virus serological test panel can be used to detect antibodies for hepatitis viruses A , B , C , and sometimes D. Additionally , other immunological and genomic tests are available .
Specific treatments other than supportive therapy , rest , and fluids are often not available for hepatitis virus infection , except for HCV , which is often self-limited .
Immunoglobulins can be used prophylactically following possible exposure .
Medications are also used , including interferon alpha 2b and antivirals ( e.g. , lamivudine , entecavir , adefovir , and telbivudine ) for chronic infections .
Hepatitis C can be treated with interferon ( as monotherapy or combined with other treatments ) , protease inhibitors , and other antivirals ( e.g. , the polymerase inhibitor sofosbuvir ) .
Combination treatments are commonly used .
Antiviral and immunosuppressive medications may be used for chronic cases of HEV .
In severe cases , liver transplants may be necessary .
Additionally , vaccines are available to prevent infection with HAV and HBV .
The HAV vaccine is also protective against HEV .
The HBV vaccine is also protective against HDV .
There is no vaccine against HCV .
Identify the most common protozoans that can cause infections of the GI tract Compare the major characteristics of specific protozoan diseases affecting the GI tract Like other microbes , protozoa are abundant in natural microbiota but can also be associated with significant illness .
Gastrointestinal diseases caused by protozoa are generally associated with exposure to contaminated food and water , meaning that those without access to good sanitation are at greatest risk .
Even in developed countries , infections can occur and these microbes have sometimes caused significant outbreaks from contamination of public water supplies .
Also called backpacker ’ s diarrhea or beaver fever , giardiasis is a common disease in the United States caused by the flagellated protist Giardia lamblia , also known as Giardia intestinalis or Giardia duodenalis .
To establish infection , G. lamblia uses a large adhesive disk to attach to the intestinal mucosa .
The disk is comprised of microtubules .
During adhesion , the flagella of G. lamblia move in a manner that draws fluid out from under the disk , resulting in an area of lower pressure that promotes its adhesion to the intestinal epithelial cells .
Due to its attachment , Giardia also blocks absorption of nutrients , including fats .
Transmission occurs through contaminated food or water or directly from person to person .
Children in day-care centers are at risk due to their tendency to put items into their mouths that may be contaminated .
Large outbreaks may occur if a public water supply becomes contaminated .
Giardia have a resistant cyst stage in their life cycle that is able to survive cold temperatures and the chlorination treatment typically used for drinking water in municipal reservoirs .
As a result , municipal water must be filtered to trap and remove these cysts .
Once consumed by the host , Giardia develops into the active tropozoite .
Infected individuals may be asymptomatic or have gastrointestinal signs and symptoms , sometimes accompanied by weight loss .
Common symptoms , which appear one to three weeks after exposure , include diarrhea , nausea , stomach cramps , gas , greasy stool ( because fat absorption is being blocked ) , and possible dehydration .
The parasite remains in the colon and does not cause systemic infection .
Signs and symptoms generally clear within two to six weeks .
Chronic infections may develop and are often resistant to treatment .
These are associated with weight loss , episodic diarrhea , and malabsorption syndrome due to the blocked nutrient absorption .
Diagnosis may be made using observation under the microscope .
A stool ova and parasite ( O & P ) exam involves direct examination of a stool sample for the presence of cysts and trophozoites ; it can be used to distinguish common parasitic intestinal infections .
ELISA and other immunoassay tests , including commercial direct fluorescence antibody kits , are also used .
The most common treatments use metronidazole as the first-line choice , followed by tinidazole .
If the infection becomes chronic , the parasites may become resistant to medications .
Another protozoan intestinal illness is cryptosporidiosis , which is usually caused by Cryptosporidium parvum or C. hominis .
These pathogens are commonly found in animals and can be spread in feces from mice , birds , and farm animals .
Contaminated water and food are most commonly responsible for transmission .
The protozoan can also be transmitted through human contact with infected animals or their feces .
In the United States , outbreaks of cryptosporidiosis generally occur through contamination of the public water supply or contaminated water at water parks , swimming pools , and day-care centers .
The risk is greatest in areas with poor sanitation , making the disease more common in developing countries .
Signs and symptoms include watery diarrhea , nausea , vomiting , cramps , fever , dehydration , and weight loss .
The illness is generally self-limiting within a month .
However , immunocompromised patients , such as those with HIV/ AIDS , are at particular risk of severe illness or death .
Diagnosis involves direct examination of stool samples , often over multiple days .
As with giardiasis , a stool O & P exam may be helpful .
Acid fast staining is often used .
Enzyme immunoassays and molecular analysis ( PCR ) are available .
The first line of treatment is typically oral rehydration therapy .
Medications are sometimes used to treat the diarrhea .
The broad-range anti-parasitic drug nitazoxanide can be used to treat cryptosporidiosis .
Other anti-parasitic drugs that can be used include azithromycin and paromomycin .
The protozoan parasite Entamoeba histolytica causes amoebiasis , which is known as amoebic dysentery in severe cases .
E. histolytica is generally transmitted through water or food that has fecal contamination .
The disease is most widespread in the developing world and is one of the leading causes of mortality from parasitic disease worldwide .
Disease can be caused by as few as 10 cysts being transmitted .
Signs and symptoms range from nonexistent to mild diarrhea to severe amoebic dysentery .
Severe infection causes the abdomen to become distended and may be associated with fever .
The parasite may live in the colon without causing signs or symptoms or may invade the mucosa to cause colitis .
In some cases , the disease spreads to the spleen , brain , genitourinary tract , or lungs .
In particular , it may spread to the liver and cause an abscess .
When a liver abscess develops , fever , nausea , liver tenderness , weight loss , and pain in the right abdominal quadrant may occur .
Chronic infection may occur and is associated with intermittent diarrhea , mucus , pain , flatulence , and weight loss .
Direct examination of fecal specimens may be used for diagnosis .
As with cryptosporidiosis , samples are often examined on multiple days .
A stool O & P exam of fecal or biopsy specimens may be helpful .
Immunoassay , serology , biopsy , molecular , and antibody detection tests are available .
Enzyme immunoassay may not distinguish current from past illness .
Magnetic resonance imaging ( MRI ) can be used to detect any liver abscesses .
The first line of treatment is metronidazole or tinidazole , followed by diloxanide furoate , iodoquinol , or paromomycin to eliminate the cysts that remain .
The intestinal disease cyclosporiasis is caused by the protozoan Cyclospora cayetanensis .
It is endemic to tropical and subtropical regions and therefore uncommon in the United States , although there have been outbreaks associated with contaminated produce imported from regions where the protozoan is more common .
This protist is transmitted through contaminated food and water and reaches the lining of the small intestine , where it causes infection .
Signs and symptoms begin within seven to ten days after ingestion .
Based on limited data , it appears to be seasonal in ways that differ regionally and that are poorly understood .
Some individuals do not develop signs or symptoms .
Those who do may exhibit explosive and watery diarrhea , fever , nausea , vomiting , cramps , loss of appetite , fatigue , and bloating .
These symptoms may last for months without treatment .
Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole is the recommended treatment .
Microscopic examination is used for diagnosis .
A stool O & P examination may be helpful .
The oocysts have a distinctive blue halo when viewed using ultraviolet fluorescence microscopy .
Identify the most common helminths that cause infections of the GI tract Compare the major characteristics of specific helminthic diseases affecting GI tract Helminths are widespread intestinal parasites .
These parasites can be divided into three common groups : roundbodied worms also described as nematodes , flat-bodied worms that are segmented ( also described as cestodes ) , and flat-bodied worms that are non-segmented ( also described as trematodes ) .
The nematodes include roundworms , pinworms , hookworms , and whipworms .
Cestodes include beef , pork , and fish tapeworms .
Trematodes are collectively called flukes and more uniquely identified with the body site where the adult flukes are located .
Although infection can have serious consequences , many of these parasites are so well adapted to the human host that there is little obvious disease .
Infections caused by the large nematode roundworm Ascaris lumbricoides , a soil-transmitted helminth , are called ascariasis .
Over 800 million to 1 billion people are estimated to be infected worldwide .
Infections are most common in warmer climates and at warmer times of year .
At present , infections are uncommon in the United States .
The eggs of the worms are transmitted through contaminated food and water .
This may happen if food is grown in contaminated soil , including when manure is used as fertilizer .
When an individual consumes embryonated eggs ( those with a developing embryo ) , the eggs travel to the intestine and the larvae are able to hatch .
Ascaris is able to produce proteases that allow for penetration and degradation of host tissue .
The juvenile worms can then enter the circulatory system and migrate to the lungs where they enter the alveoli ( air sacs ) .
From here they crawl to the pharynx and then follow the gut lumen to return to the small intestine , where they mature into adult roundworms .
Females in the host will produce and release eggs that leave the host via feces .
In some cases , the worms can block ducts such as those of the pancreas or gallbladder .
The infection is commonly asymptomatic .
When signs and symptoms are present , they include shortness of breath , cough , nausea , diarrhea , blood in the stool , abdominal pain , weight loss , and fatigue .
The roundworms may be visible in the stool .
In severe cases , children with substantial infections may experience intestinal blockage .
The eggs can be identified by microscopic examination of the stool .
In some cases , the worms themselves may be identified if coughed up or excreted in stool .
They can also sometimes be identified by X-rays , ultrasounds , or MRIs .
Ascariasis is self-limiting , but can last one to two years because the worms can inhibit the body ’ s inflammatory response through glycan gimmickry ( see ) .
The first line of treatment is mebendazole or albendazole .
In some severe cases , surgery may be required .
Two species of nematode worms are associated with hookworm infection .
Both species are found in the Americas , Africa , and Asia .
Necator americanus is found predominantly in the United States and Australia .
Another species , Ancylostoma doudenale , is found in southern Europe , North Africa , the Middle East , and Asia .
The eggs of these species develop into larvae in soil contaminated by dog or cat feces .
These larvae can penetrate the skin .
After traveling through the venous circulation , they reach the lungs .
When they are coughed up , they are then swallowed and can enter the intestine and develop into mature adults .
At this stage , they attach to the wall of the intestine , where they feed on blood and can potentially cause anemia .
Signs and symptoms include cough , an itchy rash , loss of appetite , abdominal pain , and diarrhea .
In children , hookworms can affect physical and cognitive growth .
Some hookworm species , such as Ancylostoma braziliense that is commonly found in animals such as cats and dogs , can penetrate human skin and migrate , causing cutaneous larva migrans , a skin disease caused by the larvae of hookworms .
As they move across the skin , in the subcutaneous tissue , pruritic tracks appear .
The infection is diagnosed using microscopic examination of the stool , allowing for observation of eggs in the feces .
Medications such as albendazole , mebendazole , and pyrantel pamoate are used as needed to treat systemic infection .
In addition to systemic medication for symptoms associated with cutaneous larva migrans , topical thiabendazole is applied to the affected areas .
Strongyloidiasis is generally caused by Strongyloides stercoralis , a soil-transmitted helminth with both free-living and parasitic forms .
In the parasitic form , the larvae of these nematodes generally penetrate the body through the skin , especially through bare feet , although transmission through organ transplantation or at facilities like day-care centers can also occur .
When excreted in the stool , larvae can become free-living adults rather than developing into the parasitic form .
These free-living worms reproduce , laying eggs that hatch into larvae that can develop into the parasitic form .
In the parasitic life cycle , infective larvae enter the skin , generally through the feet .
The larvae reach the circulatory system , which allows them to travel to the alveolar spaces of the lungs .
They are transported to the pharynx where , like many other helminths , the infected patient coughs them up and swallows them again so that they return to the intestine .
Once they reach the intestine , females live in the epithelium and produce eggs that develop asexually , unlike the free-living forms , which use sexual reproduction .
The larvae may be excreted in the stool or can reinfect the host by entering the tissue of the intestines and skin around the anus , which can lead to chronic infections .
The condition is generally asymptomatic , although severe symptoms can develop after treatment with corticosteroids for asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease , or following other forms of immunosuppression .
When the immune system is suppressed , the rate of autoinfection increases , and huge amounts of larvae migrate to organs throughout the body .
Signs and symptoms are generally nonspecific .
The condition can cause a rash at the site of skin entry , cough ( dry or with blood ) , fever , nausea , difficulty breathing , bloating , pain , heartburn , and , rarely , arthritis , or cardiac or kidney complications .
Disseminated strongyloidiasis or hyperinfection is a life-threatening form of the disease that can occur , usually following immunosuppression such as that caused by glucocorticoid treatment ( most commonly ) , with other immunosuppressive medications , with HIV infection , or with malnutrition .
As with other helminths , direct examination of the stool is important in diagnosis .
Ideally , this should be continued over seven days .
Serological testing , including antigen testing , is also available .
These can be limited by crossreactions with other similar parasites and by the inability to distinguish current from resolved infection .
Ivermectin is the preferred treatment , with albendazole as a secondary option .
Enterobius vermicularis , commonly called pinworms , are tiny ( 2–13 mm ) nematodes that cause enterobiasis .
Of all helminthic infections , enterobiasis is the most common in the United States , affecting as many as one-third of American children .
Although the signs and symptoms are generally mild , patients may experience abdominal pain and insomnia from itching of the perianal region , which frequently occurs at night when worms leave the anus to lay eggs .
The itching contributes to transmission , as the disease is transmitted through the fecal-oral route .
When an infected individual scratches the anal area , eggs may get under the fingernails and later be deposited near the individual ’ s mouth , causing reinfection , or on fomites , where they can be transferred to new hosts .
After being ingested , the larvae hatch within the small intestine and then take up residence in the colon and develop into adults .
From the colon , the female adult exits the body at night to lay eggs .
Infection is diagnosed in any of three ways .
First , because the worms emerge at night to lay eggs , it is possible to inspect the perianal region for worms while an individual is asleep .
An alternative is to use transparent tape to remove eggs from the area around the anus first thing in the morning for three days to yield eggs for microscopic examination .
Finally , it may be possible to detect eggs through examination of samples from under the fingernails , where eggs may lodge due to scratching .
Once diagnosis has been made , mebendazole , albendazole , and pyrantel pamoate are effective for treatment .
The nematode whipworm Trichuris trichiura is a parasite that is transmitted by ingestion from soil-contaminated hands or food and causes trichuriasis .
Infection is most common in warm environments , especially when there is poor sanitation and greater risk of fecal contamination of soil , or when food is grown in soil using manure as a fertilizer .
The signs and symptoms may be minimal or nonexistent .
When a substantial infection develops , signs and symptoms include painful , frequent diarrhea that may contain mucus and blood .
It is possible for the infection to cause rectal prolapse , a condition in which a portion of the rectum becomes detached from the inside of the body and protrudes from the anus .
Severely infected children may experience reduced growth and their cognitive development may be affected .
When fertilized eggs are ingested , they travel to the intestine and the larvae emerge , taking up residence in the walls of the colon and cecum .
They attach themselves with part of their bodies embedded in the mucosa .
The larvae mature and live in the cecum and ascending colon .
After 60 to 70 days , females begin to lay 3000 to 20,000 eggs per day .
Diagnosis involves examination of the feces for the presence of eggs .
It may be necessary to use concentration techniques and to collect specimens on multiple days .
Following diagnosis , the infection may be treated with mebendazole , albendazole , or ivermectin .
Trichinosis ( trichenellosis ) develops following consumption of food that contains Trichinella spiralis ( most commonly ) or other Trichinella species .
These microscopic nematode worms are most commonly transmitted in meat , especially pork , that has not been cooked thoroughly .
T. spiralis larvae in meat emerge from cysts when exposed to acid and pepsin in the stomach .
They develop into mature adults within the large intestine .
The larvae produced in the large intestine are able to migrate into the muscles mechanically via the stylet of the parasite , forming cysts .
Muscle proteins are reduced in abundance or undetectable in cells that contain Trichinella ( nurse cells ) .
Animals that ingest the cysts from other animals can later develop infection .
Although infection may be asymptomatic , symptomatic infections begin within a day or two of consuming the nematodes .
Abdominal symptoms arise first and can include diarrhea , constipation , and abdominal pain .
Other possible symptoms include headache , light sensitivity , muscle pain , fever , cough , chills , and conjunctivitis .
More severe symptoms affecting motor coordination , breathing , and the heart sometimes occur .
It may take months for the symptoms to resolve , and the condition is occasionally fatal .
Mild cases may be mistaken for influenza or similar conditions .
Infection is diagnosed using clinical history , muscle biopsy to look for larvae , and serological testing , including immunoassays .
Enzyme immunoassay is the most common test .
It is difficult to effectively treat larvae that have formed cysts in the muscle , although medications may help .
It is best to begin treatment as soon as possible because medications such as mebendazole and albendazole are effective in killing only the adult worms in the intestine .
Steroids may be used to reduce inflammation if larvae are in the muscles .
Taeniasis is a tapeworm infection , generally caused by pork ( Taenia solium ) , beef ( Taenia saginata ) , and Asian ( Taenia asiatica ) tapeworms found in undercooked meat .
Consumption of raw or undercooked fish , including contaminated sushi , can also result in infection from the fish tapeworm ( Diphyllobothrium latum ) .
Tapeworms are flatworms ( cestodes ) with multiple body segments and a head called a scolex that attaches to the intestinal wall .
Tapeworms can become quite large , reaching 4 to 8 meters long .
illustrates the life cycle of a tapeworm .
Tapeworms attached to the intestinal wall produce eggs that are excreted in feces .
After ingestion by animals , the eggs hatch and the larvae emerge .
They may take up residence in the intestine , but can sometimes move to other tissues , especially muscle or brain tissue .
When T. solium larvae form cysts in tissue , the condition is called cysticercosis .
This occurs through ingestion of eggs via the fecal-oral route , not through consumption of undercooked meat .
It can develop in the muscles , eye ( ophthalmic cysticercosis ) , or brain ( neurocysticercosis ) .
Infections may be asymptomatic or they may cause mild gastrointestinal symptoms such as epigastric discomfort , nausea , diarrhea , flatulence , or hunger pains .
It is also common to find visible tapeworm segments passed in the stool .
In cases of cysticercosis , symptoms differ depending upon where the cysts become established .
Neurocysticercosis can have severe , life-threatening consequences and is associated with headaches and seizures because of the presence of the tapeworm larvae encysted in the brain .
Cysts in muscles may be asymptomatic , or they may be painful .
To diagnose these conditions , microscopic analysis of stool samples from three separate days is generally recommended .
Eggs or body segments , called proglottids , may be visible in these samples .
Molecular methods have been developed but are not yet widely available .
Imaging , such as CT and MRI , may be used to detect cysts .
Praziquantel or niclosamide are used for treatment .
Another cestode , Echinococcus granulosus , causes a serious infection known as hydatid disease ( cystic echinococcosis ) .
E. granulosus is found in dogs ( the definitive host ) , as well as several intermediate hosts ( sheep , pigs , goats , cattle ) .
The cestodes are transmitted through eggs in the feces from infected animals , which can be an occupational hazard for individuals who work in agriculture .
Once ingested , E. granulosus eggs hatch in the small intestine and release the larvae .
The larvae invade the intestinal wall to gain access to the circulatory system .
They form hydatid cysts in internal organs , especially in the lungs and liver , that grow slowly and are often undetected until they become large .
If the cysts burst , a severe allergic reaction ( anaphylaxis ) may occur .
Cysts present in the liver can cause enlargement of the liver , nausea , vomiting , right epigastric pain , pain in the right upper quadrant , and possible allergic signs and symptoms .
Cysts in the lungs can lead to alveolar disease .
Abdominal pain , weight loss , pain , and malaise may occur , and inflammatory processes develop .
E. granulosus can be detected through imaging ( ultrasonography , CT , MRI ) that shows the cysts .
Serologic tests , including ELISA and indirect hemagglutinin tests , are used .
Cystic disease is most effectively treated with surgery to remove cysts , but other treatments are also available , including chemotherapy with anti-helminthic drugs ( albendazole or mebendazole ) .
Flukes are flatworms that have a leaflike appearance .
They are a type of trematode worm , and multiple species are associated with disease in humans .
The most common are liver flukes and intestinal flukes .
The liver flukes are several species of trematodes that cause disease by interfering with the bile duct .
Fascioliasis is caused by Fasciola hepatica and Fasciola gigantica in contaminated raw or undercooked aquatic plants ( e.g. , watercress ) .
In Fasciola infection , adult flukes develop in the bile duct and release eggs into the feces .
Clonochiasis is caused by Clonorchis sinensis in contaminated freshwater fish .
Other flukes , such as Opisthorchis viverrini ( found in fish ) and Opisthorchis felineus ( found in freshwater snails ) , also cause infections .
Liver flukes spend part of their life cycle in freshwater snails , which serve as an intermediate host .
Humans are typically infected after eating aquatic plants contaminated by the infective larvae after they have left the snail .
Once they reach the human intestine , they migrate back to the bile duct , where they mature .
The life cycle is similar for the other infectious liver flukes , ( see ) .
When Fasciola flukes cause acute infection , signs and symptoms include nausea , vomiting , abdominal pain , rash , fever , malaise , and breathing difficulties .
If the infection becomes chronic , with adult flukes living in the bile duct , then cholangitis , cirrhosis , pancreatitis , cholecystitis , and gallstones may develop .
Symptoms are similar for infections by other liver flukes .
Cholangiocarcinoma can occur from C. sinensis infection .
The Opisthorchis species can also be associated with cancer development .
Diagnosis is accomplished using patient history and examination of samples from feces or other samples ( such as vomitus ) .
Because the eggs may appear similar , immunoassay techniques are available that can help distinguish species .
The preferred treatment for fascioliasis is triclabendazole .
C. sinensis and Opisthorchis spp .
infections are treated with praziquantel or albendazole .
The intestinal flukes are trematodes that develop in the intestines .
Many , such as Fasciolopsis buski , which causes fasciolopsiasis , are closely related to liver flukes .
Intestinal flukes are ingested from contaminated aquatic plants that have not been properly cooked .
When the cysts are consumed , the larvae emerge in the duodenum and develop into adults while attached to the intestinal epithelium .
The eggs are released in stool .
Intestinal fluke infection is often asymptomatic , but some cases may involve mild diarrhea and abdominal pain .
More severe symptoms such as vomiting , nausea , allergic reactions , and anemia can sometimes occur , and high parasite loads may sometimes lead to intestinal obstructions .
Diagnosis is the same as with liver flukes : examination of feces or other samples and immunoassay .
Praziquantel is used to treat infections caused by intestinal flukes .
Yellow fever was once common in the southeastern US , with annual outbreaks of more than 25,000 infections in New Orleans in the mid-1800s .
In the early 20th century , efforts to eradicate the virus that causes yellow fever were successful thanks to vaccination programs and effective control ( mainly through the insecticide dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane [ DDT ] ) of Aedes aegypti , the mosquito that serves as a vector .
Today , the virus has been largely eradicated in North America .
Elsewhere , efforts to contain yellow fever have been less successful .
Despite mass vaccination campaigns in some regions , the risk for yellow fever epidemics is rising in dense urban cities in Africa and South America .
In an increasingly globalized society , yellow fever could easily make a comeback in North America , where A. aegypti is still present .
If these mosquitoes were exposed to infected individuals , new outbreaks would be possible .
Like yellow fever , many of the circulatory and lymphatic diseases discussed in this chapter are emerging or reemerging worldwide .
Despite medical advances , diseases like malaria , Ebola , and others could become endemic in the US given the right circumstances .
When these systems are infected with a microorganism , the network of vessels can facilitate the rapid dissemination of the microorganism to other regions of the body , sometimes with serious results .
In this section , we will examine some of the key anatomical features of the circulatory and lymphatic systems , as well as general signs and symptoms of infection .
The circulatory ( or cardiovascular ) system is a closed network of organs and vessels that moves blood around the body .
The primary purposes of the circulatory system are to deliver nutrients , immune factors , and oxygen to tissues and to carry away waste products for elimination .
The heart is a four-chambered pump that propels the blood throughout the body .
Deoxygenated blood enters the right atrium through the superior vena cava and the inferior vena cava after returning from the body .
The blood next passes through the tricuspid valve to enter the right ventricle .
When the heart contracts , the blood from the right ventricle is pumped through the pulmonary arteries to the lungs .
There , the blood is oxygenated at the alveoli and returns to the heart through the pulmonary veins .
The oxygenated blood is received at the left atrium and proceeds through the mitral valve to the left ventricle .
When the heart contracts , the oxygenated blood is pumped throughout the body via a series of thick-walled vessels called arteries .
The first and largest artery is called the aorta .
The arteries sequentially branch and decrease in size ( and are called arterioles ) until they end in a network of smaller vessels called capillaries .
The capillary beds are located in the interstitial spaces within tissues and release nutrients , immune factors , and oxygen to those tissues .
The capillaries connect to a series of vessels called venules , which increase in size to form the vein s. The veins join together into larger vessels as they transfer blood back to the heart .
The largest veins , the superior and inferior vena cava , return the blood to the right atrium .
Other organs play important roles in the circulatory system as well .
The kidneys filter the blood , removing waste products and eliminating them in the urine .
The liver also filters the blood and removes damaged or defective red blood cells .
The spleen filters and stores blood , removes damaged red blood cells , and is a reservoir for immune factors .
All of these filtering structures serve as sites for entrapment of microorganisms and help maintain an environment free of microorganisms in the blood .
The lymphatic system is also a network of vessels that run throughout the body .
However , these vessels do not form a full circulating system and are not pressurized by the heart .
Rather , the lymphatic system is an open system with the fluid moving in one direction from the extremities toward two drainage points into veins just above the heart .
Lymphatic fluids move more slowly than blood because they are not pressurized .
Small lymph capillaries interact with blood capillaries in the interstitial spaces in tissues .
Fluids from the tissues enter the lymph capillaries and are drained away .
These fluids , termed lymph , also contain large numbers of white blood cells .
The lymphatic system contains two types of lymphoid tissues .
The primary lymphoid tissue includes bone marrow and the thymus .
Bone marrow contains the hematopoietic stem cells ( HSC ) that differentiate and mature into the various types of blood cells and lymphocytes ( see ) .
The secondary lymphoid tissues include the spleen , lymph nodes , and several areas of diffuse lymphoid tissues underlying epithelial membranes .
The spleen , an encapsulated structure , filters blood and captures pathogens and antigens that pass into it .
The spleen contains specialized macrophages and dendritic cells that are crucial for antigen presentation , a mechanism critical for activation of T lymphocytes and B lymphocytes ( see ) .
Lymph nodes are bean-shaped organs situated throughout the body .
These structures contain areas called germinal centers that are rich in B and T lymphocytes .
The lymph nodes also contain macrophages and dendritic cells for antigen presentation .
Lymph from nearby tissues enters the lymph node through afferent lymphatic vessels and encounters these lymphocytes as it passes through ; the lymph exits the lymph node through the efferent lymphatic vessels .
Under normal circumstances , the circulatory system and the blood should be sterile ; the circulatory system has no normal microbiota .
Because the system is closed , there are no easy portals of entry into the circulatory system for microbes .
Those that are able to breach the body ’ s physical barriers and enter the bloodstream encounter a host of circulating immune defenses , such as antibodies , complement proteins , phagocytes , and other immune cells .
Microbes often gain access to the circulatory system through a break in the skin ( e.g. , wounds , needles , intravenous catheters , insect bites ) or spread to the circulatory system from infections in other body sites .
For example , microorganisms causing pneumonia or renal infection may enter the local circulation of the lung or kidney and spread from there throughout the circulatory network .
If microbes in the bloodstream are not quickly eliminated , they can spread rapidly throughout the body , leading to serious , even life-threatening infections .
Various terms are used to describe conditions involving microbes in the circulatory system .
The term bacteremia refers to bacteria in the blood .
If bacteria are reproducing in the blood as they spread , this condition is called septicemia .
The presence of viruses in the blood is called viremia .
Microbial toxins can also be spread through the circulatory system , causing a condition termed toxemia .
Microbes and microbial toxins in the blood can trigger an inflammatory response so severe that the inflammation damages host tissues and organs more than the infection itself .
This counterproductive immune response is called systemic inflammatory response syndrome ( SIRS ) , and it can lead to the life-threatening condition known as sepsis .
Sepsis is characterized by the production of excess cytokines that leads to classic signs of inflammation such as fever , vasodilation , and edema ( see ) .
In a patient with sepsis , the inflammatory response becomes dysregulated and disproportionate to the threat of infection .
Critical organs such as the heart , lungs , liver , and kidneys become dysfunctional , resulting in increased heart and respiratory rates , and disorientation .
If not treated promptly and effectively , patients with sepsis can go into shock and die .
Certain infections can cause inflammation in the heart and blood vessels .
Inflammation of the endocardium , the inner lining of the heart , is called endocarditis and can result in damage to the heart valves severe enough to require surgical replacement .
Inflammation of the pericardium , the sac surrounding the heart , is called pericarditis .
The term myocarditis refers to the inflammation of the heart ’ s muscle tissue .
Pericarditis and myocarditis can cause fluid to accumulate around the heart , resulting in congestive heart failure .
Inflammation of blood vessels is called vasculitis .
Although somewhat rare , vasculitis can cause blood vessels to become damaged and rupture ; as blood is released , small red or purple spots called petechiae appear on the skin .
If the damage of tissues or blood vessels is severe , it can result in reduced blood flow to the surrounding tissues .
This condition is called ischemia , and it can be very serious .
In severe cases , the affected tissues can die and become necrotic ; these situations may require surgical debridement or amputation .
Like the circulatory system , the lymphatic system does not have a normal microbiota , and the large numbers of immune cells typically eliminate transient microbes before they can establish an infection .
Only microbes with an array of virulence factors are able to overcome these defenses and establish infection in the lymphatic system .
However , when a localized infection begins to spread , the lymphatic system is often the first place the invading microbes can be detected .
Infections in the lymphatic system also trigger an inflammatory response .
Inflammation of lymphatic vessels , called lymphangitis , can produce visible red streaks under the skin .
Inflammation in the lymph nodes can cause them to swell .
A swollen lymph node is referred to as a bubo , and the condition is referred to as lymphadenitis .
Identify and compare bacteria that most commonly cause infections of the circulatory and lymphatic systems Compare the major characteristics of specific bacterial diseases affecting the circulatory and lymphatic systems Bacteria can enter the circulatory and lymphatic systems through acute infections or breaches of the skin barrier or mucosa .
Breaches may occur through fairly common occurrences , such as insect bites or small wounds .
Even the act of tooth brushing , which can cause small ruptures in the gums , may introduce bacteria into the circulatory system .
In most cases , the bacteremia that results from such common exposures is transient and remains below the threshold of detection .
In severe cases , bacteremia can lead to septicemia with dangerous complications such as toxemia , sepsis , and septic shock .
In these situations , it is often the immune response to the infection that results in the clinical signs and symptoms rather than the microbes themselves .
At low concentrations , pro-inflammatory cytokines such as interleukin 1 ( IL-1 ) and tumor necrosis factor-α ( TNF-α ) play important roles in the host ’ s immune defenses .
When they circulate systemically in larger amounts , however , the resulting immune response can be life threatening .
IL-1 induces vasodilation ( widening of blood vessels ) and reduces the tight junctions between vascular endothelial cells , leading to widespread edema .
As fluids move out of circulation into tissues , blood pressure begins to drop .
If left unchecked , the blood pressure can fall below the level necessary to maintain proper kidney and respiratory functions , a condition known as septic shock .
In addition , the excessive release of cytokines during the inflammatory response can lead to the formation of blood clots .
The loss of blood pressure and occurrence of blood clots can result in multiple organ failure and death .
Bacteria are the most common pathogens associated with the development of sepsis , and septic shock .
The most common infection associated with sepsis is bacterial pneumonia ( see ) , accounting for about half of all cases , followed by intra-abdominal infections and urinary tract infections .
Infections associated with superficial wounds , animal bites , and indwelling catheters may also lead to sepsis and septic shock .
including These initially minor , Staphylococcus , Streptococcus , Pseudomonas , Pasteurella , Acinetobacter , and members of the Enterobacteriaceae .
However , if left untreated , infections by these gram-positive and gram-negative pathogens can potentially progress to sepsis , shock , and death .
localized infections can be caused by a wide range of different bacteria , Toxemia associated with infections caused by Staphylococcus aureus can cause staphylococcal toxic shock syndrome ( TSS ) .
Some strains of S. aureus produce a superantigen called toxic shock syndrome toxin-1 ( TSST-1 ) .
TSS may occur as a complication of other localized or systemic infections such as pneumonia , osteomyelitis , sinusitis , and skin wounds ( surgical , traumatic , or burns ) .
Those at highest risk for staphylococcal TSS are women with preexisting S. aureus colonization of the vagina who leave tampons , contraceptive sponges , diaphragms , or other devices in the vagina for longer than the recommended time .
The mortality rate associated with staphylococcal TSS is less than 3 % of cases .
Diagnosis of staphylococcal TSS is based on clinical signs , symptoms , serologic tests to confirm bacterial species , and the detection of toxin production from staphylococcal isolates .
Cultures of skin and blood are often negative ; less than 5 % are positive in cases of staphylococcal TSS .
Treatment for staphylococcal TSS includes decontamination , debridement , vasopressors to elevate blood pressure , and antibiotic therapy with clindamycin plus vancomycin or daptomycin pending susceptibility results .
A syndrome with signs and symptoms similar to staphylococcal TSS can be caused by Streptococcus pyogenes .
This condition , called streptococcal toxic shock-like syndrome ( STSS ) , is characterized by more severe pathophysiology than staphylococcal TSS , with about 50 % of patients developing S. pyogenes bacteremia and necrotizing fasciitis .
In contrast to staphylococcal TSS , STSS is more likely to cause acute respiratory distress syndrome ( ARDS ) , a rapidly progressive disease characterized by fluid accumulation in the lungs that inhibits breathing and causes hypoxemia ( low oxygen levels in the blood ) .
STSS is associated with a higher mortality rate ( 20 % –60 % ) , even with aggressive therapy .
STSS usually develops in patients with a streptococcal soft-tissue infection such as bacterial cellulitis , necrotizing fasciitis , pyomyositis ( pus formation in muscle caused by infection ) , a recent influenza A infection , or chickenpox .
A type of sepsis called puerperal sepsis , also known as puerperal infection , puerperal fever , or childbed fever , is a nosocomial infection associated with the period of puerperium—the time following childbirth during which the mother ’ s reproductive system returns to a nonpregnant state .
Such infections may originate in the genital tract , breast , urinary tract , or a surgical wound .
Initially the infection may be limited to the uterus or other local site of infection , but it can quickly spread , resulting in peritonitis , septicemia , and death .
Before the 19th century work of Ignaz Semmelweis and the widespread acceptance of germ theory ( see ) , puerperal sepsis was a major cause of mortality among new mothers in the first few days following childbirth .
Puerperal sepsis is often associated with Streptococcus pyogenes , but numerous other bacteria can also be responsible .
Examples include gram-positive bacterial ( e.g .
Streptococcus spp. , Staphylococcus spp. , and Enterococcus spp .
) , gram-negative bacteria ( e.g .
Chlamydia spp. , Escherichia coli , Klebsiella spp. , and Proteus spp .
) , as well as anaerobes such as Peptostreptococcus spp. , Bacteroides spp. , and Clostridium spp .
In cases caused by S. pyogenes , the bacteria attach to host tissues using M protein and produce a carbohydrate capsule to avoid phagocytosis .
S. pyogenes also produces a variety of exotoxins , like streptococcal pyrogenic exotoxins A and B , that are associated with virulence and may function as superantigens .
Diagnosis of puerperal fever is based on the timing and extent of fever and isolation , and identification of the etiologic agent in blood , wound , or urine specimens .
Because there are numerous possible causes , antimicrobial susceptibility testing must be used to determine the best antibiotic for treatment .
Nosocomial incidence of puerperal fever can be greatly reduced through the use of antiseptics during delivery and strict adherence to handwashing protocols by doctors , midwives , and nurses .
Also called septic arthritis , infectious arthritis can be either an acute or a chronic condition .
Infectious arthritis is characterized by inflammation of joint tissues and is most often caused by bacterial pathogens .
Most cases of acute infectious arthritis are secondary to bacteremia , with a rapid onset of moderate to severe joint pain and swelling that limits the motion of the affected joint .
In adults and young children , the infective pathogen is most often introduced directly through injury , such as a wound or a surgical site , and brought to the joint through the circulatory system .
Acute infections may also occur after joint replacement surgery .
Acute infectious arthritis often occurs in patients with an immune system impaired by other viral and bacterial infections .
S. aureus is the most common cause of acute septic arthritis in the general population of adults and young children .
Neisseria gonorrhoeae is an important cause of acute infectious arthritis in sexually active individuals .
Chronic infectious arthritis is responsible for 5 % of all infectious arthritis cases and is more likely to occur in patients with other illnesses or conditions .
Patients at risk include those who have an HIV infection , a bacterial or fungal infection , prosthetic joints , rheumatoid arthritis ( RA ) , or who are undergoing immunosuppressive chemotherapy .
Onset is often in a single joint ; there may be little or no pain , aching pain that may be mild , gradual swelling , mild warmth , and minimal or no redness of the joint area .
Diagnosis of infectious arthritis requires the aspiration of a small quantity of synovial fluid from the afflicted joint .
Direct microscopic evaluation , culture , antimicrobial susceptibility testing , and polymerase chain reaction ( PCR ) analyses of the synovial fluid are used to identify the potential pathogen .
Typical treatment includes administration of appropriate antimicrobial drugs based on antimicrobial susceptibility testing .
For nondrug-resistant bacterial strains , β-lactams such as oxacillin and cefazolin are often prescribed for staphylococcal infections .
Third-generation cephalosporins ( e.g. , ceftriaxone ) are used for increasingly prevalent β-lactam-resistant Neisseria infections .
Infections by Mycobacterium spp .
or fungi are treated with appropriate long-term antimicrobial therapy .
Even with treatment , the prognosis is often poor for those infected .
About 40 % of patients with nongonnococcal infectious arthritis will suffer permanent joint damage and mortality rates range from 5 % to 20 % .
Mortality rates are higher among the elderly .
Osteomyelitis is an inflammation of bone tissues most commonly caused by infection .
These infections can either be acute or chronic and can involve a variety of different bacteria .
The most common causative agent of osteomyelitis is S. aureus .
However , M. tuberculosis , Pseudomonas aeruginosa , Streptococcus pyogenes , S. agalactiae , species in the Enterobacteriaceae , and other microorganisms can also cause osteomyelitis , depending on which bones are involved .
In adults , bacteria usually gain direct access to the bone tissues through trauma or a surgical procedure involving prosthetic joints .
In children , the bacteria are often introduced from the bloodstream , possibly spreading from focal infections .
The long bones , such as the femur , are more commonly affected in children because of the more extensive vascularization of bones in the young .
The signs and symptoms of osteomyelitis include fever , localized pain , swelling due to edema , and ulcers in soft tissues near the site of infection .
The resulting inflammation can lead to tissue damage and bone loss .
In addition , the infection may spread to joints , resulting in infectious arthritis , or disseminate into the blood , resulting in sepsis and thrombosis ( formation of blood clots ) .
Like septic arthritis , osteomyelitis is usually diagnosed using a combination of radiography , imaging , and identification of bacteria from blood cultures , or from bone cultures if blood cultures are negative .
Parenteral antibiotic therapy is typically used to treat osteomyelitis .
Because of the number of different possible etiologic agents , however , a variety of drugs might be used .
Broad-spectrum antibacterial drugs such as nafcillin , oxacillin , or cephalosporin are typically prescribed for acute osteomyelitis , and ampicillin and piperacillin/ tazobactam for chronic osteomyelitis .
In cases of antibiotic resistance , vancomycin treatment is sometimes required to control the infection .
In serious cases , surgery to remove the site of infection may be required .
Other forms of treatment include hyperbaric oxygen therapy ( see ) and implantation of antibiotic beads or pumps .
Infections with S. pyogenes have a variety of manifestations and complications generally called sequelae .
As mentioned , the bacterium can cause suppurative infections like puerperal fever .
However , this microbe can also cause nonsuppurative sequelae in the form of acute rheumatic fever ( ARF ) , which can lead to rheumatic heart disease , thus impacting the circulatory system .
Rheumatic fever occurs primarily in children a minimum of 2–3 weeks after an episode of untreated or inadequately treated pharyngitis ( see ) .
At one time , rheumatic fever was a major killer of children in the US ; today , however , it is rare in the US because of early diagnosis and treatment of streptococcal pharyngitis with antibiotics .
In parts of the world where diagnosis and treatment are not readily available , acute rheumatic fever and rheumatic heart disease are still major causes of mortality in children .
Rheumatic fever is characterized by a variety of diagnostic signs and symptoms caused by nonsuppurative , immunemediated damage resulting from a cross-reaction between patient antibodies to bacterial surface proteins and similar proteins found on cardiac , neuronal , and synovial tissues .
Damage to the nervous tissue or joints , which leads to joint pain and swelling , is reversible .
However , damage to heart valves can be irreversible and is worsened by repeated episodes of acute rheumatic fever , particularly during the first 3–5 years after the first rheumatic fever attack .
The inflammation of the heart valves caused by cross-reacting antibodies leads to scarring and stiffness of the valve leaflets .
This , in turn , produces a characteristic heart murmur .
Patients who have previously developed rheumatic fever and who subsequently develop recurrent pharyngitis due to S. pyogenes are at high risk for a recurrent attacks of rheumatic fever .
The American Heart Association recommends a treatment regimen consisting of benzathine benzylpenicillin every 3 or 4 weeks , depending on the patient ’ s risk for reinfection .
Additional prophylactic antibiotic treatment may be recommended depending on the age of the patient and risk for reinfection .
The endocardium is a tissue layer that lines the muscles and valves of the heart .
This tissue can become infected by a variety of bacteria , including gram-positive cocci such as Staphylococcus aureus , viridans streptococci , and Enterococcus faecalis , and the gram-negative so-called HACEK bacilli : Haemophilus spp. , Actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitans , Cardiobacterium hominis , Eikenella corrodens , and Kingella kingae .
The resulting inflammation is called endocarditis , which can be described as either acute or subacute .
Causative agents typically enter the bloodstream during accidental or intentional breaches in the normal barrier defenses ( e.g. , dental procedures , body piercings , catheterization , wounds ) .
Individuals with preexisting heart damage , prosthetic valves and other cardiac devices , and those with a history of rheumatic fever have a higher risk for endocarditis .
This disease can rapidly destroy the heart valves and , if untreated , lead to death in just a few days .
In subacute bacterial endocarditis , heart valve damage occurs slowly over a period of months .
During this time , blood clots form in the heart , and these protect the bacteria from phagocytes .
These patches of tissue-associated bacteria are called vegetations .
The resulting damage to the heart , in part resulting from the immune response causing fibrosis of heart valves , can necessitate heart valve replacement .
Outward signs of subacute endocarditis may include a fever .
Diagnosis of infective endocarditis is determined using the combination of blood cultures , echocardiogram , and clinical symptoms .
In both acute and subacute endocarditis , treatment typically involves relatively high doses of intravenous antibiotics as determined by antimicrobial susceptibility testing .
Acute endocarditis is often treated with a combination of ampicillin , nafcillin , and gentamicin for synergistic coverage of Staphylococcus spp .
and Streptococcus spp .
Prosthetic-valve endocarditis is often treated with a combination of vancomycin , rifampin , and gentamicin .
Rifampin is necessary to treat individuals with infection of prosthetic valves or other foreign bodies because rifampin can penetrate the biofilm of most of the pathogens that infect these devices .
and Streptococcus spp .
can also infect and cause inflammation in the tissues surrounding the heart , a condition called acute pericarditis .
Pericarditis is marked by chest pain , difficulty breathing , and a dry cough .
In most cases , pericarditis is self-limiting and clinical intervention is not necessary .
Diagnosis is made with the aid of a chest radiograph , electrocardiogram , echocardiogram , aspirate of pericardial fluid , or biopsy of pericardium .
Antibacterial medications may be prescribed for infections associated with pericarditis ; however , pericarditis can also be caused other pathogens , including viruses ( e.g. , echovirus , influenza virus ) , fungi ( e.g. , Histoplasma spp. , Coccidioides spp .
) , and eukaryotic parasites ( e.g. , Toxoplasma spp . ) .
Traumatic injuries or certain medical conditions , such as diabetes , can cause damage to blood vessels that interrupts blood flow to a region of the body .
When blood flow is interrupted , tissues begin to die , creating an anaerobic environment in which anaerobic bacteria can thrive .
This condition is called ischemia .
Endospores of the anaerobic bacterium Clostridium perfringens ( along with a number of other Clostridium spp .
from the gut ) can readily germinate in ischemic tissues and colonize the anaerobic tissues .
The resulting infection , called gas gangrene , is characterized by rapidly spreading myonecrosis ( death of muscle tissue ) .
The patient experiences a sudden onset of excruciating pain at the infection site and the rapid development of a foul-smelling wound containing gas bubbles and a thin , yellowish discharge tinged with a small amount of blood .
As the infection progresses , edema and cutaneous blisters containing bluish-purple fluid form .
The infected tissue becomes liquefied and begins sloughing off .
The margin between necrotic and healthy tissue often advances several inches per hour even with antibiotic therapy .
Septic shock and organ failure frequently accompany gas gangrene ; when patients develop sepsis , the mortality rate is greater than 50 % .
α-Toxin and theta ( θ ) toxin are the major virulence factors of C. perfringens implicated in gas gangrene .
α-Toxin is a lipase responsible for breaking down cell membranes ; it also causes the formation of thrombi ( blood clots ) in blood vessels , contributing to the spread of ischemia .
θ-Toxin forms pores in the patient ’ s cell membranes , causing cell lysis .
The gas associated with gas gangrene is produced by Clostridium ’ s fermentation of butyric acid , which produces hydrogen and carbon dioxide that are released as the bacteria multiply , forming pockets of gas in tissues .
Gas gangrene is initially diagnosed based on the presence of the clinical signs and symptoms described earlier in this section .
Diagnosis can be confirmed through Gram stain and anaerobic cultivation of wound exudate ( drainage ) and tissue samples on blood agar .
Treatment typically involves surgical debridement of any necrotic tissue ; advanced cases may require amputation .
Surgeons may also use vacuum-assisted closure ( VAC ) , a surgical technique in which vacuum-assisted drainage is used to remove blood or serous fluid from a wound or surgical site to speed recovery .
The most common antibiotic treatments include penicillin G and clindamycin .
Some cases are also treated with hyperbaric oxygen therapy because Clostridium spp .
are incapable of surviving in oxygen-rich environments .
Infection with the gram-negative bacterium Francisella tularensis causes tularemia ( or rabbit fever ) , a zoonotic infection in humans .
F. tularensis is a facultative intracellular parasite that primarily causes illness in rabbits , although a wide variety of domesticated animals are also susceptible to infection .
Humans can be infected through ingestion of contaminated meat or , more typically , handling of infected animal tissues ( e.g. , skinning an infected rabbit ) .
Tularemia can also be transmitted by the bites of infected arthropods , including the dog tick ( Dermacentor variabilis ) , the lone star tick ( Amblyomma americanum ) , the wood tick ( Dermacentor andersoni ) , and deer flies ( Chrysops spp . ) .
Although the disease is not directly communicable between humans , exposure to aerosols of F. tularensis can result in life-threatening infections .
F. tularensis is highly contagious , with an infectious dose of as few as 10 bacterial cells .
In addition , pulmonary infections have a 30 % –60 % fatality rate if untreated .
For these reasons , F. tularensis is currently classified and must be handled as a biosafety level-3 ( BSL-3 ) organism and as a potential biological warfare agent .
Following introduction through a break in the skin , the bacteria initially move to the lymph nodes , where they are ingested by phagocytes .
After escaping from the phagosome , the bacteria grow and multiply intracellularly in the cytoplasm of phagocytes .
They can later become disseminated through the blood to other organs such as the liver , lungs , and spleen , where they produce masses of tissue called granulomas .
After an incubation period of about 3 days , skin lesions develop at the site of infection .
Other signs and symptoms include fever , chills , headache , and swollen and painful lymph nodes .
A direct diagnosis of tularemia is challenging because it is so contagious .
Once a presumptive diagnosis of tularemia is made , special handling is required to collect and process patients ’ specimens to prevent the infection of healthcare workers .
Specimens suspected of containing F. tularensis can only be handled by BSL-2 or BSL-3 laboratories registered with the Federal Select Agent Program , and individuals handling the specimen must wear protective equipment and use a class II biological safety cabinet .
Tularemia is relatively rare in the US , and its signs and symptoms are similar to a variety of other infections that may need to be ruled out before a diagnosis can be made .
Direct fluorescent-antibody ( DFA ) microscopic examination using antibodies specific for F. tularensis can rapidly confirm the presence of this pathogen .
Culturing this microbe is difficult because of its requirement for the amino acid cysteine , which must be supplied as an extra nutrient in culturing media .
Serological tests are available to detect an immune response against the bacterial pathogen .
In patients with suspected infection , acuteand convalescent-phase serum samples are required to confirm an active infection .
PCR-based tests can also be used for clinical identification of direct specimens from body fluids or tissues as well as cultured specimens .
In most cases , diagnosis is based on clinical findings and likely incidents of exposure to the bacterium .
The antibiotics streptomycin , gentamycin , doxycycline , and ciprofloxacin are effective in treating tularemia .
Species in the genus Brucella are gram-negative facultative intracellular pathogens that appear as coccobacilli .
Several species cause zoonotic infections in animals and humans , four of which have significant human pathogenicity : B. abortus from cattle and buffalo , B. canis from dogs , B. suis from swine , and B. melitensis from goats , sheep , and camels .
Human infections are primarily associated with the ingestion of meat or unpasteurized dairy products from infected animals .
Infection can also occur through inhalation of bacteria in aerosols when handling animal products , or through direct contact with skin wounds .
In the US , most cases of brucellosis are found in individuals with extensive exposure to potentially infected animals ( e.g. , slaughterhouse workers , veterinarians ) .
Two important virulence factors produced by Brucella spp .
are urease , which allows ingested bacteria to avoid destruction by stomach acid , and lipopolysaccharide ( LPS ) , which allows the bacteria to survive within phagocytes .
After gaining entry to tissues , the bacteria are phagocytized by host neutrophils and macrophages .
The bacteria then escape from the phagosome and grow within the cytoplasm of the cell .
Bacteria phagocytized by macrophages are disseminated throughout the body .
This results in the formation of granulomas within many body sites , including bone , liver , spleen , lung , genitourinary tract , brain , heart , eye , and skin .
Acute infections can result in undulant ( relapsing ) fever , but untreated infections develop into chronic disease that usually manifests as acute febrile illness ( fever of 40–41 °C [ 104–105.8 °F ] ) with recurring flu-like signs and symptoms .
Brucella is only reliably found in the blood during the acute fever stage ; it is difficult to diagnose by cultivation .
In addition , Brucella is considered a BSL-3 pathogen and is hazardous to handle in the clinical laboratory without protective clothing and at least a class II biological safety cabinet .
Agglutination tests are most often used for serodiagnosis .
In addition , enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays ( ELISAs ) are available to determine exposure to the organism .
The antibiotics doxycycline or ciprofloxacin are typically prescribed in combination with rifampin ; gentamicin , streptomycin , and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole ( TMP-SMZ ) are also effective against Brucella infections and can be used if needed .
The zoonosis cat-scratch disease ( CSD ) ( or cat-scratch fever ) is a bacterial infection that can be introduced to the lymph nodes when a human is bitten or scratched by a cat .
It is caused by the facultative intracellular gram-negative bacterium Bartonella henselae .
Cats can become infected from flea feces containing B. henselae that they ingest while grooming .
Humans become infected when flea feces or cat saliva ( from claws or licking ) containing B. henselae are introduced at the site of a bite or scratch .
Once introduced into a wound , B. henselae infects red blood cells .
B. henselae invasion of red blood cells is facilitated by adhesins associated with outer membrane proteins and a secretion system that mediates transport of virulence factors into the host cell .
Evidence of infection is indicated if a small nodule with pus forms in the location of the scratch 1 to 3 weeks after the initial injury .
The bacteria then migrate to the nearest lymph nodes , where they cause swelling and pain .
Signs and symptoms may also include fever , chills , and fatigue .
Most infections are mild and tend to be self-limiting .
Most cases of CSD can be prevented by keeping cats free of fleas and promptly cleaning a cat scratch with soap and warm water .
The diagnosis of CSD is difficult because the bacterium does not grow readily in the laboratory .
When necessary , immunofluorescence , serological tests , PCR , and gene sequencing can be performed to identify the bacterial species .
Given the limited nature of these infections , antibiotics are not normally prescribed .
For immunocompromised patients , rifampin , azithromycin , ciprofloxacin , gentamicin ( intramuscularly ) , or TMP-SMZ are generally the most effective options .
The zoonotic infection rat-bite fever can be caused by two different gram-negative bacteria : Streptobacillus moniliformis , which is more common in North America , and Spirillum minor , which is more common in Asia .
Because of modern sanitation efforts , rat bites are rare in the US .
However , contact with fomites , food , or water contaminated by rat feces or body fluids can also cause infections .
Signs and symptoms of rat-bite fever include fever , vomiting , myalgia ( muscle pain ) , arthralgia ( joint pain ) , and a maculopapular rash on the hands and feet .
An ulcer may also form at the site of a bite , along with some swelling of nearby lymph nodes .
In most cases , the infection is self-limiting .
Little is known about the virulence factors that contribute to these signs and symptoms of disease .
Cell culture , MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry , PCR , or ELISA can be used in the identification of Streptobacillus moniliformis .
The diagnosis Spirillum minor may be confirmed by direct microscopic observation of the pathogens in blood using Giemsa or Wright stains , or darkfield microscopy .
Serological tests can be used to detect a host immune response to the pathogens after about 10 days .
The most commonly used antibiotics to treat these infections are penicillin or doxycycline .
The gram-negative bacillus Yersinia pestis causes the zoonotic infection plague .
This bacterium causes acute febrile disease in animals , usually rodents or other small mammals , and humans .
The disease is associated with a high mortality rate if left untreated .
Historically , Y. pestis has been responsible for several devastating pandemics , resulting in millions of deaths ( see ) .
There are three forms of plague : bubonic plague ( the most common form , accounting for about 80 % of cases ) , pneumonic plague , and septicemic plague .
These forms are differentiated by the mode of transmission and the initial site of infection .
illustrates these various modes of transmission and infection between animals and humans .
In bubonic plague , Y. pestis is transferred by the bite of infected fleas .
Since most flea bites occur on the legs and ankles , Y. pestis is often introduced into the tissues and blood circulation in the lower extremities .
After a 2to 6-day incubation period , patients experience an abrupt onset fever ( 39.5–41 °C [ 103.1–105.8 °F ] ) , headache , hypotension , and chills .
The pathogen localizes in lymph nodes , where it causes inflammation , swelling , and hemorrhaging that results in purple buboes .
Buboes often form in lymph nodes of the groin first because these are the nodes associated with the lower limbs ; eventually , through circulation in the blood and lymph , lymph nodes throughout the body become infected and form buboes .
The average mortality rate for bubonic plague is about 55 % if untreated and about 10 % with antibiotic treatment .
Septicemic plague occurs when Y. pestis is directly introduced into the bloodstream through a cut or wound and circulates through the body .
The incubation period for septicemic plague is 1 to 3 days , after which patients develop fever , chills , extreme weakness , abdominal pain , and shock .
Disseminated intravascular coagulation ( DIC ) can also occur , resulting in the formation of thrombi that obstruct blood vessels and promote ischemia and necrosis in surrounding tissues .
Necrosis occurs most commonly in extremities such as fingers and toes , which become blackened .
Septicemic plague can quickly lead to death , with a mortality rate near 100 % when it is untreated .
Even with antibiotic treatment , the mortality rate is about 50 % .
Pneumonic plague occurs when Y. pestis causes an infection of the lungs .
This can occur through inhalation of aerosolized droplets from an infected individual or when the infection spreads to the lungs from elsewhere in the body in patients with bubonic or septicemic plague .
After an incubation period of 1 to 3 days , signs and symptoms include fever , headache , weakness , and a rapidly developing pneumonia with shortness of breath , chest pain , and cough producing bloody or watery mucus .
The pneumonia may result in rapid respiratory failure and shock .
Pneumonic plague is the only form of plague that can be spread from person to person by infectious aerosol droplet .
If untreated , the mortality rate is near 100 % ; with antibiotic treatment , the mortality rate is about 50 % .
The high mortality rate for the plague is , in part , a consequence of it being unusually well equipped with virulence factors .
To date , there are at least 15 different major virulence factors that have been identified from Y. pestis and , of these , eight are involved with adherence to host cells .
In addition , the F1 component of the Y. pestis capsule is a virulence factor that allows the bacterium to avoid phagocytosis .
F1 is produced in large quantities during mammalian infection and is the most immunogenic component .
Successful use of virulence factors allows the bacilli to disseminate from the area of the bite to regional lymph nodes and eventually the entire blood and lymphatic systems .
Culturing and direct microscopic examination of a sample of fluid from a bubo , blood , or sputum is the best way to identify Y. pestis and confirm a presumptive diagnosis of plague .
Specimens may be stained using either a Gram , Giemsa , Wright , or Wayson 's staining technique .
The bacteria show a characteristic bipolar staining pattern , resembling safety pins , that facilitates presumptive identification .
Direct fluorescent antibody tests ( rapid test of outer-membrane antigens ) and serological tests like ELISA can be used to confirm the diagnosis .
The confirmatory method for identifying Y. pestis isolates in the US is bacteriophage lysis .
Prompt antibiotic therapy can resolve most cases of bubonic plague , but septicemic and pneumonic plague are more difficult to treat because of their shorter incubation stages .
Survival often depends on an early and accurate diagnosis and an appropriate choice of antibiotic therapy .
In the US , the most common antibiotics used to treat patients with plague are gentamicin , fluoroquinolones , streptomycin , levofloxacin , ciprofloxacin , and doxycycline .
A wide variety of zoonotic febrile diseases ( diseases that cause fever ) are caused by pathogenic bacteria that require arthropod vectors .
These pathogens are either obligate intracellular species of Anaplasma , Bartonella , Ehrlichia , Orientia , and Rickettsia , or spirochetes in the genus Borrelia .
Isolation and identification of pathogens in this group are best performed in BSL-3 laboratories because of the low infective dose associated with the diseases .
The zoonotic tickborne disease human granulocytic anaplasmosis ( HGA ) is caused by the obligate intracellular pathogen Anaplasma phagocytophilum .
HGA is endemic primarily in the central and northeastern US and in countries in Europe and Asia .
HGA is usually a mild febrile disease that causes flu-like symptoms in immunocompetent patients ; however , symptoms are severe enough to require hospitalization in at least 50 % of infections and , of those patients , less than 1 % will die of HGA .
Small mammals such as white-footed mice , chipmunks , and voles have been identified as reservoirs of A. phagocytophilum , which is transmitted by the bite of an Ixodes tick .
Five major virulence factors have been reported in Anaplasma ; three are adherence factors and two are factors that allow the pathogen to avoid the human immune response .
Diagnostic approaches include locating intracellular microcolonies of Anaplasma through microscopic examination of neutrophils or eosinophils stained with Giemsa or Wright stain , PCR for detection of A. phagocytophilum , and serological tests to detect antibody titers against the pathogens .
The primary antibiotic used for treatment is doxycycline .
Human monocytotropic ehrlichiosis ( HME ) is a zoonotic tickborne disease caused by the BSL-2 , obligate intracellular pathogen Ehrlichia chaffeensis .
Currently , the geographic distribution of HME is primarily the eastern half of the US , with a few cases reported in the West , which corresponds with the known geographic distribution of the primary vector , the lone star tick ( Amblyomma americanum ) .
Symptoms of HME are similar to the flu-like symptoms observed in anaplasmosis , but a rash is more common , with 60 % of children and less than 30 % of adults developing petechial , macula , and maculopapular rashes .
Virulence factors allow E. chaffeensis to adhere to and infect monocytes , forming intracellular microcolonies in monocytes that are diagnostic for the HME .
Diagnosis of HME can be confirmed with PCR and serologic tests .
The first-line treatment for adults and children of all ages with HME is doxycycline .
The disease epidemic typhus is caused by Rickettsia prowazekii and is transmitted by body lice , Pediculus humanus .
Flying squirrels are animal reservoirs of R. prowazekii in North America and can also be sources of lice capable of transmitting the pathogen .
Epidemic typhus is characterized by a high fever and body aches that last for about 2 weeks .
A rash develops on the abdomen and chest and radiates to the extremities .
Severe cases can result in death from shock or damage to heart and brain tissues .
Infected humans are an important reservoir for this bacterium because R. prowazekii is the only Rickettsia that can establish a chronic carrier state in humans .
Epidemic typhus has played an important role in human history , causing large outbreaks with high mortality rates during times of war or adversity .
During World War I , epidemic typhus killed more than 3 million people on the Eastern front .
With the advent of effective insecticides and improved personal hygiene , epidemic typhus is now quite rare in the US .
In the developing world , however , epidemics can lead to mortality rates of up to 40 % in the absence of treatment .
In recent years , most outbreaks have taken place in Burundi , Ethiopia , and Rwanda .
For example , an outbreak in Burundi refugee camps in 1997 resulted in 45,000 illnesses in a population of about 760,000 people .
A rapid diagnosis is difficult because of the similarity of the primary symptoms with those of many other diseases .
Molecular and immunohistochemical diagnostic tests are the most useful methods for establishing a diagnosis during the acute stage of illness when therapeutic decisions are critical .
PCR to detect distinctive genes from R. prowazekii can be used to confirm the diagnosis of epidemic typhus , along with immunofluorescent staining of tissue biopsy specimens .
Serology is usually used to identify rickettsial infections .
However , adequate antibody titers take up to 10 days to develop .
Antibiotic therapy is typically begun before the diagnosis is complete .
The most common drugs used to treat patients with epidemic typhus are doxycycline or chloramphenicol .
Murine typhus ( also known as endemic typhus ) is caused by Rickettsia typhi and is transmitted by the bite of the rat flea , Xenopsylla cheopis , with infected rats as the main reservoir .
Clinical signs and symptoms of murine typhus include a rash and chills accompanied by headache and fever that last about 12 days .
Some patients also exhibit a cough and pneumonia-like symptoms .
Severe illness can develop in immunocompromised patients , with seizures , coma , and renal and respiratory failure .
Clinical diagnosis of murine typhus can be confirmed from a biopsy specimen from the rash .
Diagnostic tests include indirect immunofluorescent antibody ( IFA ) staining , PCR for R. typhi , and acute and convalescent serologic testing .
Primary treatment is doxycycline , with chloramphenicol as the second choice .
This disease is endemic in North and South America and its incidence is coincident with the arthropod vector range .
Despite its name , most cases in the US do not occur in the Rocky Mountain region but in the Southeast ; North Carolina , Oklahoma , Arkansas , Tennessee , and Missouri account for greater than 60 % of all cases .
The map in shows the distribution of prevalence in the US in 2010 .
Signs and symptoms of RMSF include a high fever , headache , body aches , nausea , and vomiting .
A petechial rash ( similar in appearance to measles ) begins on the hands and wrists , and spreads to the trunk , face , and extremities .
If untreated , RMSF is a serious illness that can be fatal in the first 8 days even in otherwise healthy patients .
Increased vascular permeability associated with petechiae formation can result in fatality rates of 3 % or greater , even in the presence of clinical support .
Most deaths are due to hypotension and cardiac arrest or from ischemia following blood coagulation .
Diagnosis can be challenging because the disease mimics several other diseases that are more prevalent .
The diagnosis of RMSF is made based on symptoms , fluorescent antibody staining of a biopsy specimen from the rash , PCR for Rickettsia rickettsii , and acute and convalescent serologic testing .
Primary treatment is doxycycline , with chloramphenicol as the second choice .
Lyme disease is caused by the spirochete Borrelia burgdorferi that is transmitted by the bite of a hard-bodied , blacklegged Ixodes tick .
I. scapularis is the biological vector transmitting B. burgdorferi in the eastern and north-central US and I. pacificus transmits B. burgdorferi in the western US .
Different species of Ixodes ticks are responsible for B. burgdorferi transmission in Asia and Europe .
In the US , Lyme disease is the most commonly reported vectorborne illness .
In 2014 , it was the fifth most common Nationally Notifiable disease .
Ixodes ticks have complex life cycles and deer , mice , and even birds can act as reservoirs .
Over 2 years , the ticks pass through four developmental stages and require a blood meal from a host at each stage .
In the spring , tick eggs hatch into six-legged larvae .
These larvae do not carry B. burgdorferi initially .
They may acquire the spirochete when they take their first blood meal ( typically from a mouse ) .
The larvae then overwinter and molt into eight-legged nymphs in the following spring .
Nymphs take blood meals primarily from small rodents , but may also feed on humans , burrowing into the skin .
The feeding period can last several days to a week , and it typically takes 24 hours for an infected nymph to transmit enough B. burgdorferi to cause infection in a human host .
Nymphs ultimately mature into male and female adult ticks , which tend to feed on larger animals like deer or , occasionally , humans .
The adults then mate and produce eggs to continue the cycle .
The symptoms of Lyme disease follow three stages : early localized , early disseminated , and late stage .
During the early-localized stage , approximately 70 % –80 % of cases may be characterized by a bull's-eye rash , called erythema migrans , at the site of the initial tick bite .
The rash forms 3 to 30 days after the tick bite ( 7 days is the average ) and may also be warm to the touch .
This diagnostic sign is often overlooked if the tick bite occurs on the scalp or another less visible location .
Other early symptoms include flu-like symptoms such as malaise , headache , fever , and muscle stiffness .
If the patient goes untreated , the second early-disseminated stage of the disease occurs days to weeks later .
The symptoms at this stage may include severe headache , neck stiffness , facial paralysis , arthritis , and carditis .
The late-stage manifestations of the disease may occur years after exposure .
Chronic inflammation causes damage that can eventually cause severe arthritis , meningitis , encephalitis , and altered mental states .
The disease may be fatal if untreated .
A presumptive diagnosis of Lyme disease can be made based solely on the presence of a bull ’ s-eye rash at the site of infection , if it is present , in addition to other associated symptoms .
In addition , indirect immunofluorescent antibody ( IFA ) labeling can be used to visualize bacteria from blood or skin biopsy specimens .
Serological tests like ELISA can also be used to detect serum antibodies produced in response to infection .
During the early stage of infection ( about 30 days ) , antibacterial drugs such as amoxicillin and doxycycline are effective .
In the later stages , penicillin G , chloramphenicol , or ceftriaxone can be given intravenously .
also can cause relapsing fever .
Two of the most common species are B. recurrentis , which causes epidemics of louseborne relapsing fever , and B. hermsii , which causes tickborne relapsing fevers .
These Borrelia species are transmitted by the body louse Pediculus humanus and the soft-bodied tick Ornithodoros hermsi , respectively .
Lice acquire the spirochetes from human reservoirs , whereas ticks acquire them from rodent reservoirs .
Spirochetes infect humans when Borrelia in the vector ’ s saliva or excreta enter the skin rapidly as the vector bites .
In both louseand tickborne relapsing fevers , bacteremia usually occurs after the initial exposure , leading to a sudden high fever ( 39–43 °C [ 102.2–109.4 °F ) typically accompanied by headache and muscle aches .
After about 3 days , these symptoms typically subside , only to return again after about a week .
After another 3 days , the symptoms subside again but return a week later , and this cycle may repeat several times unless it is disrupted by antibiotic treatment .
Immune evasion through bacterial antigenic variation is responsible for the cyclical nature of the symptoms in these diseases .
The diagnosis of relapsing fever can be made by observation of spirochetes in blood , using darkfield microscopy .
For louseborne relapsing fever , doxycycline or erythromycin are the first-line antibiotics .
For tickborne relapsing fever , tetracycline or erythromycin are the first-line antibiotics .
The louseborne disease trench fever was first characterized as a specific disease during World War I , when approximately 1 million soldiers were infected .
Today , it is primarily limited to areas of the developing world where poor sanitation and hygiene lead to infestations of lice ( e.g. , overpopulated urban areas and refugee camps ) .
Trench fever is caused by the gram-negative bacterium Bartonella quintana , which is transmitted when feces from infected body lice , Pediculus humanus var corporis , are rubbed into the louse bite , abraded skin , or the conjunctiva .
The symptoms typically follow a 5-day course marked by a high fever , body aches , conjunctivitis , ocular pain , severe headaches , and severe bone pain in the shins , neck , and back .
Diagnosis can be made using blood cultures ; serological tests like ELISA can be used to detect antibody titers to the pathogen and PCR can also be used .
The first-line antibiotics are doxycycline , macrolide antibiotics , and ceftriaxone .
Identify common viral pathogens that cause infections of the circulatory and lymphatic systems Compare the major characteristics of specific viral diseases affecting the circulatory and lymphatic systems Viral pathogens of the circulatory system vary tremendously both in their virulence and distribution worldwide .
Some of these pathogens are practically global in their distribution .
Fortunately , the most ubiquitous viruses tend to produce the mildest forms of disease .
In the majority of cases , those infected remain asymptomatic .
On the other hand , other viruses are associated with life-threatening diseases that have impacted human history .
Human herpesvirus 4 , also known as Epstein-Barr virus ( EBV ) , has been associated with a variety of human diseases , such as mononucleosis and Burkitt lymphoma .
Exposure to the human herpesvirus 4 ( HHV-4 ) is widespread and nearly all people have been exposed at some time in their childhood , as evidenced by serological tests on populations .
The virus primarily resides within B lymphocytes and , like all herpes viruses , can remain dormant in a latent state for a long time .
When uninfected young adults are exposed to EBV , they may experience infectious mononucleosis .
The virus is mainly spread through contact with body fluids ( e.g. , saliva , blood , and semen ) .
The main symptoms include pharyngitis , fever , fatigue , and lymph node swelling .
Abdominal pain may also occur as a result of spleen and liver enlargement in the second or third week of infection .
The disease typically is self-limiting after about a month .
The main symptom , extreme fatigue , can continue for several months , however .
Complications in immunocompetent patients are rare but can include jaundice , anemia , and possible rupture of the spleen caused by enlargement .
In patients with malaria or HIV , Epstein-Barr virus can lead to a fast-growing malignant cancer known as Burkitt lymphoma .
This condition is a form of non-Hodgkin lymphoma that produces solid tumors chiefly consisting of aberrant B cells .
Burkitt lymphoma is more common in Africa , where prevalence of HIV and malaria is high , and it more frequently afflicts children .
Repeated episodes of viremia caused by reactivation of the virus are common in immunocompromised individuals .
In some patients with AIDS , EBV may induce the formation of malignant B-cell lymphomas or oral hairy leukoplakia .
Immunodeficiency-associated Burkitt lymphoma primarily occurs in patients with HIV .
HIV infection , similar to malaria , leads to polyclonal B-cell activation and permits poorly controlled proliferation of EBV B cells , leading to the formation of lymphomas .
Infectious mononucleosis is typically diagnosed based on the initial clinical symptoms and a test for antibodies to EBV-associated antigens .
Because the disease is self-limiting , antiviral treatments are rare for mononucleosis .
Cases of Burkitt lymphoma are diagnosed from a biopsy specimen from a lymph node or tissue from a suspected tumor .
Staging of the cancer includes computed tomography ( CT ) scans of the chest , abdomen , pelvis , and cytologic and histologic evaluation of biopsy specimens .
Because the tumors grow so rapidly , staging studies must be expedited and treatment must be initiated promptly .
An intensive alternating regimen of cyclophosphamide , vincristine , doxorubicin , methotrexate , ifosfamide , etoposide , and cytarabine ( CODOX-M/IVAC ) plus rituximab results in a cure rate greater than 90 % for children and adults .
Also known as cytomegalovirus ( CMV ) , human herpesvirus 5 ( HHV-5 ) is a virus with high infection rates in the human population .
It is currently estimated that 50 % of people in the US have been infected by the time they reach adulthood .
CMV is the major cause of non-Epstein-Barr infectious mononucleosis in the general human population .
It is also an important pathogen in immunocompromised hosts , including patients with AIDS , neonates , and transplant recipients .
However , the vast majority of CMV infections are asymptomatic .
In adults , if symptoms do occur , they typically include fever , fatigue , swollen glands , and pharyngitis .
CMV can be transmitted between individuals through contact with body fluids such as saliva or urine .
Common modes of transmission include sexual contact , nursing , blood transfusions , and organ transplants .
In addition , pregnant women with active infections frequently pass this virus to their fetus , resulting in congenital CMV infections , which occur in approximately one in every 150 infants in US .
Infants can also be infected during passage through the birth canal or through breast milk and saliva from the mother .
Perinatal infections tend to be milder but can occasionally cause lung , spleen , or liver damage .
Serious symptoms in newborns include growth retardation , jaundice , deafness , blindness , and mental retardation if the virus crosses the placenta during the embryonic state when the body systems are developing in utero .
However , a majority ( approximately 80 % ) of infected infants will never have symptoms or experience long-term problems .
Diagnosis of CMV infection during pregnancy is usually achieved by serology ; CMV is the “ C ” in prenatal TORCH screening .
Many patients receiving blood transfusions and nearly all those receiving kidney transplants ultimately become infected with CMV .
Approximately 60 % of transplant recipients will have CMV infection and more than 20 % will develop symptomatic disease .
These infections may result from CMV-contaminated tissues but also may be a consequence of immunosuppression required for transplantation causing reactivation of prior CMV infections .
The resulting viremia can lead to fever and leukopenia , a decrease in the number of white blood cells in the bloodstream .
Serious consequences may include liver damage , transplant rejection , and death .
For similar reasons , many patients with AIDS develop active CMV infections that can manifest as encephalitis or progressive retinitis leading to blindness .
Diagnosis of a localized CMV infection can be achieved through direct microscopic evaluation of tissue specimens stained with routine stains ( e.g. , Wright-Giemsa , hematoxylin and eosin , Papanicolaou ) and immunohistochemical stains .
Cells infected by CMV produce characteristic inclusions with an `` owl 's eye '' appearance ; this sign is less sensitive than molecular methods like PCR but more predictive of localized disease .
For more severe CMV infection , tests such as enzyme immunoassay ( EIA ) , indirect immunofluorescence antibody ( IFA ) tests , and PCR , which are based on detection of CMV antigen or DNA , have a higher sensitivity and can determine viral load .
Cultivation of the virus from saliva or urine is still the method for detecting CMV in newborn babies up to 3 weeks old .
Ganciclovir , valganciclovir , foscarnet , and cidofovir are the first-line antiviral drugs for serious CMV infections .
There are a number of arthropod-borne viruses , or arboviruses , that can cause human disease .
Among these are several important hemorrhagic fevers transmitted by mosquitoes .
We will discuss three that pose serious threats : yellow fever , chikungunya fever , and dengue fever .
Yellow fever was once common in the US and caused several serious outbreaks between 1700 and 1900 .
Through vector control efforts , however , this disease has been eliminated in the US .
Currently , yellow fever occurs primarily in tropical and subtropical areas in South America and Africa .
It is caused by the yellow fever virus of the genus Flavivirus ( named for the Latin word flavus meaning yellow ) , which is transmitted to humans by mosquito vectors .
Sylvatic yellow fever occurs in tropical jungle regions of Africa and Central and South America , where the virus can be transmitted from infected monkeys to humans by the mosquitoes Aedes africanus or Haemagogus spp .
In urban areas , the Aedes aegypti mosquito is mostly responsible for transmitting the virus between humans .
Most individuals infected with yellow fever virus have no illness or only mild disease .
Onset of milder symptoms is sudden , with dizziness , fever of 39–40 °C ( 102–104 °F ) , chills , headache , and myalgias .
As symptoms worsen , the face becomes flushed , and nausea , vomiting , constipation , severe fatigue , restlessness , and irritability are common .
Mild disease may resolve after 1 to 3 days .
However , approximately 15 % of cases progress to develop moderate to severe yellow fever disease .
In moderate or severe disease , the fever falls suddenly 2 to 5 days after onset , but recurs several hours or days later .
Symptoms of jaundice , petechial rash , mucosal hemorrhages , oliguria ( scant urine ) , epigastric tenderness with bloody vomit , confusion , and apathy also often occur for approximately 7 days of moderate to severe disease .
After more than a week , patients may have a rapid recovery and no sequelae .
In its most severe form , called malignant yellow fever , symptoms include delirium , bleeding , seizures , shock , coma , and multiple organ failure ; in some cases , death occurs .
Patients with malignant yellow fever also become severely immunocompromised , and even those in recovery may become susceptible to bacterial superinfections and pneumonia .
Of the 15 % of patients who develop moderate or severe disease , up to half may die .
Diagnosis of yellow fever is often based on clinical signs and symptoms and , if applicable , the patient ’ s travel history , but infection can be confirmed by culture , serologic tests , and PCR .
There are no effective treatments for patients with yellow fever .
Whenever possible , patients with yellow fever should be hospitalized for close observation and given supportive care .
Prevention is the best method of controlling yellow fever .
Use of mosquito netting , window screens , insect repellents , and insecticides are all effective methods of reducing exposure to mosquito vectors .
An effective vaccine is also available , but in the US , it is only administered to those traveling to areas with endemic yellow fever .
In West Africa , the World Health Organization ( WHO ) launched a Yellow Fever Initiative in 2006 and , since that time , significant progress has been made in combating yellow fever .
More than 105 million people have been vaccinated , and no outbreaks of yellow fever were reported in West Africa in 2015 .
The disease dengue fever , also known as breakbone fever , is caused by four serotypes of dengue virus called dengue 1–4 .
These are Flavivirus species that are transmitted to humans by A. aegypti or A. albopictus mosquitoes .
The disease is distributed worldwide but is predominantly located in tropical regions .
The WHO estimates that 50 million to 100 million infections occur yearly , including 500,000 dengue hemorrhagic fever ( DHF ) cases and 22,000 deaths , most among children .
Patients who develop DHF experience circulatory system failure caused by increased blood vessel permeability .
Patients with dengue fever can also develop DSS from vascular collapse because of the severe drop in blood pressure .
Patients who develop DHF or DSS are at greater risk for death without prompt appropriate supportive treatment .
About 30 % of patients with severe hemorrhagic disease with poor supportive treatment die , but mortality can be less than 1 % with experienced support .
Diagnostic tests for dengue fever include serologic testing , ELISA , and reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction ( RT-PCR ) of blood .
There are no specific treatments for dengue fever , nor is there a vaccine .
Instead , supportive clinical care is provided to treat the symptoms of the disease .
The best way to limit the impact of this viral pathogen is vector control .
The arboviral disease chikungunya fever is caused by chikungunya virus ( CHIKV ) , which is transmitted to humans by A. aegypti and A. albopictus mosquitoes .
Until 2013 , the disease had not been reported outside of Africa , Asia , and a few European countries ; however , CHIKV has now spread to mosquito populations in North and South America .
Chikungunya fever is characterized by high fever , joint pain , rash , and blisters , with joint pain persisting for several months .
These infections are typically self-limiting and rarely fatal .
The diagnostic approach for chikungunya fever is similar to that for dengue fever .
Viruses can be cultured directly from patient serum during early infections .
IFA , EIA , ELISA , PCR , and RT-PCR are available to detect CHIKV antigens and patient antibody response to the infection .
There are no specific treatments for this disease except to manage symptoms with fluids , analgesics , and bed rest .
As with most arboviruses , the best strategy for combating the disease is vector control .
The Ebola virus disease ( EVD ) is a highly contagious disease caused by species of Ebolavirus , a BSL-4 filovirus .
Transmission to humans occurs through direct contact with body fluids ( e.g. , blood , saliva , sweat , urine , feces , or vomit ) , and indirect contact by contaminated fomites .
Infected patients can easily transmit Ebola virus to others if appropriate containment and use of personal protective equipment is not available or used .
Handling and working with patients with EVD is extremely hazardous to the general population and health-care workers .
In almost every EVD outbreak there have been Ebola infections among health-care workers .
This ease of Ebola virus transmission was recently demonstrated in the Ebola epidemic in Guinea , Liberia , and Sierra Leone in 2014 , in which more than 28,000 people in 10 countries were infected and more than 11,000 died .
After infection , the initial symptoms of Ebola are unremarkable : fever , severe headache , myalgia , cough , chest pain , and pharyngitis .
As the disease progresses , patients experience abdominal pain , diarrhea , and vomiting .
Hemorrhaging begins after about 3 days , with bleeding occurring in the gastrointestinal tract , skin , and many other sites .
This often leads to delirium , stupor , and coma , accompanied by shock , multiple organ failure , and death .
The mortality rates of EVD often range from 50 % to 90 % .
The initial diagnosis of Ebola is difficult because the early symptoms are so similar to those of many other illnesses .
It is possible to directly detect the virus from patient samples within a few days after symptoms begin , using antigen-capture ELISA , immunoglobulin M ( IgM ) ELISA , PCR , and virus isolation .
There are currently no effective , approved treatments for Ebola other than supportive care and proper isolation techniques to contain its spread .
The genus Hantavirus consists of at least four serogroups with nine viruses causing two major clinical ( sometimes overlapping ) syndromes : hantavirus pulmonary syndrome ( HPS ) in North America and hemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome ( HFRS ) in other continents .
Hantaviruses are found throughout the world in wild rodents that shed the virus in their urine and feces .
Transmission occurs between rodents and to humans through inhalation of aerosols of the rodent urine and feces .
Hantaviruses associated with outbreaks in the US and Canada are transmitted by the deer mouse , white-footed mouse , or cotton rat .
HPS begins as a nonspecific flu-like illness with headache , fever , myalgia , nausea , vomiting , diarrhea , and abdominal pain .
Patients rapidly develop pulmonary edema and hypotension resulting in pneumonia , shock , and death , with a mortality rate of up to 50 % .
This virus can also cause HFRS , which has not been reported in the US .
The initial symptoms of this condition include high fever , headache , chills , nausea , inflammation or redness of the eyes , or a rash .
Later symptoms are hemorrhaging , hypotension , kidney failure , shock , and death .
The mortality rate of HFRS can be as high as 15 % .
ELISA , Western blot , rapid immunoblot strip assay ( RIBA ) , and RT-PCR detect host antibodies or viral proteins produced during infection .
Immunohistological staining may also be used to detect the presence of viral antigens .
There are no clinical treatments other than general supportive care available for HPS infections .
Patients with HFRS can be treated with ribavirin .
Human T-lymphotropic viruses ( HTLV ) , also called human immunodeficiency viruses ( HIV ) are retroviruses that are the causative agent of acquired immune deficiency syndrome ( AIDS ) .
There are two main variants of human immunodeficiency virus ( HIV ) .
HIV-1 occurs in human populations worldwide , whereas HIV-2 is concentrated in West Africa .
Currently , the most affected region in the world is sub-Saharan Africa , with an estimated 25.6 million people living with HIV in 2015 .
Sub-Saharan Africa also accounts for two-thirds of the global total of new HIV infections .
HIV is spread through direct contact with body fluids .
Casual contact and insect vectors are not sufficient for disease transmission ; common modes of transmission include sexual contact and sharing of needles by intravenous ( IV ) drug users .
It generally takes many years before the effects of an HIV infection are detected .
HIV infections are not dormant during this period : virions are continually produced , and the immune system continually attempts to clear the viral infection , while the virus persistently infects additional CD4 T cells .
Over time , the CD4 T-cell population is devastated , ultimately leading to AIDS .
When people are infected with HIV , their disease progresses through three stages based on CD4 T-cell counts and the presence of clinical symptoms .
Stage 1 : Acute HIV infection .
Two to 4 weeks after infection with HIV , patients may experience a flulike illness , which can last for a few weeks .
Patients with acute HIV infection have more than 500 cells/μL CD4 T cells and a large amount of virus in their blood .
Patients are very contagious during this stage .
To confirm acute infection , either a fourth-generation antibody-antigen test or a nucleic acid test ( NAT ) must be performed .
Stage 2 : Clinical latency .
During this period , HIV enters a period of dormancy .
Patients have between 200 and 499 cells/μL CD4 T cells ; HIV is still active but reproduces at low levels , and patients may not experience any symptoms of illness .
For patients who are not taking medicine to treat HIV , this period can last a decade or longer .
For patients receiving antiretroviral therapy , the stage may last for several decades , and those with low levels of the virus in their blood are much less likely to transmit HIV than those who are not virally suppressed .
Near the end of the latent stage , the patient ’ s viral load starts to increase and the CD4 T-cell count begins to decrease , leading to the development of symptoms and increased susceptibility to opportunistic infections .
Stage 3 : Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome ( AIDS ) .
Patients are diagnosed with AIDS when their CD4 T-cell count drops below 200 cells/μL or when they develop certain opportunistic illnesses .
During this stage , the immune system becomes severely damaged by HIV .
This is a fatal progression that , in the terminal stages , includes wasting syndrome and dementia complex .
Patients with AIDS have a high viral load and are highly infectious ; they typically survive about 3 years without treatment .
The initial diagnosis of HIV is performed using a serological test for antibody production against the pathogen .
Positive test results are confirmed by Western blot or PCR tests .
It can take weeks or months for the body to produce antibodies in response to an infection .
There are fourth-generation tests that detect HIV antibodies and HIV antigens that are present even before the body begins producing antibodies .
Nucleic acid tests ( NATs ) are a third type of test that is relatively expensive and uncommon ; NAT can detect HIV in blood and determine the viral load .
As a consequence of provirus formation , it is currently not possible to eliminate HIV from an infected patient ’ s body .
Elimination by specific antibodies is ineffective because the virus mutates rapidly—a result of the error-prone reverse transcriptase and the inability to correct errors .
Antiviral treatments , however , can greatly extend life expectancy .
To combat the problem of drug resistance , combinations of antiretroviral drugs called antiretroviral therapy ( ART ) , sometimes called highly active ART or combined ART , are used .
There are several different targets for antiviral drug action ( and a growing list of drugs for each of these targets ) .
One class of drugs inhibits HIV entry ; other classes inhibit reverse transcriptase by blocking viral RNA-dependent and DNA-dependent DNA polymerase activity ; and still others inhibit one of the three HIV enzymes needed to replicate inside human cells .
Identify common parasites that cause infections of the circulatory and lymphatic systems Compare the major characteristics of specific parasitic diseases affecting the circulatory and lymphatic systems Some protozoa and parasitic flukes are also capable of causing infections of the human circulatory system .
Although these infections are rare in the US , they continue to cause widespread suffering in the developing world today .
Fungal infections of the circulatory system are very rare .
Therefore , they are not discussed in this chapter .
Despite more than a century of intense research and clinical advancements , malaria remains one of the most important infectious diseases in the world today .
Its widespread distribution places more than half of the world ’ s population in jeopardy .
In 2015 , the WHO estimated there were about 214 million cases of malaria worldwide , resulting in about 438,000 deaths ; about 88 % of cases and 91 % of deaths occurred in Africa .
Although malaria is not currently a major threat in the US , the possibility of its reintroduction is a concern .
Malaria is caused by several protozoan parasites in the genus Plasmodium : P. falciparum , P. knowlesi , P. malariae , P. ovale , and P. vivax .
Plasmodium primarily infect red blood cells and are transmitted through the bite of Anopheles mosquitoes .
Currently , P. falciparum is the most common and most lethal cause of malaria , often called falciparum malaria .
Falciparum malaria is widespread in highly populated regions of Africa and Asia , putting many people at risk for the most severe form of the disease .
The classic signs and symptoms of malaria are cycles of extreme fever and chills .
The sudden , violent symptoms of malaria start with malaise , abrupt chills , and fever ( 39–41° C [ 102.2–105.8 °F ] ) , rapid and faint pulse , polyuria , headache , myalgia , nausea , and vomiting .
After 2 to 6 hours of these symptoms , the fever falls , and profuse sweating occurs for 2 to 3 hours , followed by extreme fatigue .
These symptoms are a result of Plasmodium emerging from red blood cells synchronously , leading to simultaneous rupture of a large number of red blood cells , resulting in damage to the spleen , liver , lymph nodes , and bone marrow .
The organ damage resulting from hemolysis causes patients to develop sludge blood ( i.e. , blood in which the red blood cells agglutinate into clumps ) that can lead to lack of oxygen , necrosis of blood vessels , organ failure , and death .
In established infections , malarial cycles of fever and chills typically occur every 2 days in the disease described as tertian malaria , which is caused by P. vivax and P. ovale .
The cycles occur every 3 days in the disease described as quartan malaria , which is caused by P. malariae .
These intervals may vary among cases .
Plasmodium has a complex life cycle that includes several developmental stages alternately produced in mosquitoes and humans .
When an infected mosquito takes a blood meal , sporozoites in the mosquito salivary gland are injected into the host ’ s blood .
These parasites circulate to the liver , where they develop into schizonts .
The schizonts then undergo schizogony , resulting in the release of many merozoites at once .
The merozoites move to the bloodstream and infect red blood cells .
Inside red blood cells , merozoites develop into trophozoites that produce more merozoites .
The synchronous release of merozoites from red blood cells in the evening leads to the symptoms of malaria .
In addition , some trophozoites alternatively develop into male and female gametocytes .
The gametocytes are taken up when the mosquito takes a blood meal from an infected individual .
Sexual sporogony occurs in the gut of the mosquito .
The gametocytes fuse to form zygotes in the insect gut .
The zygotes become motile and elongate into an ookinete .
This form penetrates the midgut wall and develops into an oocyst .
Finally , the oocyst releases new sporozoites that migrate to the mosquito salivary glands to complete the life cycle .
Diagnosis of malaria is by microscopic observation of developmental forms of Plasmodium in blood smears and rapid EIA assays that detect Plasmodium antigens or enzymes .
Drugs such as chloroquine , atovaquone , artemether , and lumefantrine may be prescribed for both acute and prophylactic therapy , although some Plasmodium spp .
have shown resistance to antimalarial drugs .
Use of insecticides and insecticide-treated bed nets can limit the spread of malaria .
Despite efforts to develop a vaccine for malaria , none is currently available .
The disease toxoplasmosis is caused by the protozoan Toxoplasma gondii .
T. gondii is found in a wide variety of birds and mammals , and human infections are common .
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ( CDC ) estimates that 22.5 % of the population 12 years and older has been infected with T. gondii ; but immunocompetent individuals are typically asymptomatic , however .
Domestic cats are the only known definitive hosts for the sexual stages of T. gondii and , thus , are the main reservoirs of infection .
Infected cats shed T. gondii oocysts in their feces , that and these oocysts typically spread to humans through contact with fecal matter on cats ’ bodies , in litter boxes , or in garden beds where outdoor cats defecate .
T. gondii has a complex life cycle that involves multiple hosts .
The T. gondii life cycle begins when unsporulated oocysts are shed in the cat ’ s feces .
These oocysts take 1–5 days to sporulate in the environment and become infective .
Intermediate hosts in nature include birds and rodents , which become infected after ingesting soil , water , or plant material contaminated with the infective oocysts .
Once ingested , the oocysts transform into tachyzoites that localize in the bird or rodent neural and muscle tissue , where they develop into tissue cysts .
Cats may become infected after consuming birds and rodents harboring tissue cysts .
Cats and other animals may also become infected directly by ingestion of sporulated oocysts in the environment .
Interestingly , Toxoplasma infection appears to be able to modify the host ’ s behavior .
Mice infected by Toxoplasma lose their fear of cat pheromones .
As a result , they become easier prey for cats , facilitating the transmission of the parasite to the cat definitive host .
Toxoplasma infections in humans are extremely common , but most infected people are asymptomatic or have subclinical symptoms .
Some studies suggest the parasite may be able to influence the personality and psychomotor performance of infected humans , similar to the way it modifies behavior in other mammals .
When symptoms do occur , they tend to be mild and similar to those of mononucleosis .
However , asymptomatic toxoplasmosis can become problematic in certain situations .
Cysts can lodge in a variety of human tissues and lie dormant for years .
Reactivation of these quiescent infections can occur in immunocompromised patients following transplantation , cancer therapy , or the development of an immune disorder such as AIDS .
In patients with AIDS who have toxoplasmosis , the immune system can not combat the growth of T. gondii in body tissues ; as a result , these cysts can cause encephalitis , retinitis , pneumonitis , cognitive disorders , and seizures that can eventually be fatal .
Toxoplasmosis can also pose a risk during pregnancy because tachyzoites can cross the placenta and cause serious infections in the developing fetus .
The extent of fetal damage resulting from toxoplasmosis depends on the severity of maternal disease , the damage to the placenta , the gestational age of the fetus when infected , and the virulence of the organism .
Congenital toxoplasmosis often leads to fetal loss or premature birth and can result in damage to the central nervous system , manifesting as mental retardation , deafness , or blindness .
Consequently , pregnant women are advised by the CDC to take particular care in preparing meat , gardening , and caring for pet cats .
Diagnosis of toxoplasmosis infection during pregnancy is usually achieved by serology including TORCH testing ( the “ T ” in TORCH stands for toxoplasmosis ) .
Diagnosis of congenital infections can also be achieved by detecting T. gondii DNA in amniotic fluid , using molecular methods such as PCR .
In adults , diagnosis of toxoplasmosis can include observation of tissue cysts in tissue specimens .
Tissue cysts may be observed in Giemsaor Wright-stained biopsy specimens , and CT , magnetic resonance imaging , and lumbar puncture can also be used to confirm infection .
Preventing infection is the best first-line defense against toxoplasmosis .
Preventive measures include washing hands thoroughly after handling raw meat , soil , or cat litter , and avoiding consumption of vegetables possibly contaminated with cat feces .
All meat should be cooked to an internal temperature of 73.9–76.7 °C ( 165–170 °F ) .
Most immunocompetent patients do not require clinical intervention for Toxoplasma infections .
However , neonates , pregnant women , and immunocompromised patients can be treated with pyrimethamine and sulfadiazine—except during the first trimester of pregnancy , because these drugs can cause birth defects .
Spiramycin has been used safely to reduce transmission in pregnant women with primary infection during the first trimester because it does not cross the placenta .
Babesiosis is a rare zoonotic infectious disease caused by Babesia spp .
These parasitic protozoans infect various wild and domestic animals and can be transmitted to humans by black-legged Ixodes ticks .
In humans , Babesia infect red blood cells and replicate inside the cell until it ruptures .
The Babesia released from the ruptured red blood cell continue the growth cycle by invading other red blood cells .
Patients may be asymptomatic , but those who do have symptoms often initially experience malaise , fatigue , chills , fever , headache , myalgia , and arthralgia .
Previously acquired asymptomatic Babesia infection may become symptomatic if a splenectomy is performed .
Diagnosis is based mainly on the microscopic observation of parasites in blood smears .
Serologic and antibody detection by IFA can also be performed and PCR-based tests are available .
Many people do not require clinical intervention for Babesia infections , however , serious infections can be cleared with a combination of atovaquone and azithromycin or a combination of clindamycin and quinine .
Also called American trypanosomiasis , Chagas disease is a zoonosis classified as a neglected tropical disease ( NTD ) .
It is caused by the flagellated protozoan Trypanosoma cruzi and is most commonly transmitted to animals and people through the feces of triatomine bugs .
The triatomine bug is nicknamed the kissing bug because it frequently bites humans on the face or around the eyes ; the insect often defecates near the bite and the infected fecal matter may be rubbed into the bite wound by the bitten individual .
The bite itself is painless and , initially , many people show no signs of the disease .
Alternative modes of transmission include contaminated blood transfusions , organ transplants from infected donors , and congenital transmission from mother to fetus .
Chagas disease is endemic throughout much of Mexico , Central America , and South America , where , according to WHO , an estimated 6 million to 7 million people are infected .
Currently , Chagas disease is not endemic in the US , even though triatomine bugs are found in the southern half of the country .
Triatomine bugs typically are active at night , when they take blood meals by biting the faces and lips of people or animals as they sleep and often defecate near the site of the bite .
Infection occurs when the host rubs the feces into their eyes , mouth , the bite wound , or another break in the skin .
The protozoan then enters the blood and invades tissues of the heart and central nervous system , as well as macrophages and monocytes .
Nonhuman reservoirs of T. cruzi parasites include wild animals and domesticated animals such as dogs and cats , which also act as reservoirs of the pathogen .
There are three phases of Chagas disease : acute , intermediate , and chronic .
These phases can be either asymptomatic or life-threatening depending on the immunocompetence status of the patient .
In acute phase disease , symptoms include fever , headache , myalgia , rash , vomiting , diarrhea , and enlarged spleen , liver , and lymph nodes .
In addition , a localized nodule called a chagoma may form at the portal of entry , and swelling of the eyelids or the side of the face , called Romaña 's sign , may occur near the bite wound .
Symptoms of the acute phase may resolve spontaneously , but if untreated , the infection can persist in tissues , causing irreversible damage to the heart or brain .
In rare cases , young children may die of myocarditis or meningoencephalitis during the acute phase of Chagas disease .
Following the acute phase is a prolonged intermediate phase during which few or no parasites are found in the blood and most people are asymptomatic .
Many patients will remain asymptomatic for life ; however , decades after exposure , an estimated 20 % –30 % of infected people will develop chronic disease that can be debilitating and sometimes life threatening .
Diagnosis can be confirmed through several different tests , including direct microscopic observation of trypanosomes in the blood , IFA , EIAs , PCR , and culturing in artificial media .
In endemic regions , xenodiagnoses may be used ; this method involves allowing uninfected kissing bugs to feed on the patient and then examining their feces for the presence of T. cruzi .
The medications nifurtimox and benznidazole are effective treatments during the acute phase of Chagas disease .
The efficacy of these drugs is much lower when the disease is in the chronic phase .
Avoiding exposure to the pathogen through vector control is the most effective method of limiting this disease .
Although it is classified as an NTD , leishmaniasis is relatively widespread in tropical and subtropical regions , affecting people in more than 90 countries .
It is caused by approximately 20 different species of Leishmania , protozoan parasites that are transmitted by sand fly vectors such as Phlebotomus spp .
and Lutzomyia spp .
Dogs , cats , sheep , horses , cattle rodents , and humans can all serve as reservoirs .
The Leishmania protozoan is phagocytosed by macrophages but uses virulence factors to avoid destruction within the phagolysosome .
The virulence factors inhibit the phagolysosome enzymes that would otherwise destroy the parasite .
The parasite reproduces within the macrophage , lyses it , and the progeny infect new macrophages ( see ) .
The three major clinical forms of leishmaniasis are cutaneous ( oriental sore , Delhi boil , Aleppo boil ) , visceral ( kalaazar , Dumdum fever ) , and mucosal ( espundia ) .
The most common form of disease is cutaneous leishmaniasis , which is characterized by the formation of sores at the site of the insect bite that may start out as papules or nodules before becoming large ulcers .
It may take visceral leishmaniasis months and sometimes years to develop , leading to enlargement of the lymph nodes , liver , spleen , and bone marrow .
The damage to these body sites triggers fever , weight loss , and swelling of the spleen and liver .
It also causes a decrease in the number of red blood cells ( anemia ) , white blood cells ( leukopenia ) , and platelets ( thrombocytopenia ) , causing the patient to become immunocompromised and more susceptible to fatal infections of the lungs and gastrointestinal tract .
The mucosal form of leishmaniasis is one of the less common forms of the disease .
It causes a lesion similar to the cutaneous form but mucosal leishmaniasis is associated with mucous membranes of the mouth , nares , or pharynx , and can be destructive and disfiguring .
Mucosal leishmaniasis occurs less frequently when the original cutaneous ( skin ) infection is promptly treated .
Definitive diagnosis of leishmaniasis is made by visualizing organisms in Giemsa-stained smears , by isolating Leishmania protozoans in cultures , or by PCR-based assays of aspirates from infected tissues .
Specific DNA probes or analysis of cultured parasites can help to distinguish Leishmania species that are causing simple cutaneous leishmaniasis from those capable of causing mucosal leishmaniasis .
Cutaneous leishmaniasis is usually not treated .
The lesions will resolve after weeks ( or several months ) , but may result in scarring .
Recurrence rates are low for this disease .
More serious infections can be treated with stibogluconate ( antimony gluconate ) , amphotericin B , and miltefosine .
Schistosomiasis ( bilharzia ) is an NTD caused by blood flukes in the genus Schistosoma that are native to the Caribbean , South America , Middle East , Asia , and Africa .
Most human schistosomiasis cases are caused by Schistosoma mansoni , S. haematobium , or S. japonicum .
Schistosoma are the only trematodes that invade through the skin ; all other trematodes infect by ingestion .
WHO estimates that at least 258 million people required preventive treatment for schistosomiasis in 2014 .
Infected human hosts shed Schistosoma eggs in urine and feces , which can contaminate freshwater habitats of snails that serve as intermediate hosts .
The eggs hatch in the water , releasing miracidia , an intermediate growth stage of the Schistosoma that infect the snails .
The miracidia mature and multiply inside the snails , transforming into cercariae that leave the snail and enter the water , where they can penetrate the skin of swimmers and bathers .
The cercariae migrate through human tissue and enter the bloodstream , where they mature into adult male and female worms that mate and release fertilized eggs .
The eggs travel through the bloodstream and penetrate various body sites , including the bladder or intestine , from which they are excreted in urine or stool to start the life cycle over again .
A few days after infection , patients may develop a rash or itchy skin associated with the site of cercariae penetration .
Within 1–2 months of infection , symptoms may develop , including fever , chills , cough , and myalgia , as eggs that are not excreted circulate through the body .
After years of infection , the eggs become lodged in tissues and trigger inflammation and scarring that can damage the liver , central nervous system , intestine , spleen , lungs , and bladder .
This may cause abdominal pain , enlargement of the liver , blood in the urine or stool , and problems passing urine .
Increased risk for bladder cancer is also associated with chronic Schistosoma infection .
In addition , children who are repeatedly infected can develop malnutrition , anemia , and learning difficulties .
Diagnosis of schistosomiasis is made by the microscopic observation of eggs in feces or urine , intestine or bladder tissue specimens , or serologic tests .
The drug praziquantel is effective for the treatment of all schistosome infections .
Improving wastewater management and educating at-risk populations to limit exposure to contaminated water can help control the spread of the disease .
The cercaria of some species of Schistosoma can only transform into adult worms and complete their life cycle in animal hosts such as migratory birds and mammals .
The cercaria of these worms are still capable of penetrating human skin , but they are unable to establish a productive infection in human tissue .
Still , the presence of the cercaria in small blood vessels triggers an immune response , resulting in itchy raised bumps called cercarial dermatitis ( also known as swimmer ’ s itch or clam digger 's itch ) .
Although it is uncomfortable , cercarial dermatitis is typically self-limiting and rarely serious .
Antihistamines and antipruritics can be used to limit inflammation and itching , respectively .
Few diseases inspire the kind of fear that rabies does .
The name is derived from the Latin word for “ madness ” or “ fury , ” most likely because animals infected with rabies may behave with uncharacteristic rage and aggression .
And while the thought of being attacked by a rabid animal is terrifying enough , the disease itself is even more frightful .
Once symptoms appear , the disease is almost always fatal , even when treated .
Rabies is an example of a neurological disease caused by an acellular pathogen .
The rabies virus enters nervous tissue shortly after transmission and makes its way to the central nervous system , where its presence leads to changes in behavior and motor function .
Well-known symptoms associated with rabid animals include foaming at the mouth , hydrophobia ( fear of water ) , and unusually aggressive behavior .
Rabies claims tens of thousands of human lives worldwide , mainly in Africa and Asia .
Most human cases result from dog bites , although many mammal species can become infected and transmit the disease .
Human infection rates are low in the United States and many other countries as a result of control measures in animal populations .
However , rabies is not the only disease with serious or fatal neurological effects .
In this chapter , we examine the important microbial diseases of the nervous system .
The CNS consists of the brain and spinal cord .
The peripheral nervous system is an extensive network of nerves connecting the CNS to the muscles and sensory structures .
The relationship of these systems is illustrated in .
Identify and describe general symptoms associated with various infections of the nervous system The brain is the most complex and sensitive organ in the body .
It is responsible for all functions of the body , including serving as the coordinating center for all sensations , mobility , emotions , and intellect .
Protection for the brain is provided by the bones of the skull , which in turn are covered by the scalp , as shown in .
The scalp is composed of an outer layer of skin , which is loosely attached to the aponeurosis , a flat , broad tendon layer that anchors the superficial layers of the skin .
The periosteum , below the aponeurosis , firmly encases the bones of the skull and provides protection , nutrition to the bone , and the capacity for bone repair .
Below the boney layer of the skull are three layers of membranes called meninges that surround the brain .
The relative positions of these meninges are shown in .
The meningeal layer closest to the bones of the skull is called the dura mater ( literally meaning tough mother ) .
Below the dura mater lies the arachnoid mater ( literally spider-like mother ) .
The innermost meningeal layer is a delicate membrane called the pia mater ( literally tender mother ) .
Unlike the other meningeal layers , the pia mater firmly adheres to the convoluted surface of the brain .
Between the arachnoid mater and pia mater is the subarachnoid space .
The subarachnoid space within this region is filled with cerebrospinal fluid ( CSF ) .
This watery fluid is produced by cells of the choroid plexus—areas in each ventricle of the brain that consist of cuboidal epithelial cells surrounding dense capillary beds .
The CSF serves to deliver nutrients and remove waste from neural tissues .
The tissues of the CNS have extra protection in that they are not exposed to blood or the immune system in the same way as other tissues .
The blood vessels that supply the brain with nutrients and other chemical substances lie on top of the pia mater .
The capillaries associated with these blood vessels in the brain are less permeable than those in other locations in the body .
The capillary endothelial cells form tight junctions that control the transfer of blood components to the brain .
In addition , cranial capillaries have far fewer fenestra ( pore-like structures that are sealed by a membrane ) and pinocytotic vesicles than other capillaries .
As a result , materials in the circulatory system have a very limited ability to interact with the CNS directly .
This phenomenon is referred to as the blood-brain barrier .
The blood-brain barrier protects the cerebrospinal fluid from contamination , and can be quite effective at excluding potential microbial pathogens .
As a consequence of these defenses , there is no normal microbiota in the cerebrospinal fluid .
The blood-brain barrier also inhibits the movement of many drugs into the brain , particularly compounds that are not lipid soluble .
This has profound ramifications for treatments involving infections of the CNS , because it is difficult for drugs to cross the blood-brain barrier to interact with pathogens that cause infections .
The spinal cord also has protective structures similar to those surrounding the brain .
Within the bones of the vertebrae are meninges of dura mater ( sometimes called the dural sheath ) , arachnoid mater , pia mater , and a blood-spinal cord barrier that controls the transfer of blood components from blood vessels associated with the spinal cord .
To cause an infection in the CNS , pathogens must successfully breach the blood-brain barrier or blood-spinal cord barrier .
Various pathogens employ different virulence factors and mechanisms to achieve this , but they can generally be grouped into four categories : intercellular ( also called paracellular ) , transcellular , leukocyte facilitated , and nonhematogenous .
Intercellular entry involves the use of microbial virulence factors , toxins , or inflammationmediated processes to pass between the cells of the blood-brain barrier .
In transcellular entry , the pathogen passes through the cells of the blood-brain barrier using virulence factors that allow it to adhere to and trigger uptake by vacuoleor receptor-mediated mechanisms .
Leukocyte-facilitated entry is a Trojan-horse mechanism that occurs when a pathogen infects peripheral blood leukocytes to directly enter the CNS .
Nonhematogenous entry allows pathogens to enter the brain without encountering the blood-brain barrier ; it occurs when pathogens travel along either the olfactory or trigeminal cranial nerves that lead directly into the CNS .
The PNS is formed of the nerves that connect organs , limbs , and other anatomic structures of the body to the brain and spinal cord .
Unlike the brain and spinal cord , the PNS is not protected by bone , meninges , or a blood barrier , and , as a consequence , the nerves of the PNS are much more susceptible to injury and infection .
Microbial damage to peripheral nerves can lead to tingling or numbness known as neuropathy .
These symptoms can also be produced by trauma and noninfectious causes such as drugs or chronic diseases like diabetes .
Tissues of the PNS and CNS are formed of cells called glial cells ( neuroglial cells ) and neurons ( nerve cells ) .
Glial cells assist in the organization of neurons , provide a scaffold for some aspects of neuronal function , and aid in recovery from neural injury .
Neurons are specialized cells found throughout the nervous system that transmit signals through the nervous system using electrochemical processes .
The basic structure of a neuron is shown in .
The cell body ( or soma ) is the metabolic center of the neuron and contains the nucleus and most of the cell ’ s organelles .
The many finely branched extensions from the soma are called dendrites .
The soma also produces an elongated extension , called the axon , which is responsible for the transmission of electrochemical signals through elaborate ion transport processes .
Axons of some types of neurons can extend up to one meter in length in the human body .
To facilitate electrochemical signal transmission , some neurons have a myelin sheath surrounding the axon .
Myelin , formed from the cell membranes of glial cells like the Schwann cells in the PNS and oligodendrocytes in the CNS , surrounds and insulates the axon , significantly increasing the speed of electrochemical signal transmission along the axon .
The end of an axon forms numerous branches that end in bulbs called synaptic terminals .
Neurons form junctions with other cells , such as another neuron , with which they exchange signals .
The junctions , which are actually gaps between neurons , are referred to as synapses .
At each synapse , there is a presynaptic neuron and a postsynaptic neuron ( or other cell ) .
The synaptic terminals of the axon of the presynaptic terminal form the synapse with the dendrites , soma , or sometimes the axon of the postsynaptic neuron , or a part of another type of cell such as a muscle cell .
The synaptic terminals contain vesicles filled with chemicals called neurotransmitters .
When the electrochemical signal moving down the axon reaches the synapse , the vesicles fuse with the membrane , and neurotransmitters are released , which diffuse across the synapse and bind to receptors on the membrane of the postsynaptic cell , potentially initiating a response in that cell .
That response in the postsynaptic cell might include further propagation of an electrochemical signal to transmit information or contraction of a muscle fiber .
Although the skull provides the brain with an excellent defense , it can also become problematic during infections .
Any swelling of the brain or meninges that results from inflammation can cause intracranial pressure , leading to severe damage of the brain tissues , which have limited space to expand within the inflexible bones of the skull .
The term meningitis is used to describe an inflammation of the meninges .
Typical symptoms can include severe headache , fever , photophobia ( increased sensitivity to light ) , stiff neck , convulsions , and confusion .
An inflammation of brain tissue is called encephalitis , and patients exhibit signs and symptoms similar to those of meningitis in addition to lethargy , seizures , and personality changes .
When inflammation affects both the meninges and the brain tissue , the condition is called meningoencephalitis .
All three forms of inflammation are serious and can lead to blindness , deafness , coma , and death .
Meningitis and encephalitis can be caused by many different types of microbial pathogens .
However , these conditions can also arise from noninfectious causes such as head trauma , some cancers , and certain drugs that trigger inflammation .
To determine whether the inflammation is caused by a pathogen , a lumbar puncture is performed to obtain a sample of CSF .
If the CSF contains increased levels of white blood cells and abnormal glucose and protein levels , this indicates that the inflammation is a response to an infectioninflinin .
Identify the most common bacteria that can cause infections of the nervous system Compare the major characteristics of specific bacterial diseases affecting the nervous system Bacterial infections that affect the nervous system are serious and can be life-threatening .
Fortunately , there are only a few bacterial species commonly associated with neurological infections .
Bacterial meningitis is one of the most serious forms of meningitis .
Bacteria that cause meningitis often gain access to the CNS through the bloodstream after trauma or as a result of the action of bacterial toxins .
Bacteria may also spread from structures in the upper respiratory tract , such as the oropharynx , nasopharynx , sinuses , and middle ear .
Patients with head wounds or cochlear implants ( an electronic device placed in the inner ear ) are also at risk for developing meningitis .
Many of the bacteria that can cause meningitis are commonly found in healthy people .
The most common causes of non-neonatal bacterial meningitis are Neisseria meningitidis , Streptococcus pneumoniae , and Haemophilus influenzae .
All three of these bacterial pathogens are spread from person to person by respiratory secretions .
Each can colonize and cross through the mucous membranes of the oropharynx and nasopharynx , and enter the blood .
Once in the blood , these pathogens can disseminate throughout the body and are capable of both establishing an infection and triggering inflammation in any body site , including the meninges .
Without appropriate systemic antibacterial therapy , the case-fatality rate can be as high as 70 % , and 20 % of those survivors may be left with irreversible nerve damage or tissue destruction , resulting in hearing loss , neurologic disability , or loss of a limb .
Mortality rates are much lower ( as low as 15 % ) in populations where appropriate therapeutic drugs and preventive vaccines are available .
A variety of other bacteria , including Listeria monocytogenes and Escherichia coli , are also capable of causing meningitis .
These bacteria cause infections of the arachnoid mater and CSF after spreading through the circulation in blood or by spreading from an infection of the sinuses or nasopharynx .
Streptococcus agalactiae , commonly found in the microbiota of the vagina and gastrointestinal tract , can also cause bacterial meningitis in newborns after transmission from the mother either before or during birth .
The profound inflammation caused by these microbes can result in early symptoms that include severe headache , fever , confusion , nausea , vomiting , photophobia , and stiff neck .
Systemic inflammatory responses associated with some types of bacterial meningitis can lead to hemorrhaging and purpuric lesions on skin , followed by even more severe conditions that include shock , convulsions , coma , and death—in some cases , in the span of just a few hours .
Diagnosis of bacterial meningitis is best confirmed by analysis of CSF obtained by a lumbar puncture .
Abnormal levels of polymorphonuclear neutrophils ( PMNs ) ( > 10 PMNs/mm ) , glucose ( < 45 mg/dL ) , and protein ( > 45 mg/ dL ) in the CSF are suggestive of bacterial meningitis .
Characteristics of specific forms of bacterial meningitis are detailed in the subsections that follow .
Meningococcal meningitis is a serious infection caused by the gram-negative coccus N. meningitidis .
In some cases , death can occur within a few hours of the onset of symptoms .
Nonfatal cases can result in irreversible nerve damage , resulting in hearing loss and brain damage , or amputation of extremities because of tissue necrosis .
Meningococcal meningitis can infect people of any age , but its prevalence is highest among infants , adolescents , and young adults .
Meningococcal meningitis was once the most common cause of meningitis epidemics in human populations .
This is still the case in a swath of sub-Saharan Africa known as the meningitis belt , but meningococcal meningitis epidemics have become rare in most other regions , thanks to meningococcal vaccines .
However , outbreaks can still occur in communities , schools , colleges , prisons , and other populations where people are in close direct contact .
N. meningitidis has a high affinity for mucosal membranes in the oropharynx and nasopharynx .
Contact with respiratory secretions containing N. meningitidis is an effective mode of transmission .
The pathogenicity of N. meningitidis is enhanced by virulence factors that contribute to the rapid progression of the disease .
These include lipooligosaccharide ( LOS ) endotoxin , type IV pili for attachment to host tissues , and polysaccharide capsules that help the cells avoid phagocytosis and complement-mediated killing .
A unique sign of meningococcal meningitis is the formation of a petechial rash on the skin or mucous membranes , characterized by tiny , red , flat , hemorrhagic lesions .
This rash , which appears soon after disease onset , is a response to LOS endotoxin and adherence virulence factors that disrupt the endothelial cells of capillaries and small veins in the skin .
The blood vessel disruption triggers the formation of tiny blood clots , causing blood to leak into the surrounding tissue .
As the infection progresses , the levels of virulence factors increase , and the hemorrhagic lesions can increase in size as blood continues to leak into tissues .
Lesions larger than 1.0 cm usually occur in patients developing shock , as virulence factors cause increased hemorrhage and clot formation .
Sepsis , as a result of systemic damage from meningococcal virulence factors , can lead to rapid multiple organ failure , shock , disseminated intravascular coagulation , and death .
Because meningococcoal meningitis progresses so rapidly , a greater variety of clinical specimens are required for the timely detection of N. meningitidis .
Required specimens can include blood , CSF , nasoand oropharyngeal swabs , urethral and endocervical swabs , petechial aspirates , and biopsies .
Safety protocols for handling and transport of specimens suspected of containing N. meningitidis should always be followed , since cases of fatal meningococcal disease have occurred in healthcare workers exposed to droplets or aerosols from patient specimens .
Prompt presumptive diagnosis of meningococcal meningitis can occur when CSF is directly evaluated by Gram stain , revealing extraand intracellular gram-negative diplococci with a distinctive coffee-bean microscopic morphology associated with PMNs .
Identification can also be made directly from CSF using latex agglutination and immunochromatographic rapid diagnostic tests specific for N. meningitidis .
Species identification can also be performed using DNA sequence-based typing schemes for hypervariable outer membrane proteins of N. meningitidis , which has replaced sero ( sub ) typing .
Meningococcal infections can be treated with antibiotic therapy , and third-generation cephalosporins are most often employed .
However , because outcomes can be negative even with treatment , preventive vaccination is the best form of treatment .
In 2010 , countries in Africa ’ s meningitis belt began using a new serogroup A meningococcal conjugate vaccine .
This program has dramatically reduced the number of cases of meningococcal meningitis by conferring individual and herd immunity .
Twelve different capsular serotypes of N. meningitidis are known to exist .
Serotypes A , B , C , W , X , and Y are the most prevalent worldwide .
The CDC recommends that children between 11–12 years of age be vaccinated with a single dose of a quadrivalent vaccine that protects against serotypes A , C , W , and Y , with a booster at age 16 .
An additional booster or injections of serogroup B meningococcal vaccine may be given to individuals in high-risk settings ( such as epidemic outbreaks on college campuses ) .
Pneumococcal meningitis is caused by the encapsulated gram-positive bacterium S. pneumoniae ( pneumococcus , also called strep pneumo ) .
This organism is commonly found in the microbiota of the pharynx of 30–70 % of young children , depending on the sampling method , while S. pneumoniae can be found in fewer than 5 % of healthy adults .
Although it is often present without disease symptoms , this microbe can cross the blood-brain barrier in susceptible individuals .
In some cases , it may also result in septicemia .
Since the introduction of the Hib vaccine , S. pneumoniae has become the leading cause of meningitis in humans aged 2 months through adulthood .
S. pneumoniae can be identified in CSF samples using gram-stained specimens , latex agglutination , and immunochromatographic RDT specific for S. pneumoniae .
In gram-stained samples , S. pneumoniae appears as grampositive , lancet-shaped diplococci .
Identification of S. pneumoniae can also be achieved using cultures of CSF and blood , and at least 93 distinct serotypes can be identified based on the quellung reaction to unique capsular polysaccharides .
PCR and RT-PCR assays are also available to confirm identification .
With the emergence of drug-resistant strains of S. pneumoniae , pneumococcal meningitis is typically treated with broad-spectrum antibiotics , such as levofloxacin , cefotaxime , penicillin , or other β-lactam antibiotics .
The two available pneumococcal vaccines are described in .
Meningitis due to H. influenzae serotype b ( Hib ) , an encapsulated pleomorphic gram-negative coccobacilli , is now uncommon in most countries , because of the use of the effective Hib vaccine .
Without the use of the Hib vaccine , H. influenzae can be the primary cause of meningitis in children 2 months thru 5 years of age .
H. influenzae can be found in the throats of healthy individuals , including infants and young children .
By five years of age , most children have developed immunity to this microbe .
Infants older than 2 months of age , however , do not produce a sufficient protective antibody response and are susceptible to serious disease .
The intracranial pressure caused by this infection leads to a 5 % mortality rate and 20 % incidence of deafness or brain damage in survivors .
H. influenzae produces at least 16 different virulence factors , including LOS , which triggers inflammation , and Haemophilus adhesion and penetration factor ( Hap ) , which aids in attachment and invasion into respiratory epithelial cells .
The bacterium also has a polysaccharide capsule that helps it avoid phagocytosis , as well as factors such as IgA1 protease and P2 protein that allow it to evade antibodies secreted from mucous membranes .
In addition , factors such as hemoglobin-binding protein ( Hgp ) and transferrin-binding protein ( Tbp ) acquire iron from hemoglobin and transferrin , respectively , for bacterial growth .
Preliminary diagnosis of H. influenzae infections can be made by direct PCR and a smear of CSF .
Stained smears will reveal intracellular and extracellular PMNs with small , pleomorphic , gram-negative coccobacilli or filamentous forms that are characteristic of H. influenzae .
Initial confirmation of this genus can be based on its fastidious growth on chocolate agar .
Identification is confirmed with requirements for exogenous biochemical growth cofactors NAD and heme ( by MALDI-TOF ) , latex agglutination , and RT-PCR .
Meningitis caused by H. influenzae is usually treated with doxycycline , fluoroquinolones , secondand thirdgeneration cephalosporins , and carbapenems .
The best means of preventing H. influenza infection is with the use of the Hib polysaccharide conjugate vaccine .
It is recommended that all children receive this vaccine at 2 , 4 , and 6 months of age , with a final booster dose at 12 to 15 months of age .
S. agalactiae , Group B streptococcus ( GBS ) , is an encapsulated gram-positive bacterium that is the most common cause of neonatal meningitis , a term that refers to meningitis occurring in babies up to 3 months of age .
S. agalactiae can also cause meningitis in people of all ages and can be found in the urogenital and gastrointestinal microbiota of about 10–30 % of humans .
Neonatal infection occurs as either early onset or late-onset disease .
Early onset disease is defined as occurring in infants up to 7 days old .
The infant initially becomes infected by S. agalactiae during childbirth , when the bacteria may be transferred from the mother ’ s vagina .
Incidence of early onset neonatal meningitis can be greatly reduced by giving intravenous antibiotics to the mother during labor .
Late-onset neonatal meningitis occurs in infants between 1 week and 3 months of age .
Infants born to mothers with S. agalactiae in the urogenital tract have a higher risk of late-onset menigitis , but late-onset infections can be transmitted from sources other than the mother ; often , the source of infection is unknown .
Infants who are born prematurely ( before 37 weeks of pregnancy ) or to mothers who develop a fever also have a greater risk of contracting late-onset neonatal meningitis .
Signs and symptoms of early onset disease include temperature instability , apnea ( cessation of breathing ) , bradycardia ( slow heart rate ) , hypotension , difficulty feeding , irritability , and limpness .
When asleep , the baby may be difficult to wake up .
Symptoms of late-onset disease are more likely to include seizures , bulging fontanel ( soft spot ) , stiff neck , hemiparesis ( weakness on one side of the body ) , and opisthotonos ( rigid body with arched back and head thrown backward ) .
Diagnosis of neonatal meningitis is often , but not uniformly , confirmed by positive results from cultures of CSF or blood .
Tests include routine culture , antigen detection by enzyme immunoassay , serotyping of different capsule types , PCR , and RT-PCR .
It is typically treated with β-lactam antibiotics such as intravenous penicillin or ampicillin plus gentamicin .
Even with treatment , roughly 10 % mortality is seen in infected neonates .
Species in the genus Clostridium are gram-positive , endospore-forming rods that are obligate anaerobes .
Endospores of Clostridium spp .
are widespread in nature , commonly found in soil , water , feces , sewage , and marine sediments .
produce more types of protein exotoxins than any other bacterial genus , including two exotoxins with protease activity that are the most potent known biological toxins : botulinum neurotoxin ( BoNT ) and tetanus neurotoxin ( TeNT ) .
These two toxins have lethal doses of 0.2–10 ng per kg body weight .
BoNT can be produced by unique strains of C. butyricum , and C. baratii ; however , it is primarily associated with C. botulinum and the condition of botulism .
TeNT , which causes tetanus , is only produced by C. tetani .
These powerful neural exotoxins are the primary virulence factors for these pathogens .
The mode of action for these toxins was described in and illustrated in .
Diagnosis of tetanus or botulism typically involves bioassays that detect the presence of BoNT and TeNT in fecal specimens , blood ( serum ) , or suspect foods .
In addition , both C. botulinum and C. tetani can be isolated and cultured using commercially available media for anaerobes .
ELISA and RT-PCR tests are also available .
Tetanus is a noncommunicable disease characterized by uncontrollable muscle spasms ( contractions ) caused by the action of TeNT .
It generally occurs when C. tetani infects a wound and produces TeNT , which rapidly binds to neural tissue , resulting in an intoxication ( poisoning ) of neurons .
Depending on the site and extent of infection , cases of tetanus can be described as localized , cephalic , or generalized .
Generalized tetanus that occurs in a newborn is called neonatal tetanus .
Localized tetanus occurs when TeNT only affects the muscle groups close to the injury site .
There is no CNS involvement , and the symptoms are usually mild , with localized muscle spasms caused by a dysfunction in the surrounding neurons .
Individuals with partial immunity—especially previously vaccinated individuals who neglect to get the recommended booster shots—are most likely to develop localized tetanus as a result of C. tetani infecting a puncture wound .
Cephalic tetanus is a rare , localized form of tetanus generally associated with wounds on the head or face .
In rare cases , it has occurred in cases of otitis media ( middle ear infection ) .
Cephalic tetanus often results in patients seeing double images , because of the spasms affecting the muscles that control eye movement .
Both localized and cephalic tetanus may progress to generalized tetanus—a much more serious condition—if TeNT is able to spread further into body tissues .
In generalized tetanus , TeNT enters neurons of the PNS .
From there , TeNT travels from the site of the wound , usually on an extremity of the body , retrograde ( back up ) to inhibitory neurons in the CNS .
There , it prevents the release of gamma aminobutyric acid ( GABA ) , the neurotransmitter responsible for muscle relaxation .
The resulting muscle spasms often first occur in the jaw muscles , leading to the characteristic symptom of lockjaw ( inability to open the mouth ) .
As the toxin progressively continues to block neurotransmitter release , other muscles become involved , resulting in uncontrollable , sudden muscle spasms that are powerful enough to cause tendons to rupture and bones to fracture .
Spasms in the muscles in the neck , back , and legs may cause the body to form a rigid , stiff arch , a posture called opisthotonos .
Spasms in the larynx , diaphragm , and muscles of the chest restrict the patient ’ s ability to swallow and breathe , eventually leading to death by asphyxiation ( insufficient supply of oxygen ) .
Neonatal tetanus typically occurs when the stump of the umbilical cord is contaminated with spores of C. tetani after delivery .
Although this condition is rare in the United States , neonatal tetanus is a major cause of infant mortality in countries that lack maternal immunization for tetanus and where birth often occurs in unsanitary conditions .
At the end of the first week of life , infected infants become irritable , feed poorly , and develop rigidity with spasms .
Neonatal tetanus has a very poor prognosis with a mortality rate of 70 % –100 % .
Treatment for patients with tetanus includes assisted breathing through the use of a ventilator , wound debridement , fluid balance , and antibiotic therapy with metronidazole or penicillin to halt the growth of C. tetani .
In addition , patients are treated with TeNT antitoxin , preferably in the form of human immunoglobulin to neutralize nonfixed toxin and benzodiazepines to enhance the effect of GABA for muscle relaxation and anxiety .
A tetanus toxoid ( TT ) vaccine is available for protection and prevention of tetanus .
It is the T component of vaccines such as DTaP , Tdap , and Td .
The CDC recommends children receive doses of the DTaP vaccine at 2 , 4 , 6 , and 15–18 months of age and another at 4–6 years of age .
One dose of Td is recommended for adolescents and adults as a TT booster every 10 years .
Botulism is a rare but frequently fatal illness caused by intoxication by BoNT .
It can occur either as the result of an infection by C. botulinum , in which case the bacteria produce BoNT in vivo , or as the result of a direct introduction of BoNT into tissues .
Infection and production of BoNT in vivo can result in wound botulism , infant botulism , and adult intestinal toxemia .
Wound botulism typically occurs when C. botulinum is introduced directly into a wound after a traumatic injury , deep puncture wound , or injection site .
Infant botulism , which occurs in infants younger than 1 year of age , and adult intestinal toxemia , which occurs in immunocompromised adults , results from ingesting C. botulinum endospores in food .
The endospores germinate in the body , resulting in the production of BoNT in the intestinal tract .
Intoxications occur when BoNT is produced outside the body and then introduced directly into the body through food ( foodborne botulism ) , air ( inhalation botulism ) , or a clinical procedure ( iatrogenic botulism ) .
Foodborne botulism , the most common of these forms , occurs when BoNT is produced in contaminated food and then ingested along with the food ( recall ) .
Inhalation botulism is rare because BoNT is unstable as an aerosol and does not occur in nature ; however , it can be produced in the laboratory and was used ( unsuccessfully ) as a bioweapon by terrorists in Japan in the 1990s .
A few cases of accidental inhalation botulism have also occurred .
Iatrogenic botulism is also rare ; it is associated with injections of BoNT used for cosmetic purposes ( see ) .
is transferred to the When BoNT enters the bloodstream in the gastrointestinal neuromuscular junctions of motor neurons where it binds irreversibly to presynaptic membranes and prevents the release of acetylcholine from the presynaptic terminal of motor neurons into the neuromuscular junction .
The consequence of preventing acetylcholine release is the loss of muscle activity , leading to muscle relaxation and eventually paralysis .
If BoNT is absorbed through the gastrointestinal tract , early symptoms of botulism include blurred vision , drooping eyelids , difficulty swallowing , abdominal cramps , nausea , vomiting , constipation , or possibly diarrhea .
This is followed by progressive flaccid paralysis , a gradual weakening and loss of control over the muscles .
A patient ’ s experience can be particularly terrifying , because hearing remains normal , consciousness is not lost , and he or she is tract , wound , or lungs , it fully aware of the progression of his or her condition .
In infants , notable signs of botulism include weak cry , decreased ability to suckle , and hypotonia ( limpness of head or body ) .
Eventually , botulism ends in death from respiratory failure caused by the progressive paralysis of the muscles of the upper airway , diaphragm , and chest .
Botulism is treated with an antitoxin specific for BoNT .
If administered in time , the antitoxin stops the progression of paralysis but does not reverse it .
Once the antitoxin has been administered , the patient will slowly regain neurological function , but this may take several weeks or months , depending on the severity of the case .
During recovery , patients generally must remain hospitalized and receive breathing assistance through a ventilator .
Listeria monocytogenes is a nonencapsulated , nonsporulating , gram-positive rod and a foodborne pathogen that causes listeriosis .
At-risk groups include pregnant women , neonates , the elderly , and the immunocompromised ( recall the Clinical Focus case studies in and ) .
Listeriosis leads to meningitis in about 20 % of cases , particularly neonates and patients over the age of 60 .
The CDC identifies listeriosis as the third leading cause of death due to foodborne illness , with overall mortality rates reaching 16 % .
In pregnant women , listeriosis can cause also cause spontaneous abortion in pregnant women because of the pathogen ’ s unique ability to cross the placenta .
L. monocytogenes is generally introduced into food items by contamination with soil or animal manure used as fertilizer .
Foods commonly associated with listeriosis include fresh fruits and vegetables , frozen vegetables , processed meats , soft cheeses , and raw milk .
Unlike most other foodborne pathogens , Listeria is able to grow at temperatures between 0 °C and 50 °C , and can therefore continue to grow , even in refrigerated foods .
Ingestion of contaminated food leads initially to infection of the gastrointestinal tract .
However , L. monocytogenes produces several unique virulence factors that allow it to cross the intestinal barrier and spread to other body systems .
Surface proteins called internalins ( InlA and InlB ) help L. monocytogenes invade nonphagocytic cells and tissues , penetrating the intestinal wall and becoming disseminating through the circulatory and lymphatic systems .
Internalins also enable L. monocytogenes to breach other important barriers , including the blood-brain barrier and the placenta .
Within tissues , L. monocytogenes uses other proteins called listeriolysin O and ActA to facilitate intercellular movement , allowing the infection to spread from cell to cell .
L. monocytogenes is usually identified by cultivation of samples from a normally sterile site ( e.g. , blood or CSF ) .
Recovery of viable organisms can be enhanced using cold enrichment by incubating samples in a broth at 4 °C for a week or more .
Distinguishing types and subtypes of L. monocytogenes —an important step for diagnosis and epidemiology—is typically done using pulsed-field gel electrophoresis .
Identification can also be achieved using chemiluminescence DNA probe assays and MALDI-TOF .
Treatment for listeriosis involves antibiotic therapy , most commonly with ampicillin and gentamicin .
There is no vaccine available .
Hansen ’ s disease ( also known as leprosy ) is caused by a long , thin , filamentous rod-shaped bacterium Mycobacterium leprae , an obligate intracellular pathogen .
M. leprae is classified as gram-positive bacteria , but it is best visualized microscopically with an acid-fast stain and is generally referred to as an acid-fast bacterium .
Hansen ’ s disease affects the PNS , leading to permanent damage and loss of appendages or other body parts .
Hansen ’ s disease is communicable but not highly contagious ; approximately 95 % of the human population can not be easily infected because they have a natural immunity to M. leprae .
Person-to-person transmission occurs by inhalation into nasal mucosa or prolonged and repeated contact with infected skin .
Armadillos , one of only five mammals susceptible to Hansen ’ s disease , have also been implicated in transmission of some cases .
In the human body , M. leprae grows best at the cooler temperatures found in peripheral tissues like the nose , toes , fingers , and ears .
Some of the virulence factors that contribute to M. leprae ’ s pathogenicity are located on the capsule and cell wall of the bacterium .
These virulence factors enable it to bind to and invade Schwann cells , resulting in progressive demyelination that gradually destroys neurons of the PNS .
The loss of neuronal function leads to hypoesthesia ( numbness ) in infected lesions .
M. leprae is readily phagocytized by macrophages but is able to survive within macrophages in part by neutralizing reactive oxygen species produced in the oxidative burst of the phagolysosome .
Like L. monocytogenes , M. leprae also can move directly between macrophages to avoid clearance by immune factors .
The extent of the disease is related to the immune response of the patient .
Initial symptoms may not appear for as long as 2 to 5 years after infection .
These often begin with small , blanched , numb areas of the skin .
In most individuals , these will resolve spontaneously , but some cases may progress to a more serious form of the disease .
Tuberculoid ( paucibacillary ) Hansen ’ s disease is marked by the presence of relatively few ( three or less ) flat , blanched skin lesions with small nodules at the edges and few bacteria present in the lesion .
Although these lesions can persist for years or decades , the bacteria are held in check by an effective immune response including cell-mediated cytotoxicity .
Individuals who are unable to contain the infection may later develop lepromatous ( multibacillary ) Hansen ’ s disease .
This is a progressive form of the disease characterized by nodules filled with acid-fast bacilli and macrophages .
Impaired function of infected Schwann cells leads to peripheral nerve damage , resulting in sensory loss that leads to ulcers , deformities , and fractures .
Damage to the ulnar nerve ( in the wrist ) by M. leprae is one of the most common causes of crippling of the hand .
In some cases , chronic tissue damage can ultimately lead to loss of fingers or toes .
When mucosal tissues are also involved , disfiguring lesions of the nose and face can also occur .
Hansen ’ s disease is diagnosed on the basis of clinical signs and symptoms of the disease , and confirmed by the presence of acid-fast bacilli on skin smears or in skin biopsy specimens .
M. leprae does not grow in vitro on any known laboratory media , but it can be identified by culturing in vivo in the footpads of laboratory mice or armadillos .
Where needed , PCR and genotyping of M. leprae DNA in infected human tissue may be performed for diagnosis and epidemiology .
Hansen ’ s disease responds well to treatment and , if diagnosed and treated early , does not cause disability .
In the United States , most patients with Hansen ’ s disease are treated in ambulatory care clinics in major cities by the National Hansen ’ s Disease program , the only institution in the United States exclusively devoted to Hansen ’ s disease .
Since 1995 , WHO has made multidrug therapy for Hansen ’ s disease available free of charge to all patients worldwide .
As a result , global prevalence of Hansen ’ s disease has declined from about 5.2 million cases in 1985 to roughly 176,000 in 2014 .
Multidrug therapy consists of dapsone and rifampicin for all patients and a third drug , clofazimin , for patients with multibacillary disease .
Currently , there is no universally accepted vaccine for Hansen ’ s disease .
India and Brazil use a tuberculosis vaccine against Hansen ’ s disease because both diseases are caused by species of Mycobacterium .
The effectiveness of this method is questionable , however , since it appears that the vaccine works in some populations but not in others .
Identify the most common acellular pathogens that can cause infections of the nervous system Compare the major characteristics of specific viral diseases affecting the nervous system A number of different viruses and subviral particles can cause diseases that affect the nervous system .
Viral diseases tend to be more common than bacterial infections of the nervous system today .
Fortunately , viral infections are generally milder than their bacterial counterparts and often spontaneously resolve .
Some of the more important acellular pathogens of the nervous system are described in this section .
Although it is much more common than bacterial meningitis , viral meningitis is typically less severe .
Many different viruses can lead to meningitis as a sequela of the primary infection , including those that cause herpes , influenza , measles , and mumps .
Most cases of viral meningitis spontaneously resolve , but severe cases do occur .
Several types of insect-borne viruses can cause encephalitis .
Collectively , these viruses are referred to as arboviruses ( because they are arthropod-borne ) , and the diseases they cause are described as arboviral encephalitis .
Most arboviruses are endemic to specific geographical regions .
Arborviral encephalitis diseases found in the United States include eastern equine encephalitis ( EEE ) , western equine encephalitis ( WEE ) , St. Louis encephalitis , and West Nile encephalitis ( WNE ) .
Expansion of arboviruses beyond their endemic regions sometimes occurs , generally as a result of environmental changes that are favorable to the virus or its vector .
Increased travel of infected humans , animals , or vectors has also allowed arboviruses to spread into new regions .
In most cases , arboviral infections are asymptomatic or lead to a mild disease .
However , when symptoms do occur , they include high fever , chills , headaches , vomiting , diarrhea , and restlessness .
In elderly patients , severe arboviral encephalitis can rapidly lead to convulsions , coma , and death .
Mosquitoes are the most common biological vectors for arboviruses , which tend to be enveloped ssRNA viruses .
Thus , prevention of arboviral infections is best achieved by avoiding mosquitoes—using insect repellent , wearing long pants and sleeves , sleeping in well-screened rooms , using bed nets , etc .
Diagnosis of arboviral encephalitis is based on clinical symptoms and serologic testing of serum or CSF .
There are no antiviral drugs to treat any of these arboviral diseases , so treatment consists of supportive care and management of symptoms .
Eastern equine encephalitis ( EEE ) is caused by eastern equine encephalitis virus ( EEEV ) , which can cause severe disease in horses and humans .
Birds are reservoirs for EEEV with accidental transmission to horses and humans by Aedes , Coquillettidia , and Culex species of mosquitoes .
Neither horses nor humans serve as reservoirs .
EEE is most common in US Gulf Coast and Atlantic states .
EEE is one of the more severe mosquito-transmitted diseases in the United States , but fortunately , it is a very rare disease in the United States .
Western equine encephalitis ( WEE ) is caused by western equine encephalitis virus ( WEEV ) .
WEEV is usually transmitted to horses and humans by the Culex tarsalis mosquitoes and , in the past decade , has caused very few cases of encephalitis in humans in the United States .
In humans , WEE symptoms are less severe than EEE and include fever , chills , and vomiting , with a mortality rate of 3–4 % .
Like EEEV , birds are the natural reservoir for WEEV .
Periodically , for indeterminate reasons , epidemics in human cases have occurred in North America in the past .
The largest on record was in 1941 , with more than 3400 cases .
St. Louis encephalitis ( SLE ) , caused by St. Louis encephalitis virus ( SLEV ) , is a rare form of encephalitis with symptoms occurring in fewer than 1 % of infected patients .
The natural reservoirs for SLEV are birds .
SLEV is most often found in the Ohio-Mississippi River basin of the central United States and was named after a severe outbreak in Missouri in 1934 .
The worst outbreak of St. Louis encephalitis occurred in 1975 , with over 2000 cases reported .
Humans become infected when bitten by C. tarsalis , C. quinquefasciatus , or C. pipiens mosquitoes carrying SLEV .
Most patients are asymptomatic , but in a small number of individuals , symptoms range from mild flu-like syndromes to fatal encephalitis .
The overall mortality rate for symptomatic patients is 5–15 % .
Japanese encephalitis , caused by Japanese encephalitis virus ( JEV ) , is the leading cause of vaccine-preventable encephalitis in humans and is endemic to some of the most populous countries in the world , including China , India , Japan , and all of Southeast Asia .
JEV is transmitted to humans by Culex mosquitoes , usually the species C. tritaeniorhynchus .
The biological reservoirs for JEV include pigs and wading birds .
Most patients with JEV infections are asymptomatic , with symptoms occurring in fewer than 1 % of infected individuals .
However , about 25 % of those who do develop encephalitis die , and among those who recover , 30–50 % have psychiatric , neurologic , or cognitive impairment .
Fortunately , there is an effective vaccine that can prevent infection with JEV .
The CDC recommends this vaccine for travelers who expect to spend more than one month in endemic areas .
As the name suggests , West Nile virus ( WNV ) and its associated disease , West Nile encephalitis ( WNE ) , did not originate in North America .
Until 1999 , it was endemic in the Middle East , Africa , and Asia ; however , the first US cases were identified in New York in 1999 , and by 2004 , the virus had spread across the entire continental United States .
Over 35,000 cases , including 1400 deaths , were confirmed in the five-year period between 1999 and 2004 .
WNV infection remains reportable to the CDC .
WNV is transmitted to humans by Culex mosquitoes from its natural reservoir , infected birds , with 70–80 % of infected patients experiencing no symptoms .
Most symptomatic cases involve only mild , flu-like symptoms , but fewer than 1 % of infected people develop severe and sometimes fatal encephalitis or meningitis .
The mortality rate in WNV patients who develop neurological disease is about 10 % .
More information about West Nile virus can be found in .
Zika virus infection is an emerging arboviral disease associated with human illness in Africa , Southeast Asia , and South and Central America ; however , its range is expanding as a result of the widespread range of its mosquito vector .
The first cases originating in the United States were reported in 2016.The Zika virus was initially described in 1947 from monkeys in the Zika Forest of Uganda through a network that monitored yellow fever .
Mosquitoes of the Aedes genus are the primary vectors , although the virus can also be transmitted sexually , from mother to baby during pregnancy , or through a blood transfusion .
Most Zika virus infections result in mild symptoms such as fever , a slight rash , or conjunctivitis .
However , infections in pregnant women can adversely affect the developing fetus .
Reports in 2015 indicate fetal infections can result in brain damage , including a serious birth defect called microcephaly , in which the infant is born with an abnormally small head .
Diagnosis of Zika is primarily based on clinical symptoms .
However , the FDA recently authorized the use of a Zika virus RNA assay , Trioplex RT-PCR , and Zika MAC-ELISA to test patient blood and urine to confirm Zika virus disease .
There are currently no antiviral treatments or vaccines for Zika virus , and treatment is limited to supportive care .
Rabies is a deadly zoonotic disease that has been known since antiquity .
The disease is caused by rabies virus ( RV ) , a member of the family Rhabdoviridae , and is primarily transmitted through the bite of an infected mammal .
Rhabdoviridae are enveloped RNA viruses that have a distinctive bullet shape ; they were first studied by Louis Pasteur , who obtained rabies virus from rabid dogs and cultivated the virus in rabbits .
He successfully prepared a rabies vaccine using dried nerve tissues from infected animals .
This vaccine was used to first treat an infected human in 1885 .
The remaining 7.4 % of cases that year were in domesticated animals such as dogs , cats , horses , mules , sheep , goats , and llamas .
While there are typically only one or two human cases per year in the United States , rabies still causes tens of thousands of human deaths per year worldwide , primarily in Asia and Africa .
The low incidence of rabies in the United States is primarily a result of the widespread vaccination of dogs and cats .
An oral vaccine is also used to protect wild animals , such as raccoons and foxes , from infection .
Oral vaccine programs tend to focus on geographic areas where rabies is endemic .
The oral vaccine is usually delivered in a package of bait that is dropped by airplane , although baiting in urban areas is done by hand to maximize safety .
Many countries require a quarantine or proof of rabies vaccination for domestic pets being brought into the country .
These procedures are especially strict in island nations where rabies is not yet present , such as Australia .
The incubation period for rabies can be lengthy , ranging from several weeks or months to over a year .
As the virus replicates , it moves from the site of the bite into motor and sensory axons of peripheral nerves and spreads from nerve to nerve using a process called retrograde transport , eventually making its way to the CNS through the spinal ganglia .
Once rabies virus reaches the brain , the infection leads to encephalitis caused by the disruption of normal neurotransmitter function , resulting in the symptoms associated with rabies .
The virions act in the synaptic spaces as competitors with a variety of neurotransmitters for acetylcholine , GABA , and glycine receptors .
Thus , the action of rabies virus is neurotoxic rather than cytotoxic .
After the rabies virus infects the brain , it can continue to spread through other neuronal pathways , traveling out of the CNS to tissues such as the salivary glands , where the virus can be released .
As a result , as the disease progresses the virus can be found in many other tissues , including the salivary glands , taste buds , nasal cavity , and tears .
The early symptoms of rabies include discomfort at the site of the bite , fever , and headache .
Once the virus reaches the brain and later symptoms appear , the disease is always fatal .
Terminal rabies cases can end in one of two ways : either furious or paralytic rabies .
Individuals with furious rabies become very agitated and hyperactive .
Hydrophobia ( a fear of water ) is common in patients with furious rabies , which is caused by muscular spasms in the throat when swallowing or thinking about water .
Excess salivation and a desire to bite can lead to foaming of the mouth .
These behaviors serve to enhance the likelihood of viral transmission , although contact with infected secretions like saliva or tears alone is sufficient for infection .
The disease culminates after just a few days with terror and confusion , followed by cardiovascular and respiratory arrest .
In contrast , individuals with paralytic rabies generally follow a longer course of disease .
The muscles at the site of infection become paralyzed .
Over a period of time , the paralysis slowly spreads throughout the body .
This paralytic form of disease culminates in coma and death .
Before present-day diagnostic methods were available , rabies diagnosis was made using a clinical case history and histopathological examination of biopsy or autopsy tissues , looking for the presence of Negri bodies .
We now know these histologic changes can not be used to confirm a rabies diagnosis .
There are no tests that can detect rabies virus in humans at the time of the bite or shortly thereafter .
Once the virus has begun to replicate ( but before clinical symptoms occur ) , the virus can be detected using an immunofluorescence test on cutaneous nerves found at the base of hair follicles .
Saliva can also be tested for viral genetic material by reverse transcription followed by polymerase chain reaction ( RT-PCR ) .
Even when these tests are performed , most suspected infections are treated as positive in the absence of contravening evidence .
It is better that patients undergo unnecessary therapy because of a false-positive result , rather than die as the result of a false-negative result .
Human rabies infections are treated by immunization with multiple doses of an attenuated vaccine to develop active immunity in the patient ( see the Clinical Focus feature in the chapter on ) .
Vaccination of an already-infected individual has the potential to work because of the slow progress of the disease , which allows time for the patient ’ s immune system to develop antibodies against the virus .
Patients may also be treated with human rabies immune globulin ( antibodies to the rabies virus ) to encourage passive immunity .
These antibodies will neutralize any free viral particles .
Although the rabies infection progresses slowly in peripheral tissues , patients are not normally able to mount a protective immune response on their own .
Poliomyelitis ( polio ) , caused by poliovirus , is a primarily intestinal disease that , in a small percentage of cases , proceeds to the nervous system , causing paralysis and , potentially , death .
Poliovirus is highly contagious , with transmission occurring by the fecal-oral route or by aerosol or droplet transmission .
Approximately 72 % of all poliovirus infections are asymptomatic ; another 25 % result only in mild intestinal disease , producing nausea , fever , and headache .
However , even in the absence of symptoms , patients infected with the virus can shed it in feces and oral secretions , potentially transmitting the virus to others .
In about one case in every 200 , the poliovirus affects cells in the CNS .
After it enters through the mouth , initial replication of poliovirus occurs at the site of implantation in the pharynx and gastrointestinal tract .
As the infection progresses , poliovirus is usually present in the throat and in the stool before the onset of symptoms .
One week after the onset of symptoms , there is less poliovirus in the throat , but for several weeks , poliovirus continues to be excreted in the stool .
Poliovirus invades local lymphoid tissue , enters the bloodstream , and then may infect cells of the CNS .
Replication of poliovirus in motor neurons of the anterior horn cells in the spinal cord , brain stem , or motor cortex results in cell destruction and leads to flaccid paralysis .
In severe cases , this can involve the respiratory system , leading to death .
Patients with impaired respiratory function are treated using positivepressure ventilation systems .
In the past , patients were sometimes confined to Emerson respirators , also known as iron lungs .
Direct detection of the poliovirus from the throat or feces can be achieved using reverse transcriptase PCR ( RT-PCR ) or genomic sequencing to identify the genotype of the poliovirus infecting the patient .
Serological tests can be used to determine whether the patient has been previously vaccinated .
There are no therapeutic measures for polio ; treatment is limited to various supportive measures .
These include pain relievers , rest , heat therapy to ease muscle spasms , physical therapy and corrective braces if necessary to help with walking , and mechanical ventilation to assist with breathing if necessary .
Two different vaccines were introduced in the 1950s that have led to the dramatic decrease in polio worldwide .
The Salk vaccine is an inactivated polio virus that was first introduced in 1955 .
This vaccine is delivered by intramuscular injection .
The Sabin vaccine is an oral polio vaccine that contains an attenuated virus ; it was licensed for use in 1962 .
There are three serotypes of poliovirus that cause disease in humans ; both the Salk and the Sabin vaccines are effective against all three .
Attenuated viruses from the Sabin vaccine are shed in the feces of immunized individuals and thus have the potential to infect nonimmunized individuals .
By the late 1990s , the few polio cases originating in the United States could be traced back to the Sabin vaccine .
In these cases , mutations of the attenuated virus following vaccination likely allowed the microbe to revert to a virulent form .
For this reason , the United States switched exclusively to the Salk vaccine in 2000 .
Because the Salk vaccine contains an inactivated virus , there is no risk of transmission to others ( see ) .
Currently four doses of the vaccine are recommended for children : at 2 , 4 , and 6–18 months of age , and at 4–6 years of age .
In 1988 , WHO launched the Global Polio Eradication Initiative with the goal of eradicating polio worldwide through immunization .
That goal is now close to being realized .
Polio is now endemic in only a few countries , including Afghanistan , Pakistan , and Nigeria , where vaccination efforts have been disrupted by military conflict or political instability .
Acellular infectious agents called prions are responsible for a group of related diseases known as transmissible spongiform encephalopathies ( TSEs ) that occurs in humans and other animals ( see ) .
All TSEs are degenerative , fatal neurological diseases that occur when brain tissue becomes infected by prions .
These diseases have a slow onset ; symptoms may not become apparent until after an incubation period of years and perhaps decades , but death usually occurs within months to a few years after the first symptoms appear .
TSEs in animals include scrapie , a disease in sheep that has been known since the 1700s , and chronic wasting disease , a disease of deer and elk in the United States and Canada .
Mad cow disease is seen in cattle and can be transmitted to humans through the consumption of infected nerve tissues .
Human prion diseases include CreutzfeldtJakob disease and kuru , a rare disease endemic to Papua New Guinea .
Prions are infectious proteinaceous particles that are not viruses and do not contain nucleic acid .
They are typically transmitted by exposure to and ingestion of infected nervous system tissues , tissue transplants , blood transfusions , or contaminated fomites .
Prion proteins are normally found in a healthy brain tissue in a form called PrP .
However , if this protein is misfolded into a denatured form ( PrP ) , it can cause disease .
Although the exact function of PrP is not currently understood , the protein folds into mostly alpha helices and binds copper .
The rogue protein , on the other hand , folds predominantly into beta-pleated sheets and is resistant to proteolysis .
In addition , PrP can induce PrP to become misfolded and produce more rogue protein .
As PrP accumulates , it aggregates and forms fibrils within nerve cells .
These protein complexes ultimately cause the cells to die .
As a consequence , brain tissues of infected individuals form masses of neurofibrillary tangles and amyloid plaques that give the brain a spongy appearance , which is why these diseases are called spongiform encephalopathy .
Damage to brain tissue results in a variety of neurological symptoms .
Most commonly , affected individuals suffer from memory loss , personality changes , blurred vision , uncoordinated movements , and insomnia .
These symptoms gradually worsen over time and culminate in coma and death .
The gold standard for diagnosing TSE is the histological examination of brain biopsies for the presence of characteristic amyloid plaques , vacuoles , and prion proteins .
Great care must be taken by clinicians when handling suspected prion-infected materials to avoid becoming infected themselves .
Other tissue assays search for the presence of the 14-3-3 protein , a marker for prion diseases like Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease .
New assays , like RT-QuIC ( realtime quaking-induced conversion ) , offer new hope to effectively detect the abnormal prion proteins in tissues earlier in the course of infection .
Prion diseases can not be cured .
However , some medications may help slow their progress .
Medical support is focused on keeping patients as comfortable as possible despite progressive and debilitating symptoms .
Identify the most common fungi that can cause infections of the nervous system Compare the major characteristics of specific fungal diseases affecting the nervous system infections of the nervous system , called neuromycoses , are rare in healthy individuals .
However , Fungal neuromycoses can be devastating in immunocompromised or elderly patients .
Several eukaryotic parasites are also capable of infecting the nervous system of human hosts .
Although relatively uncommon , these infections can also be life-threatening in immunocompromised individuals .
In this section , we will first discuss neuromycoses , followed by parasitic infections of the nervous system .
Cryptococcus neoformans is a fungal pathogen that can cause meningitis .
This yeast is commonly found in soils and is particularly associated with pigeon droppings .
It has a thick capsule that serves as an important virulence factor , inhibiting clearance by phagocytosis .
Most C. neoformans cases result in subclinical respiratory infections that , in healthy individuals , generally resolve spontaneously with no long-term consequences ( see ) .
In immunocompromised patients or those with other underlying illnesses , the infection can progress to cause meningitis and granuloma formation in brain tissues .
Cryptococcus antigens can also serve to inhibit cellmediated immunity and delayed-type hypersensitivity .
Cryptococcus can be easily cultured in the laboratory and identified based on its extensive capsule .
C. neoformans is frequently cultured from urine samples of patients with disseminated infections .
Prolonged treatment with antifungal drugs is required to treat cryptococcal infections .
Combined therapy is required with amphotericin B plus flucytosine for at least 10 weeks .
Many antifungal drugs have difficulty crossing the bloodbrain barrier and have strong side effects that necessitate low doses ; these factors contribute to the lengthy time of treatment .
Patients with AIDS are particularly susceptible to Cryptococcus infections because of their compromised immune state .
AIDS patients with cryptococcosis can also be treated with antifungal drugs , but they often have relapses ; lifelong doses of fluconazole may be necessary to prevent reinfection .
Primary amoebic meningoencephalitis ( PAM ) is caused by Naegleria fowleri .
This amoeboflagellate is commonly found free-living in soils and water .
It can exist in one of three forms—the infective amoebic trophozoite form , a motile flagellate form , and a resting cyst form .
PAM is a rare disease that has been associated with young and otherwise healthy individuals .
Individuals are typically infected by the amoeba while swimming in warm bodies of freshwater such as rivers , lakes , and hot springs .
The pathogenic trophozoite infects the brain by initially entering through nasal passages to the sinuses ; it then moves down olfactory nerve fibers to penetrate the submucosal nervous plexus , invades the cribriform plate , and reaches the subarachnoid space .
The subarachnoid space is highly vascularized and is a route of dissemination of trophozoites to other areas of the CNS , including the brain .
Inflammation and destruction of gray matter leads to severe headaches and fever .
Within days , confusion and convulsions occur and quickly progress to seizures , coma , and death .
The progression can be very rapid , and the disease is often not diagnosed until autopsy .
N. fowleri infections can be confirmed by direct observation of CSF ; the amoebae can often be seen moving while viewing a fresh CSF wet mount through a microscope .
Flagellated forms can occasionally also be found in CSF .
The amoebae can be stained with several stains for identification , including Giemsa-Wright or a modified trichrome stain .
Detection of antigens with indirect immunofluorescence , or genetic analysis with PCR , can be used to confirm an initial diagnosis .
N. fowleri infections are nearly always fatal ; only 3 of 138 patients with PAM in the United States have survived .
A new experimental drug called miltefosine shows some promise for treating these infections .
This drug is a phosphotidylcholine derivative that is thought to inhibit membrane function in N. fowleri , triggering apoptosis and disturbance of lipid-dependent cell signaling pathways .
When administered early in infection and coupled with therapeutic hypothermia ( lowering the body ’ s core temperature to reduce the cerebral edema associated with infection ) , this drug has been successfully used to treat primary amoebic encephalitis .
Acanthamoeba and Balamuthia species are free-living amoebae found in many bodies of fresh water .
Human infections by these amoebae are rare .
However , they can cause amoebic keratitis in contact lens wearers ( see ) , disseminated infections in immunocompromised patients , and granulomatous amoebic encephalitis ( GAE ) in severe cases .
Compared to PAM , GAE tend to be subacute infections .
The microbe is thought to enter through either the nasal sinuses or breaks in the skin .
It is disseminated hematogenously and can invade the CNS .
There , the infections lead to inflammation , formation of lesions , and development of typical neurological symptoms of encephalitis .
GAE is nearly always fatal .
GAE is often not diagnosed until late in the infection .
Lesions caused by the infection can be detected using CT or MRI .
The live amoebae can be directly detected in CSF or tissue biopsies .
Serological tests are available but generally are not necessary to make a correct diagnosis , since the presence of the organism in CSF is definitive .
Some antifungal drugs , like fluconazole , have been used to treat acanthamoebal infections .
In addition , a combination of miltefosine and voriconazole ( an inhibitor of ergosterol biosynthesis ) has recently been used to successfully treat GAE .
Even with treatment , however , the mortality rate for patients with these infections is high .
Human African trypanosomiasis ( also known as African sleeping sickness ) is a serious disease endemic to two distinct regions in sub-Saharan Africa .
It is caused by the insect-borne hemoflagellate Trypanosoma brucei .
The subspecies Trypanosoma brucei rhodesiense causes East African trypanosomiasis ( EAT ) , and another subspecies , Trypanosoma brucei gambiense causes West African trypanosomiasis ( WAT ) .
A few hundred cases of EAT are currently reported each year .
WAT is more commonly reported and tends to be a more chronic disease .
Around 7000 to 10,000 new cases of WAT are identified each year .
T. brucei is primarily transmitted to humans by the bite of the tsetse fly ( Glossina spp . ) .
Soon after the bite of a tsetse fly , a chancre forms at the site of infection .
The flagellates then spread , moving into the circulatory system .
These systemic infections result in an undulating fever , during which symptoms persist for two or three days with remissions of about a week between bouts .
As the disease enters its final phase , the pathogens move from the lymphatics into the CNS .
Neurological symptoms include daytime sleepiness , insomnia , and mental deterioration .
In EAT , the disease runs its course over a span of weeks to months .
In contrast , WAT often occurs over a span of months to years .
Although a strong immune response is mounted against the trypanosome , it is not sufficient to eliminate the pathogen .
Through antigenic variation , Trypanosoma can change their surface proteins into over 100 serological types .
This variation leads to the undulating form of the initial disease .
The initial septicemia caused by the infection leads to high fevers .
As the immune system responds to the infection , the number of organisms decrease , and the clinical symptoms abate .
However , a subpopulation of the pathogen then alters its surface coat antigens by antigenic variation and evades the immune response .
These flagellates rapidly proliferate and cause another bout of disease .
If untreated , these infections are usually fatal .
Clinical symptoms can be used to recognize the early signs of African trypanosomiasis .
These include the formation of a chancre at the site of infection and Winterbottom ’ s sign .
Winterbottom ’ s sign refers to the enlargement of lymph nodes on the back of the neck—often indicative of cerebral infections .
Trypanosoma can be directly observed in stained samples including blood , lymph , CSF , and skin biopsies of chancres from patients .
Antibodies against the parasite are found in most patients with acute or chronic disease .
Serologic testing is generally not used for diagnosis , however , since the microscopic detection of the parasite is sufficient .
Early diagnosis is important for treatment .
Before the nervous system is involved , drugs like pentamidine ( an inhibitor of nuclear metabolism ) and suramin ( mechanism unclear ) can be used .
These drugs have fewer side effects than the drugs needed to treat the second stage of the disease .
Once the sleeping sickness phase has begun , harsher drugs including melarsoprol ( an arsenic derivative ) and eflornithine can be effective .
Following successful treatment , patients still need to have follow-up examinations of their CSF for two years to detect possible relapses of the disease .
The most effective means of preventing these diseases is to control the insect vector populations .
Toxoplasma gondii is an ubiquitous intracellular parasite that can cause neonatal infections .
Cats are the definitive host , and humans can become infected after eating infected meat or , more commonly , by ingesting oocysts shed in the feces of cats ( see ) .
T. gondii enters the circulatory system by passing between the endothelial cells of blood vessels .
Most cases of toxoplasmosis are asymptomatic .
However , in immunocompromised patients , neurotoxoplasmosis caused by T. gondii infections are one of the most common causes of brain abscesses .
The organism is able to cross the blood-brain barrier by infecting the endothelial cells of capillaries in the brain .
The parasite reproduces within these cells , a step that appears to be necessary for entry to the brain , and then causes the endothelial cell to lyse , releasing the progeny into brain tissues .
This mechanism is quite different than the method it uses to enter the bloodstream in the first place .
The brain lesions associated with neurotoxoplasmosis can be detected radiographically using MRI or CAT scans .
Diagnosis can be confirmed by direct observation of the organism in CSF .
RT-PCR assays can also be used to detect T. gondii through genetic markers .
Treatment of neurotoxoplasmosis caused by T. gondii infections requires six weeks of multi-drug therapy with pyrimethamine , sulfadiazine , and folinic acid .
Long-term maintenance doses are often required to prevent recurrence .
Cysticercosis is a parasitic infection caused by the larval form of the pork tapeworm , Taenia solium .
When the larvae invade the brain and spinal cord , the condition is referred to as neurocysticercosis .
This condition affects millions of people worldwide and is the leading cause of adult onset epilepsy in the developing world .
The life cycle of T. solium is discussed in .
Following ingestion , the eggs hatch in the intestine to form larvae called cysticerci .
Adult tapeworms form in the small intestine and produce eggs that are shed in the feces .
These eggs can infect other individuals through fecal contamination of food or other surfaces .
Eggs can also hatch within the intestine of the original patient and lead to an ongoing autoinfection .
The cystercerci , can migrate to the blood and invade many tissues in the body , including the CNS .
Neurocysticercosis is usually diagnosed through noninvasive techniques .
Epidemiological information can be used as an initial screen ; cysticercosis is endemic in Central and South America , Africa , and Asia .
Radiological imaging ( MRI and CT scans ) is the primary method used to diagnose neurocysticercosis ; imaging can be used to detect the oneto two-centimeter cysts that form around the parasites .
Elevated levels of eosinophils in the blood can also indicate a parasitic infection .
EIA and ELISA are also used to detect antigens associated with the pathogen .
The treatment for neurocysticercosis depends on the location , number , size , and stage of cysticerci present .
Antihelminthic chemotherapy includes albendazole and praziquantel .
Because these drugs kill viable cysts , they may acutely increase symptoms by provoking an inflammatory response caused by the release of Taenia cysticerci antigens , as the cysts are destroyed by the drugs .
To alleviate this response , corticosteroids that cross the blood-brain barrier ( e.g. , dexamethasone ) can be used to mitigate these effects .
Surgical intervention may be required to remove intraventricular cysts .
